TITLE: A Culture of Public Faith
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Public Faith Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/a-culture-of-public-faith-2/

============================================================

The whole formation, the whole emphasis on formation means that the churches of Redeemer are seeking to actually form Christians who contribute to a culture of public faith. And we just saw what that means. Public faith means that you don't keep your faith private, but that you're willing to identify yourself as a Christian to your neighbors, your colleagues, and enter into friendships with them. That's what we mean by public faith. And the Redeemer Church are trying to form people who do that. Now, what we're going to do tonight, or what I'm going to do, is I'm just going to try to frame things up for the entire weekend by talking about how the gospel creates a culture of public faith. Now, to do that, I'm going to talk about history, history, theology. History of Redeemer, briefly. History of Christianity and the theology of the gospel. Now, what I mean by history of Redeemer, I find that video we just saw really fascinating in light of the fact that 26 years ago, or 27 years ago, this is what we wrote in the Redeemer newsletter that either Kathy wrote or we both wrote. But this is what I got out of it. I found it, and it said, One of Redeemer's core values is that we be a place where those who are not believers or who are not sure what they believe find that their questions are invited, their doubts and difficulties are respected, and their struggles with Christianity have been anticipated. This means that we who are believers are always expecting and thinking of people who don't believe as being present in virtually every meeting we hold here at Redeemer. This means we show visibly and verbally that we're glad for the presence in our midst of people who doubt Christianity, that we are intent, yet extremely noncombative, as we present the reasonable beauty of the Christian faith, and that we respect so much good questions, and we remember what it's like not to believe. Redeemer is a church not for itself but for the city, where those who doubt are welcomed and are free to ask questions and process with friends the Christian faith. So that was all written like 26 years ago. It's remarkable to me that it survived, that even the idea survived, and the fact we're here today to still say, after so many years, how do we do that? How do we be churches like that? Now, history of Christianity. It's really clear to me, because I've been at this Christian ministry thing for about 45 years, it's really obvious to me that it is more difficult today to be public about your faith. Even 40 years ago, things had changed, because at one point in America, in the United States, there was social pressure to be a Christian, or at least go to church. There was social pressure to go to church. And even 40 years ago, that pressure had largely begun to recede, and there wasn't social benefit particularly or social pressure to go to church. And yet, even 40 years ago, in general, Christianity and church was seen as a pretty good thing. To have a church in a neighborhood was considered to be a good thing. So, 40 years ago, you might say, there was no more pressure to be a Christian. But today, there's actually, in many, many circles, a lot of pressure not to be a Christian, not to identify as a Christian. There's fewer and fewer people in our society who actually think that Christianity and church is a good thing at all. And so, in light of that, as the culture gets more cold to us, it feels more drafty to let people know that you go to church. It feels, there's a chill out there. What are we going to do? Well, let's go all the way back. Let's go all the way back. How did we start? Larry Hurtado, who's a New Testament scholar and a historian, he taught at Edinburgh University for many years. He's recently wrote a book, a little book, called Why on Earth Did Anyone Become a Christian in the First Three Centuries? And he's asking that question as a historian. And he says, you know, it's an extremely important historical question, interesting historical question, because, he says, Christians were, of all the religions at that time in the Roman Empire, Christianity was by far the most persecuted. And since there were absolutely, there was no social benefit at all, in fact, there was all sorts of losses that were attached to becoming a Christian, why in the world did Christianity grow? And it did grow. Now, why was Christianity so? Roman world on the surface looked very tolerant. It was highly pluralistic because everybody had their own gods. You know, every ethnic group had its own gods, every city had its own gods, every guild had its own gods, very often every big estate had its own gods. Everybody had their own gods, and if you came in with your own gods, hey, that's great, as long as you accepted everyone else's gods too. That is to say, when you went to the estate, you would burn incense to their gods. When you went to another city, you would of course show obeisance to their gods. In other words, just like today, it looked pluralistic on the surface. The Roman Empire seemed, Roman society seemed incredibly open. If you had your gods, great. You got your gods, you got your gods, great, as long as you accept all the rest of our gods, as long as no one says their god is the god. Now, there were only two groups, of course, that did say their god was the god. One group were the Jews, but they actually were kind of given a pass by Roman society because in some ways they still fit into the Roman worldview because they were a single ethnic group. They said, okay, that ethnic group, that's their god, and they think their god is the god, but at least they're still, in a sense, playing by the rules, but Christians. See, Christians came from every different race, and yet when they became a Christian, they were forbidden to sacrifice to any other gods, to bow, to kneel to any other gods because their god was the god. And you realize how unbelievably offensive this was. I mean, if you were a slave in a home and you became a Christian, you could no longer do obeisance to the gods of the estate. It was incredibly offensive. And as a result, Christians were hounded, Christians were rejected, Christians were despised. They were treated terribly. And Larry Hurtado asked this question, well, if that's the case, if they were by far the most despised and rejected religion in the Roman Empire and you lost so much social credibility and credence if you became a Christian, why is it that Christianity grew from just a handful of people over a couple of centuries to millions and millions and millions? I mean, why was it that by the beginning of the fourth century, you know, 10% of the Roman Empire, Roman society were Christian? Why? Why would you become a Christian? And how do people become Christians when all you did if you became a Christian was suffer social credibility loss? Well, when you ask the question how and why people became Christians, here's what the historians will tell you. Here's what Larry Hurtado will tell you. Here's what others will tell you. Number one, Christianity spread through individual conversation. You did not bring a non-Christian to church. It didn't happen. There are a whole lot of reasons why. One of which was, was dangerous to bring somebody to church. But the fact is, no, no, no, you didn't bring people to church. You didn't bring them to big events. You didn't bring them to, you know, to hear the celebrity speakers or anything like that. It all happened through individual conversations. That means Christians who were courageous enough under the circumstances identify as Christians. Secondly, it must have happened, we know it has happened because of the attractiveness of the lives of the individuals and of the community. The attractiveness, we won't go into that. That's not what we're here to talk about. But the fact is there was an attractiveness. There was a virtuousness. There was a love. There was a humility. There was a consistency. There was something about the lives of the Christians as well, not just individually but corporately, the community that they formed that was extremely compelling. And thirdly, there was the gospel itself because you must keep in mind that the two things that a Roman or a Greek person would hear when they heard the gospel that was so radical, number one, the gospel meant you had a love relationship with God. You didn't just buy this God off with sacrifices and this. You had a love relationship with God. Number two, you were saved by grace. It was an eternal life you could have now. And there was something absolutely unique about that. But here, okay, how bad are things here? I mean, how bad is it in New York? How difficult is it in New York City to identify as a Christian? It is harder than it was 40, well, 30 years ago when we got here. There's no doubt that there's more social costs. There is no doubt. It's nothing like yet, and hopefully never will be. It's nothing like the early Christians faced. But guess what? Individual conversations, opening your heart, just letting people see who you are. How modern is that? Come on. In other words, Christians, just be yourselves, which is what you're being told all the time. Just be yourselves. Thank you. be discreet. Don't just blurt everything out with a person you hardly know, but individual conversations. And then, of course, the attractiveness of our lives. Let's get to that. And the attractiveness of the community. But guess what? It worked once under far, far, far, far, far, far worse conditions. And it will work again. So how does the gospel actually create those attractive lives? How does it actually create a culture of public faith? It does so because let's go negative now. I'm a minister. I'm very good at this, going negative. Here's the reasons why we don't open up. Here are the reasons why we actually do not open our hearts up and get public with our faith. Number one, a lack of sensitivity. Number two, a lack of sensitivity. Then number two, a lack of hope. Number three, a lack of courage. And number four, a lack of spiritual reality. Let me explain that and show how the gospel heals it. First of all, a lack of sensitivity. One reason why we're not very effective in our public faith is because of a certain harshness or abrasiveness or maybe even a haughtiness. There are plenty of Christians, I've heard them, and I'm not saying that I have never participated in this in my life, but very often Christians are unbelievably unattractive because they come at this thing with a superior attitude. Look, I'm right and you're wrong. You know, I call that elder brother evangelism. I'm right, you're wrong, and I love telling you about it. I mean, I just enjoy that. And there are plenty of Christians who are just, they just aren't very understanding. They're just not, they do not show much respect. The book of the Bible, the book of Jude, I know some of you say, that's in the Bible. It's in the Bible. Commands you to be merciful to those that doubt. It's a command. Be merciful to those that doubt. And I have seen an enormous number of Christians violate the word of God at that point by just not at all being merciful to people who doubt. But what does the gospel do? How does the gospel speak to that? Of course it speaks to that. Because the gospel is you're a sinner saved by grace. The gospel is that there's nothing that you have done or ever will do or ever can do or ever have done that in any way can merit it. You're saved by grace. And of course, how in the world can anybody who at the moment they understand that feel superior to the person you're talking to? In fact, of course, let's talk about this here for just a second. If you really believe you're saved by grace, not by being a better person than anyone else, but you're saved by grace, then the non-Christian you're talking to could easily be a better person than you. That person could be more virtuous, more, you know, more courageous, more moral in many, many ways. That person could be a better father or mother than you are or a better son or daughter than you very easily. And you've got to realize that. It doesn't matter whether they don't believe what they should believe or what you believe. So first of all, that lack of sensitivity is healed by the humility the gospel brings. But secondly, I'll take this in a slightly different order. I said one of the problems is the lack of sensitivity. The second reason we don't do public faith is because of a lack of courage. Let's take that one next. We're afraid. You know, one of the things I realized about so many fields in New York. I mean, this is a, you know, kind of a white-collar heaven in many ways. And so people come here to get into the media and the journalism. They come here to get into business, the arts, fashion. They get into everything. It is a little frightening, is it not, how much of what goes on in these fields happens through relationships. You know that. It happens through who you know. It happens through how many people have you got that you can call and talk to. It's all relationships. And you suddenly realize, man, if any, if I say something that makes some people think I'm a fanatic, I'm not just going to maybe hurt my, you know, my party life and who invites me out. I'm going to hurt my professional life. And you will probably. So what are you going to do about that? And the answer, of course, is, again, the gospel comes in and says, well, where's your identity rest? Does your identity rest in your professional success? Does it rest in popular approval? Or does it rest in who you are in Christ and how God regards you? You see, to the degree you actually are someone who experiences God's love and that that's the main engine for your identity, that you know how he regards you. To that degree, you'll be able to do public faith because of course you're still going to be intimidated to some degree, but you're not going to be paralyzed. is healed by the gospel because of the assurance the gospel gives you of who you are in Christ, and it demotes what other people think about you. That's a hard one. I know it's a hard one. But obviously, the early Christians had it because they were in a far more hostile environment than you are. Thirdly, the third reason why we have problems with public faith is not a lack of sensitivity, lack of fear, lack of courage, excuse me, and also a lack of hope. Now, what do I mean by lack of hope? Now, think about this for a minute. Very often you look at somebody in your life, somebody you probably work with, or maybe somebody in your family, somebody you look at who's not a Christian believer, and you look at them and you say, that person will never become a Christian. And not in a million, I can't imagine, that is not the kind of person that could ever become a Christian. Oh, and you are. Oh. What wonder, I'm so glad that, you know, you were such good material. You were great Christian material, and God brought you faith, and you, you know, you blessed him with your presence in his body. And you're not the kind of, there is nobody who's the type of person that becomes a Christian. There is no Christian type. You know, there's this place, little place in Romans that says, no one seeks for God. No one understands. No, not one. Or let me put it another way. Do you really believe you're saved by grace? No, you don't. Do you know why? Because if you knew you were saved by grace, you would know that you're a miracle. It's a miracle that you're a Christian. And of course, miracles mean it's not like, oh, you were the kind of person that, you just need a little push to become a Christian. No, you're a miracle. And guess what? Miracles can happen to anybody. Nobody's the Christian type. And the more you understand that, the more hope you have for anybody, anybody in your life, anybody you come across. So public faith, we have trouble with it because of a lack of courage, because of a lack of sensitivity, humility really, because of a lack of hope. Finally, a lack of spiritual reality. What do I mean? You know, John Stott some years ago, many years ago now, wrote this. It's always convicted me. He says, nothing shuts the mouth and seals the lips and ties the tongue like the secret poverty of our own spiritual experience. Now, think about that. Now, listen, I don't think you have, you should have sighed. You should be weeping. You're not listening. So let me say it again. He says, one of the reasons why, and what he means is one of the main reasons why we don't talk to other people about Christ is because he's not a spiritual reality to us. He's something we believe in in principle. We might even be very, very committed. But is he a living reality? Do you get joy in your prayer life? Do you really experience his love? You see, because if you do, you're going to look at the people around you and say, how in the world, how in the world can I sit on what I've got? How in the world can I think of myself as loving anybody in my life if I keep quiet about this? And how can you? And I can tell you how it actually happens. I mean, I'm not saying this is right, but I can tell you how it happens. And that is our lives are not all that marked by the joy and love of communion with Christ. And as a result, we don't have this feeling, this longing to share it with the people that we care about. But the gospel solves that because the gospel, as I said, as Larry Hurtado actually points out, one of the things that was so strange to pagan ears. I mean, they all believed you had to have a kind of, you know, they didn't believe in a personal relationship with God. You bought your God off. You showed, you know, you showed deference to the God. You did sacrifice for the God. You took vows to the God in order to get the God to bless you. But the idea, you know, Aristotle says nobody can be friends with a God. Aristotle says nobody can be friends with a God. Why? Because it's too much inequality. There's too much of a difference except because, you see, our God became a human being. Our God became someone like us. Aristotle was wrong. You can be friends with a God, this God. And when that happens, when you begin to experience that, then, of course, that changes the way in which you're friends with everybody else. Because you're just looking for opportunities. You're not trying to avoid them. You're not hoping the subject, you're not saying, I hope the subject doesn't come up because they're going to ask me a question I don't know and I don't want to look bad. Instead, you're saying, look, how do I find a way to share what I've got with the people that I care about? So, where do we go from here? That's the rest of it. a little set of tips that at one of the seminars we did recently we gave people. I think it would be a good place. Here's just a start, even though probably everything I'm about to tell you is going to get covered somewhere in this weekend. But they go like this. Number one, why not do a little inventory of those four problems? I said there's a lack of sensitivity. The gospel gives you humility. A lack of courage. The gospel gives you assurance of who you are in Christ. There's a lack of hope. The gospel reminds you of the miracle of grace. There's a lack of inward reality. Why don't you look at that and ask yourself, which of those is probably my bigger problem? I know some of you are saying it's a four-way tie. But think about it. Assess yourself. Ask God to use the gospel on that weak part. Another question, of course, is think about who you spend time with. That little grid that we put up there just a minute ago in the video, you have a kind of privatized Christian, you've got a bubbled or secluded Christian, and then you've got a public Christian, as it were. The privatized Christian actually has a lot of friendships with all kinds of people, but you're private about your faith. The secluded Christian actually pretty much has all their major, major friendships are just inside the Christian church. Doesn't really know people much outside. And the public faith person is someone who has, you know, that kind of an integrity of relationships both inside and outside. And so ask yourself, look at who you're spending time with and make some changes. And as a fairly important thing to say, we are not talking about friendship evangelism. We're talking about friendship. See, friendship evangelism is like, how friendly do I have to be to get a scalp? I mean, I don't actually think people in New York are actually prone to that. I mean, I don't think you're actually prone to that. I think it's too scary out there to do friendship evangelism. But actually, the only way for you to really, with integrity, reach out to people is just to be friends. Friends just open, you open to each other. You let people see how, if you're a friend with somebody, you'll see how you handle your problems. You let them see how you get your meaning in life, how you deal with forgiveness, how you deal with failure, how you deal with the things that are happening to you. So we're not talking about friendship evangelism. We're just talking about friendship. And one last thing is start praying. It's one of the ways to make yourself more of a good friend. Pray for some people who you know pretty well, or at least you could know pretty well, who don't have what you have and just begin praying very intentionally for them. You know, I've been doing a lot of meditation for various reasons on Jonah. And Jonah does go off to Nineveh, and he does preach the gospel, so he's evangelizing. And when they actually start moving toward God, God relents and doesn't destroy them. And he's really angry. And it's really obvious that even though he evangelized the city, he didn't love the city. I mean, he did finally go to the city, and he didn't love the city. He originally didn't want to go to Nineveh because he didn't want to risk his life. And he went, and the people started listening to him, and he was still unhappy because he didn't like them. How many of us are like that here? How many of us are, you know, we're Christians, and we're in New York, and we kind of, you know, it's one thing to, I've had people say, I love New York, and when they tell me what they mean, what they mean is I love the experience of New York. I love the restaurants. I love the vibe. I love all the opportunities. But do you love New York? I don't know. You see, you know, Jonah went to the city. He didn't love the city. Jonah actually shared his faith, as it were, but he wasn't very effective. By the way, if you take a look at Jonah's gospel presentation, it's in chapter 3, and it says, 40 days and Nineveh will be overturned. That's it. Period. You know, he actually even didn't say, you know, God might be merciful if you turn to him. They did anyway. But, I mean, he just clearly was not a very good evangelist because he didn't love the people. He didn't love the people. He didn't love them. But, of course, the real Jonah, Matthew 12, Jesus says, I'm the ultimate Jonah. He didn't come just at the risk of his life. He came at the cost of his life. And he gave himself to love us. So see what he did for you until you love the people around you, ultimately, to be a public Christian. Ultimately, it is about love. Yes, we're here to train you. We're here to help you. But ultimately, it's a question of love. others. Let's pray for a second. Thank you, Father, for reminding us of all the resources we have to be public Christians. We thank you that historically, your faith has been spread just through the credibility and the courage of individuals who got into conversations with the people around them. And we know that's the secret, no program. But what we need is love. Yes, the knowledge of your word. Yes, the knowledge of our faith. And we're here to enhance all that. But ultimately, it's love. Love from you, love for you, love for others. So enhance our love as well as our skills this weekend, we pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
