TITLE: A Place for You
SCRIPTURE: John 14:1-5
TOPICS: Death Heaven and Hell Hope
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/a-place-for-you/

============================================================

We've been moving through the Gospel according to St. John, and this morning we come to the 14th chapter and to verses 1 through 5. John chapter 14, verses 1 through 5. Do not let your hearts be troubled. Trust in God. Trust also in me. In my Father's house are many rooms. If it were not so, I would have told you. I am going there to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me, that you also may be where I am. You know the way to the place where I am going. Thomas said to him, Lord, we don't know where you are going, so how can we know the way? This ends the reading of God's holy word. It's hard for us, it's hard for me to imagine a society living more in the denial of death than our society. I think I may have shared with you back in the summer, I saw an interesting TV program about the relationship between Japanese doctors and their patients in Tokyo. And it told us that most of the time when a Japanese doctor is treating a patient with terminal cancer, he never tells the patient what they're being treated for, and the patient usually doesn't ask. And the Western reporter was asking a Japanese doctor about this, and the Japanese doctor said, well, you have to understand this, we here in Japan generally don't believe in an afterlife, and so death is a harder thing for us to accept. I think he was giving the United States and Western people way too much credit, because maybe the Japanese deny death by not asking their doctors anything, but the Americans deny death by suing their doctors for anything, because you see, it's not supposed to happen. Decay, death, sickness, it's not supposed to happen. If you look at the advertisements, just look at the advertisements, you'll see that there's never been a society more scared of aging, more in denial of it. In the last 25 years there has been a movement, a real movement, so it's a hard thing to explain, it's more of an interdisciplinary movement, it's in medicine, it's in philosophy, it's in the social sciences, and so on, and the movement is trying to say death is natural, there's nothing strange about death. One of the great leaders of that movement, Elizabeth Kubler-Ross says, for example, she says, the moment of death is neither frightening nor painful, it is peaceful cessation. You see, the idea is of the shining little drop going back into the ocean. The moment of death is neither frightening nor is it painful, it's peaceful cessation. Nonsense. Every human heart instinctively knows, if it hasn't read a book like that, every human heart instinctively knows that death is monstrous, that it is unnatural, that it is perverted, that it is radically traumatic, that it is alien, it is the ultimate enemy, it's the last enemy. And the real question we have to ask is, why would we do such an incredibly massive job? Why would everybody be, you might say, conspiring together, everything from the philosophers to the medical people to the advertisers, why would everybody be getting together to deny death? Ernst Becker wrote a book called The Denial of Death. And he was not a Christian, but he said, he says, the reason we deny death is not an innocent one. There is a motive behind it. We don't want to admit that we're out of control. We don't want to admit that we rely on a transcendent something that supports us. You see, modern times, to us modern people, what makes life meaningful is choice. The idea of options, keeping your options open. The American way is, nobody has a right to tell you how to dress, how to believe, how to live, what to listen to, how to think, what to do, where to go. And that's why we're stymied with death, because death does not negotiate. Death offers absolutely no choices. That's the reason why the belief in reincarnation is growing here. It's the reason why we have so many stories in our fiction, like the movies Heaven Can Wait and Ghost. See? Choices after death. But that's all they are. Fiction. The reason we can't stand the idea of death is because death is inexorable. Immutable. You can't appeal to it. You can't switch channels on it. It won't listen to federal arbitrators. It is relentless. And we can't stand it. And we can't take it. Now, my question to you is, what... the only reality that we know about. It's the only thing sure about your future. The only thing. And I'm telling you this, unless you know that tomorrow you're prepared to die without fear or regret, you are living in denial. You are living in denial of the only thing that you're sure of. Are you prepared for that? You're prepared for everything else but that and none of the other things that you're prepared for can you be sure will ever happen. You're preparing for all sorts of things that you don't know will ever happen. The only thing you know will happen is the one thing you're unprepared of for unless you can tell me today that you're prepared to die tomorrow without fear and without regret. Can you? then you're in denial too. Jesus and Jesus alone tells us how to face death without fear or regret. Here's what he does. We have to look at his teaching and here's how it goes. The first the first set of teaching is this. First thing he teaches us is there's a place for you. You see that? He says, I'm going to prepare a place for you. A place. What does he mean? What he means is this, that human beings need a place. I go to prepare a place for you. See, now Jesus Christ is trying to comfort these men. He says, don't let your hearts be troubled. Now he's trying to comfort them. And who are these people? Jesus knows that these people are all going to suffer an incredible, horrible death. Every one of them except one who's going to die a lonely prisoner in exile. He knows that they're going to be sawn in half. He knows they're going to be impaled on stakes while they're still alive and covered with pitch and lit. He knows that they're going to be tied to wild animals and the animals set off in two different directions and their limbs are going to be pulled out. And he wants to comfort them? Let's face it, whatever he's got here to comfort them with better be pretty good stuff. What kind of potion is he going to give that will comfort them? And if it comforts them, and if it works for them, it better probably work for us, I would think. So what is it? He says, here it is. Here's the potion. I have a place for you. Why are human beings so absolutely, so connected to place? Why is place so powerful? Why is it, for example, that all across the country, in cities all over the country, expressways are continually stopped by people who are offered incredibly lucrative, tremendously financially advantageous reasons to leave their place and they won't do it? Why? Why is it that Americans spend almost one, foreign-born Americans spend nearly one billion dollars per year traveling back to the communities in which they were born? Why? Why is it that the great curse on Adam and Eve, the great punishment for what they did in the Garden of Eden, was they became homeless? Why is it that the greatest curse possible is to be homeless? Why is it there's nothing more destructive to the human psyche and the human nature than homelessness? Why is it that a young, ignorant, and idealistic 24-year-old minister in Virginia some years ago thought that since there's only a quarter of the, you know, only a quarter of the sanctuary was filled on a Sunday night that it'd be nice for everybody to sit up front? So what he did in his, you know, ignorance was he just corded off the back two-thirds of the pews so when people came in they had to sit up front. Why is it afterwards he found that most of the long-standing members came up to him with fury in their eyes and said, if you ever do that again, I'm never coming back. I can't worship in another pew. Why? Here's the reason why place is so important. You see, the Eastern religions say that basically we're not individuals. When we die, we're going to go back into the shining sea. We're going to become part of the great all-pervasive omnipresent, you see, all-pervasive omnipresent life force. The Bible says no. Human beings are personal by definition. We will always be personal throughout all eternity and persons are local. Persons are by definition localized. We're not forces. We're not disembodied esoteric things. We are localized and therefore every human being needs a home. We need a home. We need a home. What is a home? Not a house. It's more than geography, not less, but more. A home. A home is a place you belong. A home is a place where you're totally accepted. Home is a place where you can be yourself. Home is a place where the sights and the sounds and the smells and the colors fit. What is... is a home? It's an open door and light, yellow light inside, and a fire. And you're expected, and supper's ready. And as you walk in, the smells of the best, the foods that you love the most are unbelievably delicious. And everyone in the room rises up in delight and joy to greet you, and you're led over and you sit down in your chair. Home. Listen, a lot of us absolutely live off those memories. We live off memories of places like that. We go back to them like wells constantly to get some sense of who we are, and yet very often when you investigate that memory, you'll find out that that place was nothing like what you remember it to be. And not only that, there are a lot of other people who are like wounded birds living incredibly angry lives because they haven't even got a living memory of a home. A place where they were accepted. A place where everything fit and suited them. A place where they could be themselves. Paul Tournier, the Swiss doctor, said, Children who never experience or find a home, a family, a place where they belong. Such children grew up carrying a fundamental incapacity for attachment. We need a place. We need a home. And therefore, Jesus Christ is able to come to these people, these men, and say, You're going to face the most incredible suffering, the most incredible troubles, but I've got the solution. I have got that which overcomes it. I've got the place. The one you've been looking for. I've got it. Everybody needs a place. That's the first thing he teaches. And secondly, he teaches, The place that we need is the Father's house. He says, I go to prepare a place for you, and my Father's house are many mansions. Now, one of the most interesting things that Jesus says here is he says, You know the way. See that in verse 4? He says, You know the way, and you know the place where I'm going. In the old authorized edition, he says, You know where I'm, you know whither I'm going, and you know the way. And you see, Thomas turns and says, Lord, what are you talking about? We don't know the way. We don't know where you're going, and we don't know the way to it. And Jesus says, Yes, you do. What an interesting statement. Most of the time, Jesus is telling them, You don't know. You think you know, but you don't. Here, he's saying, You think you don't know, but you do. What he's saying is, The home that you've been looking for in all your homes, and the fathers you've been looking for in all your fathers, has been this one. No matter how great the fathers are that you've had, no matter how great the homes are that you've had, what you've really been after is this one. Whether you believe in the Father's house or not, whether you believe in heaven or not, this is the real thing that you've been yearning for, this is the real thing you've been longing for. A couple of weeks ago, I wrote up a little leaflet. What does it mean to know God? Put it in the bulletins, and we're going to try to make that available. And it's all about this. And in there, what we bring out, what Christian writers and teachers have taught for years, is something that I'm just trying to get in touch with. I believe you all know it. And that is, we all yearn and long for something, a homeness that we can never find. You see, for example, when you first fall in love, or when you first break into your new job, or your chosen field, or when you first look like you're finally getting the breaks you want in your career, or when you go on that vacation you've been longing for for years, or when you finally get that house that you've really wanted, just as you're getting to that, you feel that you're finally going to get something that you've been looking for all your life. Something. That something seems like it's just about to break through the smell of the air by the sea. It's about to break through her perfume. You see. And yet we find, when we actually put our fingers around the prize, that the something is gone. That no matter, there's a longing, that something is a longing, that no lovers, no vacations, no houses by the sea, no career achievement, even the best possible ones cannot fulfill it. And the people who know this most are the people that we, in our foolishness, most envy. It's the elite. The ones who have the most sublime houses by the sea, and they get the highest acclaim, and they get the most incredible looking lovers, and you say, hmm. And yet they're the ones, we laugh about the fact that they're the ones, who find them, a higher percentage of them are jumping off bridges, and a higher percentage of them are going to therapists, and are acting hard. you see, they've run the race, they've won the prize, they've grabbed the treasure chest, they've opened the lid, and they look inside, and there's nothing in there but a mirror. Where's the missing joy? Where is the something? What is it that we're looking for? Jesus says, it's homeness, it's the cosmic, it's the cosmic equivalent of sitting in that chair by the fire. Finally, at last, no more wandering, no more restlessness. Keats talks about it, he talks about the eternal, where is the place, for gosh sakes, here we go, he talks about the journey homeward into habitual self. The point that Jesus is making is, until you recognize that the longing you've got for home will only be satisfied in the Father's house, unless, until you recognize that, you will spend all of your life chasing will-o'-the-wisps. And whenever a Christian man or woman finds this out, and finally says, oh my God, here it is, my true home, my true country, finally the thing that I've been looking for, you know, they turn around, they write lots of things to try to warn people, do you hear it? One writer put it this way, the reason the best marriages, the reason the best careers, the best earthly joys always leave us restless is because, quote, our Father may refresh us with some pleasant ends along the way, but he will not let us mistake them for home. Or the quote that we put in the leaflet that day, listen, the Christian says, creatures are not born with desires unless satisfaction for those desires exists. A baby feels hunger, there's such a thing as food. A duckling wants to swim, there's such a thing as water. Men feel sexual desire, there's such a thing as sex. And if I find in myself a desire which no experience in this world can satisfy, then the only probable explanation is that I was made for another world. If none of my earthly pleasures satisfy it, that does not mean the universe is a fraud. Probably earthly pleasures were never meant to satisfy it, but only to arouse it and to suggest the real thing. We all need a place, but the place we need is the Father's house, and until you see that, Jesus says, you'll be chasing will of the wisps. The way you know, he says, you say you don't know it, you do know it. Your desire for the Father's house is strong if you just recognize it. That's what you've been after, and that's why it always seems to be ready to break through, and it never does, because these things are inns. They're way stations. They're not home. Everybody needs a place, Jesus says, number one. Number two, the place you need is the Father's house. But number three, he teaches us the Father's house is your place, the place you need, because Jesus is there. What makes it home, what makes it home is that Jesus is there. He says in verse three, he says, if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come back and take you to be with me, so that you also may be where I am, so that you may be with me. The point of the Father's house is that you're with Jesus. Now, what are the implications of that? What does that mean? It's astonishing. He says, I want you to be where I am. In John 17, 24, Jesus makes this incredible statement when he's praying. He says, Father, I will that they also be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou givest me, for thou lovest me before the foundation of the world. Did you hear that? Jesus says, and this beggars our imagination, Jesus says the reason that he has glory is because the Father loves him. His glory, see, the substance, his everlasting greatness, his beauty, his cosmic consequentiality, his importance, his glory is tied up with the fact the Father. The Father has a kind of endless, beginningless, glory-forging love. The Father's love gives glory. It forges glory. And Jesus says, I want you to stand on ground zero where the glory of God comes down. I want you to be right there with me. I want that glory-forging love of the Father, that perfect love of the Father, in the presence of God, to fall on you too. What he's actually saying is, when that happens, you will be perfect because you will see the face of God. You'll be in my presence. This is the beatific vision that's being promised to us here. This is the visio dei, the vision of God. What is that experience like? 1 John 3, 2 says, Beloved, we do not know what we will be like, but we know we will be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Did you get that? John is saying that this experience we see Him, we will be transformed into His likeness, and all the love and the glory and beauty will become ours. In fact, it says in 1 John 3, 2, it says, Beloved, we don't know what we will be, but we know we'll be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. And then John goes on and says, Whoever hopes thus for Him purifies himself as He is pure. Do you hear that? That experience is so powerful that to even hope for it, to even want it, will begin to change you. For the next ten minutes, if you sit here, it says, and yearn for the thing we're talking about, it will not just be an intellectual exercise, you will get changed now. He who hopes thus in Him purifies himself as He is pure. If you yearn for the glory, if you say, that's it, that's what I want, you will get strength not to sin, you will get strength not to fall, you will be, in some small but significant ways, changed into the great person God wants you to be. The vision of God, Psalm 17, verse 5, the psalmist says, When I awake, I shall behold thy face in righteousness. I shall be satisfied with seeing your form. Satisfied. This is homeness. This is the experience of home. What does it mean to be home? It means the wandering is over, the restlessness is over. I want to be here, I don't want to go anywhere else. You sink down in the chair by the fire. This is home. The understanding can know no more. The will can will no more. And the emotions, the love and the delight, they are completely satisfied because they rest in their proper center, just like the rivers rest in the ocean. The vision of God, homeness, complete satisfaction, finally, the wandering is over. This is the home experience. This is it, to see him. And that's the reason why, you know, if the Queen of Sheba could say to Solomon, Blessed are those who stand continually before thy face and taste of thy wisdom. If Queen of Sheba could say that to Solomon, what must it be like to stand before the face of God and to drink in his glory and his life and to eat of the tree of life and to eat the hidden manna and to have Jesus Christ himself embrace you with his glory-forging love. But that's not all. It says here that this is not just a place where you have an experience. This is a place. Now, what I mean by that is nobody else, nobody else's, no, the other religions, when they talk about the future in terms of an ethereal, disembodied kind of existence, they don't really satisfy your need as a person for a place. There's a placeness about this place. There's a concreteness about it. When Jesus Christ had his resurrection body, after the resurrection, he comes to see the apostles and what does he do? He comes into the room and he eats a fish. Why? He doesn't have to. He eats it because he wants to. I don't know what you think about heaven, but let me tell you something. It's a place where you eat. It's a place where you love. It's a place where you laugh. It's a place where you learn. There's a concreteness about it. The Father's house contains the new heavens and the new earth. What will that be like if this world, with all of its seas and canyons and valleys and peaks and airs and immensities and infinities with all of its glory and all of its beauty, if this is the kind of world that God gives to people who are his enemies, what do you think he's going to give to people who are his friends? In that land, in that house, a blade of grass is going to be so real, so glorious, so sharp, and so clear, it'll make you bow the knee to worship just to look at a blade of grass and you'll want to just revere. It's beauty beyond bearing. You won't be able to bear it, but you won't have to because at last, the Bible says, the beauty will pass into you. All the beauty you've seen out here for years finally will pass into you. You will become a glorified person, a glorified self. Daniel chapter 12, verse 3, says, we will shine like the stars in the sun. You see, we won't just admire the morning star, we'll put on the morning star, we'll put on the splendor of the sun. Don't ask me too much about what will that glorified body and that glorified self be like, who knows? If you ever talk to a person born blind, you know, if you have five senses and you talk to a person with four senses, you try to explain to someone who's never seen anything, who's never seen light, try to explain to them what it's like, they can't get it. But maybe in that glorified state, you've got five senses now, who'll have a hundred senses. Think of that. Who'll have a thousand senses. now compared to what you're going to be then. This is the glory. In my Father's house, there are many mansions. And not only that, not only that, you know, see, Augustine says the rapture of the glorified soul, of seeing the face, will flow over into the body. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man the things that he has prepared for those who love him. There's one last thing. It doesn't say that there's one mansion. It says there's many mansions. When Jesus talks about why this place is going to be so great, what it means to be with him, number one, it means we'll see him. Number two, it means we'll be transformed into his likeness. Number three, we will have a love between one another that we cannot imagine. It doesn't say there's one mansion. There's many mansions. Lots of people there. One of the most weird experiences, the most wonderful experiences, is to open up to somebody completely. Have you ever had this happen? To be completely vulnerable, to let a person see you to the bottom, and to have that person rejoice in what they see. Now, I'm not talking about tolerate. I'm not talking about accept. Oh, a lot of people, people just say, the greatest thing is to let people know who I really am and be accepted. Well, that is great. That's a lot better than most, what you usually get. But we're going way beyond that. Have you ever had somebody look deep into you, see you all the way to the bottom, and rejoice in it, exult in it? Have you ever seen that? It's a rare experience, and when it happens, you can't articulate the glory of it. But it's nothing compared to the perfect love and unity that will bind all of our hearts together. The love that we're going to experience there between one another is so much above any of the best love you ever experience here. As a wedding dress is above an oil rag, Jesus Christ says, I want to take you to ground zero of the glory and love of God, and I want to let it fall on you, and I want you to see my face, and I want you to be known even as you are known. Now, lastly, don't you see, how can you face death? How can you face troubles? Jesus says to know that the secret to it all is that you all need a place, that the place you've been seeking that you need is the Father's house, and the reason you need it is because I'll be there. Now, lastly, let me just point this out. Somebody out there might be saying, well, how practical is this doctrine for how I live right now? I'm sure it'll be comforting on my deathbed. It's immensely practical in two ways. I would say, unless you understand the bigger world, unless you understand this world is part of a much bigger world, you will, A, not have the power to love people that you should, and you, B, will not have the power to face the troubles in your life. Those two things. You won't have the power to love people, and you won't have the power to face the troubles in your life. First of all, the power to love people. There is some interesting station on one of the Manhattan cable television stations that's run by a local, it's a humanist organization, and it starts out this way and says, one of the big problems we have today is religion. If people, people who think that they're going to heaven do not do a good job of taking care of the earth. If you knew that this was the only world you had, and this is the only heaven you'll ever know, then you'd be more motivated to love people and make it a good place. Hogwash. I've been through that. Twenty years ago when I was in college, and I didn't know if I believed in God or not, and I didn't think I needed to believe in God, I got into politics that had to do with life. One of the things I was really, we were all big on peace, on marching for peace. We're also all big on pollution and ecology and taking care of the environment. And we were saying, down with the politics of death, and down with the economics of death, and up with life. And then I read Bertrand Russell's Why I'm Not a Christian. And you know, it shook me. It didn't shake my belief in God because it was already shaken. What shook me was my belief in the importance of life. Because Russell pointed out, he says, if there is no God, and this world is the only world we'll ever know, life is a blip. It's an aberration. There was oceans of dead time before we had life, and when we burn out, when the universe burns up, there'll be oceans of dead time afterwards. And life is a blip. And I began to realize suddenly, life is an aberration. It's not ultimate reality unless there is more to life than this world. Life isn't central. It's not ultimate. And I began to realize, why then should you cherish it? Because you see, what I was being told is, well, we don't know if there's another world, but you have to work to make this world a better one. And I began to realize, wait, you might be able to prove to me that living a selfish life... morally wrong, because if there's no God, if there's no bigger world, nothing's morally wrong. And you can't even prove to me that a selfish life is impractical for me if I'm smart. And besides that, even if I do break my neck to create a good world, that every generation will lose this good world through death, and the last generation will lose it totally, because everything is burning up. And you say, wait a minute, the real logic is eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die. The real logic is you only go around once in life, so you've got to grab for all the gusto that you can. If you're old enough, you remember that was a beer commercial. You've got to be over 35. You only go around once in life. That's the only logic, and I began to realize that if there really, if this world was all that there was, I did not have any incentive for cherishing life or living an unselfish life. But what if God comes to you and says, wait a minute, this room, this world is like the anteroom to the house. The universe is a much bigger house in this world in time and space. And let me tell you, God says, the only things that will last are the kingdom of God and people. People last forever. So don't trudge and drudge to buy that summer home, because that will burn up. But people last forever, so love people, invest in people, put your money into people, put your time into people, meet their needs, love them, comfort them, transform them, bring them to me, because my reward will last forever and people will last forever. And I began to realize I now had an incentive. You know, in the old days, when you had a, when you're fighting a battle, you're down there, you're fighting the battle. And you know, you were trying to defend your country, your city from the invader. And always these fortresses would have watchtowers. Why? Because if you go up into the watchtower, you could look to see the bigger picture, to see whether there were reinforcements coming. And the image you get in the Bible is that if you're down here fighting this terrible battle against evil, you're fighting and you're overwhelmed and the numbers look like they're bigger than you and it looks like you can't win. You go up into the watchtower and you get the bigger picture and you say, wait, there they are. There's the army. There's our friends. There's our allies. There's the reinforcements. They're on the way. You come down out of the watchtower because you've seen the bigger picture and now things haven't really changed yet, have they? You're still out number two to one. You're still bloody. But now you, what do you do? You fight with a new vigor because you've seen the big picture. The first lady that I ever ministered to as a pastor when I was 24 years old and she was probably about 80, was a woman named Alice. And she'd had an incredibly miserable life. And when I met her, I was just a brand, brand, brand new minister, like weeks old in the ministry. And I found out what she'd gone through and the children that she'd lost and the way that she'd been abused. And it was incredible because this was a radiant Christian who was always saying, but you see, God knows. But you see, God will do this. But you see, God will pay that back. But you see, God will take me to himself. And I began to realize that, boy, this woman had a lot to teach me. And she was getting sicker and sicker. And one day I found out that she had gone unconscious. And I ran to the hospital room. And there was Alice laid out. And her face looked awful. And she was on a respirator. And you know how they breathe in a very, very sort of anxious way. And her brow was all furrowed up. And she didn't have her eyes open. And she didn't seem to be hearing anybody. But I went over to her. And I got up to her ear. And I opened John 14, chapter 14, verse 1. And I said, let not your heart be troubled. Neither let it be afraid. Believe in God. Believe also in me. I go to prepare a place for you. In my father's house, there are many mansions. If it was not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And her face changed. And all the furrows went out of her brow. And I realized that Alice for one more time had gotten up in the watchtower. She saw the big picture. She didn't fight against the evil in her life. The way Camus says you have to fight. It's a never-ending defeat. Christians don't fight that way. They get up in the watchtower. They got a reason to love people. They got a reason to fight the evil here. She got up in the watchtower. And she had one more time. And she was able to deal with the fact that she knew she was in her very last hours of life. Do you believe that Jesus is preparing a place for you? Do you believe in the father's house? Do you have that watchtower? Without it, I don't know what keeps you going. And secondly, in loving people, secondly, this is also the way for you to handle the problems of your life. Jesus tells us, let not your heart be troubled. Don't let it be afraid. That's a command. Where does he get off with that? See, he says, don't let your heart be troubled. That's a command. If you're troubled today, he says, stop it. if there's something that you can do. A lot of people think, well, my emotions, I can't control them. Jesus says, you got something you can do. He says, I've got a truth for you. And the truth is the coming glory. See, listen, were these men comforted by what Jesus told them? I can prove that they were. The Roman world never saw the like of the early Christians. The Roman world could come up with stoicism. They learned how to deal with death with a stiff upper lip. But they'd never seen people going to their death reveling in joy, singing hymns. You see, counting themselves blessed that they were found worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. people who acted like they were on top of the world when the world seemed to be more on top of them. They'd never seen the like. How did they get comfort? Because they took this living hope and they thought about it. See, Paul says, I account that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory that will be revealed. Christianity is ultimately a thinking person's religion. Jesus is not, Christianity isn't a spirit to catch. You think it out. Jesus says there's a truth here. And anytime you're troubled, you listen to it and you think about it and you reason it out. Christianity never minimizes problems. It never says, oh, in every cloud there's a silver lining. You know, things could be worse. Christianity never, in such an insensitive way, minimizes your trouble. Christianity says the evil you face is very real and there's only one possible way to deal with it. If you believe this truth, do you believe that Jesus Christ was God, that he died for your sins, that on the cross he defeated death, that he rose triumphant over the grave, that he passed into the heavens and now he's seated before the Father and preparing a place for you? If you believe that, then there's comfort. If you don't believe that, you're stuck. You're trapped in this life. All the happiness you'll ever know has to be in this life. You see, you're trapped here. If anything goes wrong with your life, this is all you are. If something destroys your death, you're healthier or destroys your wealthier or destroys your happiness, you're sunk. Christianity is very much a no-nonsense religion. It says the only possible way to deal with the troubles of life is if this is true. So Christians, think about it. Let not your heart be troubled. Think about it. Let the glory of it dawn on you and it'll swallow up any darkness. Let the living hope rise you, pull you up out of anything. What are you doing with death? What are you doing with your troubles? Are you whistling in the dark or are you taking this truth? Let me close this way. Friends, if you see what Jesus is saying and you say, I want that hope, how do I get it? It's simple. Just notice this. Jesus does not say, go prepare a place for yourself. He says, I prepare a place for you. How do you get into grad school? You prepare a place for yourself. Why? High achievement. But that's not the way Jesus does it. He says, the people who get to heaven are the ones who relinquish their ability, who forsake and recognize that they can't possibly be good enough, they can't possibly prepare a place for themselves in heaven, that he has to prepare a place in heaven for them. We had a friend who knew Mike Ford and Gail Ford when Gerald Ford was in the White House. One time we went in to the White House and went upstairs to the place where the first family lived. And we saw all the places that nobody else was ever allowed to go to. And we felt the sense of honor. We were in the house of the most powerful person in the world. Why? Because of our high SAT scores? Because of our Olympic gold medals? No. We had a relationship. Somebody loved us who loved the person in power. If you believe what society tells you, you've got what it takes. You've got all that you need inside for you to be a great person. You can definitely earn your own salvation and be everything that God wants you to be. That's a lie. The Bible says you need somebody to come into the Father's house and unlock the door from the inside. Some of you think, the trouble with Christianity is, I'm a passionate, lusty person, and I'm afraid Christianity is just too milk-soppy for me. In your dreams, listen. Listen. Your problem, the Bible says, is that your lust for love and joy and glory is not too strong. It's too weak. Here you are messing around with sex and career ambition when infinite glory is offered to you. Ask God right now to give you a real desire for joy because you don't have it. A park is a lovely place to walk, but it's a lousy place to live. When people have to live in there, it ruins it because it's not home. Your work, your relationships, your money is not home. You can't live there. And you have to say, oh Lord, wonderful things that I love on earth, if I make them my home, the things that will really give me joy, I'm lost forever. I'll always be wandering and never come home. It'll always be December and never Christmas. But I see now that only Jesus Christ can prepare a place for me, and the only place that will satisfy me is your house. Prepare a place for me, oh Lord Jesus. You have to say that today. Let not my heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Pray that prayer, and Jesus will say, amen. Amen. Let's pray. Father, as we listen to the offering music, as we give of our money to you, now we give our hearts to you, and we ask that you would simply enable us to get the strength to face our troubles, to get the love to love people, to get the hope that we need to live this life from knowing that you are preparing a place for us in your Father's house. We ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
