TITLE: A Widow’s Joy
SCRIPTURE: 1 Kings 17:7-24
TOPICS: Prophecy
SERIES: Discerning the Spirits (with Elijah)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/a-widows-joy/

============================================================

Let's take a look at the passage of Scripture on which the teaching is based. Right here, in your bulletin, we're starting a new series. It's fall, and this is a passage out of the history, a narrative story of the life of Elijah the prophet. Let me read it to you. 1 Kings 17, verse 7 to 24. Sometime later, the brook dried up because there had been no rain in the land. And then the word of the Lord came to him. Go at once to Zarephath of Sidon and stay there. I have commanded a widow in that place to supply you with food. So Elijah went to Zarephath, and when he came to the town, a widow was there gathering sticks. He called to her and asked, would you bring me a little water in a jar so I may have a drink? And as she was going to get it, he called, and bring me, please, a piece of bread. As surely as the Lord your God lives, she replied, I don't have any bread. Only a handful of flour in a jar and a little oil in a jug. I am gathering a few sticks to take home and make a meal for myself and my son that we may eat it and then die. Elijah said to her, don't be afraid. Go home and do as you have said, but first make a small cake of bread for me from what you have and bring it to me and then make something for yourself and your son. For this is what the Lord, the God of Israel says, the jar of flour will not be used up and the jug of oil will not run dry until the day the Lord gives rain on the land. And she went away and did as Elijah had told her. So there was food every day for Elijah and for the woman and her family. For the jar of flour was not used up and the jug of oil did not run dry in keeping with the word of the Lord spoken by Elijah. Sometime later, the son of the woman who owned the house became ill. She grew worse and he grew worse and worse and finally stopped breathing. She said to Elijah, what do you have against me, man of God? Did you come to remind me of my sin and kill my son? Give me your son, Elijah replied. He took him from her arms, carried him to the upper room where he was staying and laid him on his bed. Then he cried out to the Lord. Oh Lord, my God, have you brought tragedy also upon this widow I am staying with by causing her son to die? Then he stretched himself out on the boy three times and cried to the Lord. Oh Lord, my God, let this boy's life return to him. The Lord heard Elijah's cry and the boy's life returned to him and he lived. Elijah picked up the child and carried him down from the room into the house. He gave him to his mother and said, look, your son is alive. And then the woman said to Elijah, Elijah, now I know that you are a man of God and that the word of the Lord from your mouth is the truth. That's God's word. Now, it was absolutely dogma amongst all the intellectuals, all the academics of the world that Western society was on an irreversible, inevitable course away from faith, away from religion, away from belief in the supernatural, the transcendent. That because of scientific progress, because of technology and so on, that we were all going to eventually have a very unreligious society. And now in the last 10 or 15 years, that view has been totally abandoned. There has been an enormous upsurge in religious faiths of all kinds. There has been an enormous upsurge in spiritual seeking everywhere, even amongst the secular elites of New York City, we know. And as a result, the 21st century is being hailed as, it's being called, it's being looked forward to as a post-secular century in which we're going to have multiple surging living faiths and religions of all sorts, major faiths, little faiths, new faiths, old faiths, everywhere around us. Now, that brings us into a completely new situation, or I should say, in the West, we haven't faced this situation in over 2,000 years. Maybe I should say it's a completely old one, but it's not something we've known for a long time, and that's this. Because up until recently, if you lived in any country in North America or Europe, any country in Western civilization, we would call it, there was always a single faith option. You know, if you were in Sweden, there was the Lutheran. If you were in Italy, it was the Catholic. You know, there was always one basic faith option. And the question you always had in front of you was this, do I want to have faith? Do I want to be religious, or do I want to be a skeptic, or do I want to be something in the middle? Do I want to have faith? That's not the question anymore. Because for the first time since Roman days, for the first time since the ancient days, in the West, you will have around you, as it's beginning now, every kind of faith. the world, and zillions and zillions of smaller ones or newer ones. And therefore, the question no longer will be, do I want to have faith? Do I want to be a religious person? But the question is going to be, which faith? Not, do I want to believe in God? Which God? God, which, in other words, a new skill set is necessary if you are going to be able to consider yourself a thoughtful person in our society, a person living in an examined life. You have to learn this, and that is discernment of spirits. Namely, you have to learn how to evaluate the competing spiritual claims. How do you know which God is valid? How do you know which God is true? How do you know which faith and which spirituality is right? Unless you learn to have that kind of skill set to evaluate amongst the different and choose the faith, the spirituality, the God that you believe is right and true, unless you have that skill set, you're not going to be able to navigate life. Now, I can imagine a couple of objections quickly. See, I just said, unless you learn how to choose amongst the faiths, not the question of do I want to believe, do I want to believe in God, but which faith, which God? How do I decide? How do I evaluate? Now, somebody says, oh, no, no, no, no, not for me. I don't need to do that. One person, I can hear people say, I'm a secular person. I don't have faith. I don't have any interest in checking out the various faiths. So I don't need this skill set. Wait. One thing we have gotten from the French philosophers in the last 15 years, we've gotten a lot of bad things, but we've gotten something very good. And that is that when you say, hey, I don't have faith, well, what do you mean? Well, this world is all there is. This is a typical statement by a secular person in New York. This world is all there is. We really, no one created us. And when we die, you know, we came from nothing. We go to nothing. We're basically accidents of nature. There is no supernatural. There is no spirit world. But people are significant. People have rights. Human beings are valuable. Now, that, as the French philosophers have said, is an unbelievable leap of faith. It's not something you can prove. It is a spirituality. It is a faith. And here's the question. You say, well, I don't believe. I don't need to choose amongst the faiths. That is a faith. And why should you choose the one you choose? Did you realize you chose a faith? Do you realize, in a sense, you chose a spirituality? It's a spirit. It's one of the spiritual claims. And so we're back where we started. Why should you believe the one you've got instead of some other one? Don't say, well, I'm not religious. You are. Everybody is. You just don't want to admit it. You did a leap of faith. You've got a view of ultimate reality. I'm back to the question. How are you going to judge between them? How are you going to discern? I've had some people say, you don't need to. All faiths are basically alike. Just choose the one that, you know, you like. Because they're all basically alike. If a member of one race hears a member of another race say, you know, all you look alike. You all look alike. I mean, for example, let me put this on the right. If you're a white person here and you hear somebody from another race say, you know, white people, you all look alike. Pasty, kind of. You all look alike. If a member of one race hears a member of another race say, you all look alike. What are you going to say? You bristle and you say, you don't know many of us, do you? And when somebody says, all faiths are basically alike, that just proves that you don't know any of them. Not very well. How are we going to get this skill set after all these centuries? And the answer is we're going to have to go back to the days in which we had spiritual guides who lived in times of spiritual pluralism, of fervent religious pluralism. Back then, we had spiritual guides whose job it was to help you test and say, this is valid, this is invalid, this is the true God, these are false gods. And we're going to look for several weeks at one of the great discerners of spirits, Elijah, who lived in a time of many gods and who, by his words and deeds, showed us how to do the testing, how to decide. So for several weeks, we're going to learn how to discern the spirits, the spiritual claims, with Elijah. Now, what's Elijah's, let me tell you what the story is, and then we're going to see what he teaches us about two things. How do you know the true God, and how do you serve the true God? How can you know the true God as opposed to false ones, and then how would you serve him? Now, if you notice in verse 6, and I even had to tell you this because in a sense we pick up the story in the middle. You notice it starts right in saying, sometime later the brook dried up. What brook? What's going on? All right, well, here's the situation. In 8th century B.C., in Israel, the king of Israel, Ahab, entered into a diplomatic marriage with the daughter of one of the kings or one of the princes of Tyre and Sidon, a northern kingdom, in order to have a kind of alliance, of course. And Jezebel, his wife, and Ahab, once they were married, went on a systematic campaign to make Israel a religiously pluralistic society. Jezebel brought 400 prophets of Baal and 450 prophets of Asherah. They're both nature gods. Brought them into Israel, put them on government salary, sent them out to practice. And what this means is that for the first time in history, Israel had always been tempted by the gods and the religions of the neighboring nations. But for the first time in history, you had the power structure itself of Israel, the king and the queen, the government, systematically going about to create a religiously pluralistic and idol-worshipping society. And many of the prophets of the Lord, God, had been stuck, had been thrown out. Many of them had been killed. And Elijah was the last functioning prophet left. And so in a very dramatic moment, in the very beginning of this chapter, actually chapter 17, verse 1, Elijah shows up before King Ahab. And in the first couple of verses, he says this. He says to Ahab, He proclaims that the Lord is going to send a famine, no rain, not even dew. And that's a direct confrontation. It's a direct blow to Baal worship because Baal was the Lord of the heavens. He was the Lord of the storm. And he was the one who sent rain when you did his bidding, when you served him, when you sacrificed to him. He sent rain for the crops. And the Lord says, We'll see who's Lord of the heavens. And he sends Elijah. And a famine descends. And Ahab and Jezebel go on an international search trying to find Elijah to kill him. And Elijah has to go into the Kirith Ravine where at least there's some water. And he lives there for a while. But then that dries up. And he's facing starvation. And you have to keep this in mind, biblically speaking. In fact, in almost many, many ways, Elijah is the single most important life in the world at that moment. Because if Elijah dies, Judaism, the biblical religion dies. Otherwise, there will never be Christianity. But there will never even be the Ten Commandments. Never will have heard of the Ten Commandments. In other words, he is the most important human life in the world. And it's hanging by a thread. Everybody's searching for him. He's facing starvation. And the Lord speaks to him and says, I'll save you. But how? And what happens to Elijah? Not so much his words, but his deeds, the events of his life right here. Show us the true God. By the way, it's your life that really is a better revealer than your words of the God you believe in anyway. What do we learn from what happens here about who the true God is as opposed to false gods? And the answer is this. Three things we learn. That we have, in this instance, is we learn that he is the true God is an outsider's God, a living God, and a stretched-out God. He's an outsider's God, a living God, and a stretched-out God. Let's go. First of all, he's an outsider's God. God comes to Elijah and says, I'm going to save your life. But who? What does he say? He says, Go at once to Zarephath of Sidon and stay there. I have commanded a widow in that place to supply you with food. Now, I want you to know that Elijah was utterly shocked when he heard this. Now, it doesn't say he was shocked, and there's nothing in the text that tells us he was shocked, but I'll tell you he was shocked. In Luke chapter 4, Jesus Christ preaches his first sermon, his first public ministry. And at the end of his sermon, at the end of that, he says in Luke 4, he points to this passage, and he says there were many widows in Israel during the famine, but the Lord sent Elijah to none of them, but only to the widow of Zarephath in Sidon. And when he said that, when he brought up that sore subject, when he brought up this story to all those religious people, that is when they tried to kill him. They tried to kill him. Because this story is not something that religious people can understand. This story is in their craw. This story confounds them. This story upsets them. This story doesn't make any sense. And for Jesus to even raise the thing up meant that they tried to kill him. And therefore, if they were... so shocking? Well, first of all, look. First of all, God says, I'm going to save you, but I'm going to send you out of Israel. Sidon was the pagan country that Jezebel came from. The people up there were Gentiles. The people up there were idol worshipers. The people up there didn't believe in the Ten Commandments. They were immoral. They were heretics. They were racially outside us. Come on, Elijah must have said. You mean you're telling me you can't save my life here? No. Out. And then secondly, that's not all. The second part of the shock is he doesn't just send Elijah for his salvation to a pagan man. He sends Elijah to a pagan woman. Now, a lot of you women working in very liberated New York supposedly know something, and that is that there's a very, very, very, very deep need that men have to believe that they're more capable than women in general. They believe, they, they believe that they should be able to take care of women, but women shouldn't have to be able to take, shouldn't be able to take care of them. Now, if that's still true here and now, what must it have been like then and there? I mean, this is back in a time in which women had absolutely no rights. They were virtually nothing but property, and God says, I'm going to send you to a woman, a pagan, racially outsider, and a woman. She will be the one that will save you. She'll be the one through whom. Why? Couldn't you just, you know, drop it? I mean, remember manna? You know, why do I have to leave the Jordan? Why do I leave the Holy Land? Why do I have to leave my chosen people, the good people? And why, for crying out loud, do I have to go to a woman? And then not only is it's pagan, a racially different person, a religiously different person, a gender different person, but then she's poor. She's dirt poor. And, you know, middle class and professional people just look at the poor, and we, you know, they like to think that we're sympathetic, but basically we tend to look at the poor and say, well, there's something wrong with them. I mean, you know, why couldn't they, you know, what's wrong with them? Why didn't they pull themselves together? What's going on here? So God sends Elijah for his salvation to a racial outsider, a moral outsider, a gender and economic outsider. He breaks through, he shatters every single barrier that religion and society puts between people. Now, see, that's the point. Why did this so shock religious people? And here's why. Think about this. Religious people, or I should say the God of all other religions, and in fact, I'm saying this very slowly, even the God of most people who think they're following the biblical religion. So the gods of all the other religions and even the gods of the people who think they're following the biblical religion, they operate like this. Other gods say, obey my rules, I'll bless you. Simple. You come to me, you obey my rules, you obey my commandments, you do, you know, you come to me and you do everything, I work with you. You don't, I don't work with you. And here's God going to a dirt poor, racially other, unbelieving, idol-worshipping woman, and says to Elijah, I'm going to save you through her. And I'm actually going to save her through you. Go to her. Have a relationship there. I refuse to save you any other way. Why in the world would God honor her? Why in the world would God work with her? That's the reason why Jesus says, he says, you know, there were a lot of widows in Israel during the famine, but where did God go? Who did he use? A pagan, poor, racially different woman. And they wanted to kill him. Of course, they don't get it. How could it be? And so here's the question. Why would God do this? And the answer is because God is a God of outsiders because the true God is a God of grace. The true God offers his salvation regardless of merit, regardless of pedigree, regardless of gender or class. More than that, the gods of the religions, even the gods of the people who think they're following the biblical religion, are gods who basically work with you on the basis of your performance, your spiritual attainment. You pray enough. If you go off into a closet, if you do this, if you do that, if you're active enough in church, if you read the Bible all the time, if you do everything, if you keep your nose clean, then I'll work with you. That's not the true God. It's not. It's a God of grace. It doesn't matter who you are. It doesn't matter what you've done. It doesn't matter what kind of mess you are. In fact, it helps if you know you're a mess because the only way you can know a God of grace is to know him as a God of grace. And if you're shocked at this, if you say, well, how could this be? Why in the world would he work with us? a God who's different than this one. It's not the true God. Or you may even have rejected the God that you grew up with in church. And if he's different than this one, he's not the true God. You see, when I was a younger, brasher pastor, I would often talk to people who said, well, I was raised in church, but I've rejected God. And you know, when I was younger and brasher, I would say, why? You know, not like that, of course, but I would say, why? And then they'd tell me, and I would say, well, no, wait a minute. You know, I would argue. Nicely. But I would argue. Now I tend to say this. Describe the God you rejected. Describe the God you don't believe in. And they describe it, and I can't believe. Nine times out of ten, I said, look, I am an Orthodox Christian minister. I don't believe in that God either. Because usually they say, I tried so hard I couldn't live up. Or I was surrounded by people who believed in this God, and they were so, they excluded people. They were, you see, religion is always associated with the insider. Because if you have a God, a religious God, a God of the religions is always, if you keep your nose straight, if you do right, if you work yourself up. You see, therefore, the God of the religions is the God of the insiders. The insiders are the people who, they've done well. They're very moral. They're respectable. Their children don't misbehave. This is the God of the people, you see, who most of us, so many people have rejected. But Elijah is showing us, by his life, it's not the real God. Test yourself. Do you believe in a God to whom you can sing, or at least say, if you have a voice like mine, "'Tis not that I did choose thee, for, Lord, that could not be. This heart would still refuse thee, hast thou not chosen me.'" My heart owns none before thee, for thy rich grace I thirst. This knowing, if I love thee, thou must have loved me first. Now, if you say, I don't know what it's like to talk like that, if you don't, then you don't know the real God. Or if you say, all my life I just could never sort of live up, and I hated all the people who were so exclusive, and all the insiders, and they looked down at everybody else. Their God isn't the real God. Their God isn't the true God. The true God is a God of the outsiders because he's a God of grace. Secondly, though, we learn something else. This first incident tells us that he's a God of grace. He goes to the outsider. He goes to the marginal. He works for the outsider. He works through the marginal. And, of course, the first, and we're not going to go into detail, the first miracle is a wonderful miracle. They're saved by the flower, and the oil keeps coming. It's a miracle of grace, and it shows us we have a God of grace. And somebody says, well, okay, I believe that. Lots of people believe in a loving God, but that's not all the true God is. The true God is not only an outsider's God. This next incident goes like this. After a little while, the little boy, and we know he's a little boy because you'll see it's not just Elijah that holds him, his dead body in her arms, but it's his mother. So it's a little boy. The little boy gets sick, and slowly but surely she watches him die, and finally he breathes his last. And it's interesting, see, verse 18 and 19, essentially she picks him up, and she takes him to Elijah, and she says, I thought you came with blessing. You've come with judgment. You've come to punish me for my sins. And Elijah is just, Elijah is very clear, especially when you see how he works in the upper room. You see, he grabs hold of the boy, and he runs upstairs. Now, here's what's so interesting. The widow looks at Elijah and actually asks a question. She says, is this punishment for my sins? Is this a reminder, which is a kind of weak word, the way it's translated, but is this evidence of my sins? Is this a result of my sins, is what she's saying. Have I been punished for my sins? And Elijah, now, you know, she hardly believes yet. You know, she's in process. She's certainly learned a lot about the true God, but she's in process. And so, Elijah, he's a seminary graduate. Elijah has a doctorate. Elijah is one of the great minds and one of the great prophets in history. Elijah gets up into that room, puts the little boy down on the bed, and looks up and asks the same question. She says, is this punishment for my sins? And what does he say? He looks up in heaven and says, oh, Lord. Is it? Is this punishment? Did you do this? Is this a stroke of judgment? He doesn't know either. Now, here's what's so interesting. Neither the woman nor Elijah, on the one hand, say, you have no right to do this. She doesn't say, you have no right to do this. I obeyed, I followed what you told me to do. She doesn't say that. She doesn't say that. She says, is this punishment for my sins? She doesn't say, I'm not a sinner. She says, I know I'm a sinner, is this punishment? And then Elijah goes up and doesn't say, how dare you? He says, have you? Which means both of them are saying, this is a sovereign God. This is a God who might be doing this. This might be from God. This might be a stroke of judgment. Now here's what's being taught. Now listen, hold your breath for a second, all right? I'm going to try to be as delicate as I can on this. When she meets him, she knows the difference between the God of Israel and all the other gods. When she meets him in verse 12, she says, what? In verse 12, she says, as surely as the Lord, your God, lives. Actually, up in verse one, when Elijah first comes to Ahab, he says, I come from the God who lives. Now what is a living God? And how is it different than any other kind of God? I'll tell you. An idol is something you project. An idol is a God that you have designed to fit your mind, which means it's really an extension of your mind. An idol is a God who's under your control. An idol is a God who doesn't do things that you don't understand or like because you just won't believe in a God like that. See, an idol is a God that you have designed, that you have in a sense projected. But here's what a living God is. How do you know if you have a living God? You know you have a living God when he says things that you don't understand and you don't like, but you still obey him. And when he sends things that you don't understand and you don't like, but you still serve him. Only then do you know you have a real God, not a God you've made up. You see, if you have a God that fits into your mind, that never says anything or does anything, that doesn't dumbfound and confound you or upset you, if you have a God that fits into your mind, then you have a God spun out of your mind. Or if you're not even willing to have a God who can tell you to do things that you don't like and you say, none of my friends believe this. I don't believe this. I don't like a God like this. If you're not even willing to have a God who can contradict you, if you're not willing to have an untamed God, if you're not willing to have a God who's uncontrollable, then you'll never have a real God. You'll never have a living God. When you have concocted a God in your mind, that God is as dead as if you'd carved it. When you carve a God, set it up very carefully, because if that God falls over, you're going to have to put it back in place. It's not going to get back there itself. It's not living. This is a God who is sovereign. This is a God who is not accountable to us. This is a God who is free to judge. And both Elijah and this woman know it. And if you say, I couldn't believe in a God who would do anything like that, it's possible, just possible, that what you're saying is, I'm not willing to have a living God. I must have a God that I have designed. Now you see, when you put these two together, you're starting to get a picture, are you not? Lots of people have a loving God who's a God of outsiders who brings in the marginal and who accepts the broken and loves people and gives grace no matter what. Lots of people have a God like that. And there's also a lot of people who are severe, because they have a severe God. And they have a God who you can please through good works and you better. Lots of people have a God who's a God of grace, and lots of people have a God who's a God of truth, a God of sovereignty, a God of judgment. But Elijah is showing that there is a God who is both. And you know what? A God like that does not fit in your mind. A God like that breaks through all your paradigms. A God like that will completely blow through your categories over and over and over again. You will try hard to say, I guess he's a judging God. But then you see, both in his word and in your life, all this grace. And then you'll say, well, I guess he just sort of accepts me the way I am. And then he comes after you. And you'll say, how could this be? This is a real God. This is a living God. This is a God of the outsiders. But he's a living God. How can he do both? How can he be both? Or let me put it to you in this question. Why did he do both? Or let me put it to you in this question. How can he do both? How can he be both? Or let me put it to you in this question. Why didn't he kill the little boy? Because you see, when Elijah goes up there and asks for the little boy's life back, saying, did you slay this little boy as punishment for sin? Then, God says by the resurrection, which he gives the little boy, no. See, when Elijah says, did this little boy die for his mother's sins? The resurrection is God's way of saying no. Well, here's a quick question then. If God is a God not just of grace, but also a God of justice and truth, why not? Why did the resurrection happen of this little boy? Why did God do this? Why didn't God punish the little boy? Why didn't God punish them for their sins? And the answer is this, the stretching. A lot of people have had a lot of trouble, I know, because I looked up about eight commentaries and everybody was kind of perplexed. Why does Elijah stretch out over the little boy? The word there doesn't just mean that he's, you know, sort of fell on the little boy, but it means he literally stretched out his arms, stretched out his body over the little boy. What was he doing? Well, you know what? Even if there was no other biblical references, you would know this, and that is when you put your arms out, it's an action of vulnerability. If you want to die, this is the best way to do it in a dangerous situation. But you know what? In John chapter 21, verse 18, when Jesus Christ is speaking to Peter and predicting his future, and he says to Peter, Peter, I want you to know what's going to happen to you. Someday you're going to stretch out your hands, and people will take you where you don't want to go. And John, the writer, after that quote, says Jesus was talking to Peter about his death. Peter was crucified. And here's what Elijah is doing. When he stretches out, I think he's instinctively saying, take me. Haven't you ever felt that way? You ever watched somebody die? You ever watched a young person die? And you look up and say, take me. And I think that's what Elijah was doing, but God didn't do it. Why not? God did give back the resurrection, but didn't take Elijah. Why not? Pretty simple. The answer of the God of the Bible to the question that came up twice. Did my son die for my sins? And God's answer is no. Your son can't pay for your sins. My son's going to pay for your sins. My son's going to stretch out and impart life to the world. My son is going to descend into the world and, like Elijah, stretch out and cry out. And this is why I can be both a God of judgment and justice and yet a God of grace. This is the reason why you don't have to be, this is the reason why you don't have to pay for your sins and he doesn't have to pay for your sins. This is the reason I can be the just and justifier of those who believe because my son will stretch out. My son will die, not yours. Now here's what goes on. When you have these three things, you've got a unique God. There is no other claimant. There is no other spirituality. There is no other faith that claims that we have a God of grace, a God of judgment, and because he's a God of sacrifice, a God that stretches out so that he is both and can be both. Now, what is the result of that? Now, in some ways, and this is the problem with an introductory sermon, in some ways we're going to get to all of these, but let me just run down. If you have a God of grace and truth, Jesus Christ is the Lord of grace and truth. Not a God of grace, God of truth, but a God of grace and truth because God who died for us. If you have that, then the way in which you live out your life, the way in which you serve that God will be very unique. Let me just show you three real fast, very fast, because they're going to come up again. Number one, Elijah has this unbelievable, humble, yet hopeful realism toward life. Elijah, when he starts praying, does not say, how dare you? He does not say to God, there's something wrong, but he also doesn't acquiesce. You see, he doesn't say, how can you do this? How could this be? This is unjust. This is wrong, which is what most of us do who believe only in a God of grace. But on the other hand, he doesn't say, well, it's your will, Lord. I mean, you killed him. Well, I mean, it doesn't matter. I can just abjectly grovel here. You know, you are the great God. I am nothing but a peasant. I am nothing but a peon. I'm nothing but a pawn in your hand. And that is how people who have a God of judgment only do. And I tell you something, unless you have a God like this, you're not going to be able to handle reality. That's the way you test a God. Hamlet said it years ago. He says, there's more things in heaven and earth that are dreamt of in your theology. for and handle all the things in heaven and earth. It's not real. It's not true. And if you have a God of grace or a God of severity, and even if you say, I don't believe in a God, I've rejected a God, you've rejected one of those gods, which is still there. You've got a God, even though you rejected him. And unless you have the true God, you're going to go back and forth between romanticism and cynicism over and over and over. You're going to be jerked back and forth. You're going to say, everything will be fine if I do it, everything right. And then things are going to go wrong. And then you're going to say, oh, everything is terrible. We have an unjust God. If there is a God at all, I curse the gods, what gods there be. You're going to go back and forth because your God in your head, a God you believe in, or even the God that you rejected, which therefore you have to believe in to reject him. You don't have the biblical God. You don't have the true God. You don't have this unbelievable, humble, hopeful poise that Elijah has, which is on the one hand, he goes after God. He says, don't do this. Please help me. But on the other hand, he doesn't say, there's something wrong. You're unjust. You'd have no right to do this. Amazing, isn't it? How could he have this kind of, this poise, this humble, hopeful attitude toward life, this assertiveness, yet humility? And the answer is, he has the true God. So first of all, you have that perfect poise, that humble poise toward life if you serve the true God. Secondly, you will embrace the outsider. How did that woman really learn who the true God was? A weirdo came into her life. Elijah was weird. Elijah wore all kinds of strange, well, we'll get into this as time goes on. Elijah was weird. Elijah was a man. Elijah was an Israelite. Elijah was all the weird, I mean, Elijah was an outsider to her. How did Elijah find out who God really is? Through her. Unless you are willing, through the gospel, to embrace people who are very different than you, serve the poor, but realize the poor will save your soul. Now, I'm talking kind of, that's an overstatement. Elijah comes into life of this poor person, but he's not just condescending. He ends up getting saved physically and really redeemed in many ways spiritually through her. And the same thing happens to her. What does this mean? If you're religious, you're going to feel inferior or superior to people. But the gospel says, you are a wicked sinner, so don't you dare feel superior to anybody, but you are absolutely loved, so don't feel inferior to anyone. And that means you'll be able to move on out in the world with a freedom in relationships. Though you believe in the truth, you can embrace. He literally embraced the other. He got involved with the poor. He got involved with the needy. He got involved with people from another culture, and that's where he found God. That's where he found grace, and that's where she found grace. Open yourself to people who are different. It's really weird. You need the gospel to do it, and then you find the gospel as you do it. Lastly, the most important thing, I guess, in a sense, it wasn't his words that saved her alone. She had to see the resurrection. Do you see that? What's the last line? Now I know the true God. Now I know your message is true. Now I know. He'd been talking to her. See? She'd heard his words, but she needed a resurrection. If you want to become a Christian today, it's not enough to say, I'll study the Bible and try to follow Jesus. No. Jesus did not come to teach you how to save yourself by being good. Jesus came to die and rise again in history to save you. He didn't come to show you how to save yourself. He came to save you. It's not enough for his words. You've got to see his resurrection. Christian friends, you've got people around you that you care for, and you say, if only I could show them the truth, if only I could show them more about God. Your words won't be enough. Are you showing them a resurrected life? Is there anything unusual about you? Is your love and your joy and your peace remarkable? Let me close with these evaluation questions. I actually wrote these things out. I know I never do this, but I wanted to do it. Number one, does everybody in this room see you have a God, even if you've rejected God, you've rejected a kind of God. Have you seen that every one of you has got a God, and it needs to be evaluated through the words of the prophets? Secondly, do you have a living God or a God that you've projected? Do you have a God that can confound you and upset you, or have you designed a God by saying, well, I'm not going to believe in a God unless… I'm not going to believe in a God who does this. I'm not going to believe in a God who does that. Do you have a living God or just a projection? better than others? Come on. Follow after him. Read the words of the prophets. And follow him in overflowing jars. Follow him through dying children. You will come to know the true God. Let's pray. Give us grace, Lord, to know the true God. Help us to see, actually, that one of the reasons why we're having so much trouble dealing with the troubles of life is we don't know the true God. One of the reasons we're having so much trouble making friendships with people who are different than us is because we don't know the true God. One of the reasons that we are down on ourselves or too far up on ourselves is because we don't know the true God. Change our lives by showing us who you are. Through Jesus, in his name we pray. Amen. Amen.
