TITLE: Abraham and the Fire
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 15:1-21
TOPICS: Salvation Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Theophany: Anticipations of Jesus in the Old Testament
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/abraham-and-the-fire/

============================================================

The scripture reading is from Genesis chapter 15 verses 1 through 21. After this, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision. Do not be afraid, Abram. I am your shield, your very great reward. But Abram said, O sovereign Lord, what can you give me since I remain childless and the one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus? And Abram said, You have given me no children, so a servant in my household will be my heir. Then the word of the Lord came to him, This man will not be your heir, but a son coming from your own body will be your heir. He took him outside and said, Look up at the heavens and count the stars, if indeed you can count them. Then he said to him, So shall your offspring be. Abram believed the Lord, and he credited it to him as righteousness. He also said to him, I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it. But Abram said, So sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it? So the Lord said to him, Bring me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon. Abram brought all these things to him, cut them in two and arranged the halves opposite each other. The birds, however, he did not cut in half. Then birds of prey came down in the carcasses, but Abram drove them away. As the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a thick and dreadful darkness came over him. Then the Lord said to him, Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and mistreated four hundred years. But I will punish the nation they serve as slaves, and afterward they will come out with great possessions. You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old age. In the fourth generation, your descendants will come back here, for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its full measure. When the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking firepot with a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces. On that day, the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said, To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river. For the Euphrates, the land of Kenites, Kenizzites, Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Rephites, Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and Jebusites. This is God's word. Well, we get into our summer months, and over the next number of weeks, you'll be coming and going, and the pastors and preachers are coming and going. So we have a series I'd like to introduce that it needs to be a set of stand-alone sermons, because people will not be here every single week. On the other hand, there needs to be a theme, and the theme is theophany. And a theophany is a scene, an account of a time in which the great God of the universe manifests himself in a physical or audible way here on the earth. When God manifests himself in some physical, audible way, some palpable way that can be sensed with the eyes and the ears, that is called a theophany. And what we're going to do is look at a whole series of them over the next few weeks. They're all in the Old Testament. St. Augustine once said that the Old Testament is like a fully furnished room that's very poorly lit. In other words, there's all kinds of things there that you really can't see unless you open a window and let light in from the New Testament. And from the standpoint of the New Testament, looking back on the Old Testament, you see all kinds of things that you wouldn't otherwise see. And it's mainly this. Every place where God manifests himself in some dramatic, physical way in the Old Testament, it points to the ultimate expression, the ultimate God come in a physical, fleshly way in Jesus Christ. In other words, every single theophany points us to Jesus Christ and teaches us something about Jesus Christ, and there's nothing more important to know than that, to know more and more about Jesus Christ. And that's why each week we're going to be taking a look at one theophany. Now, this first one here is one of the most, well, it's one of the most wonderful passages in the Bible, and I have to say it's one of my, the most comforting and the most light. have to understand something about the background. Let's take a look at this passage under two headings. The first eight verses are the questions and doubts of Abraham, and then from verses 9 to 21, we'll see the answers and the assurances of God. So first, the questions and doubts of Abraham, and then the answers and assurances of God. And then we'll talk a little bit about what that means to us, how this actually affects the way in which we live. First, the questions and doubts. The reason why God shows up in verse 1 and says, don't be afraid, Abraham, is because in the chapter before, Abraham has just rescued his nephew, Lot, from a bunch of tribal chieftains and tribes, and he's afraid of retaliation. This is quite a dog-eat-dog, or maybe I should say tribe-eat-tribe and clan-eat-clan world. And therefore, he's afraid of retaliation. And God comes and says, don't be afraid. I am your shield, your very great reward. When it says, the word of the Lord came to Abraham, it's the only place in all the Pentateuch, in all the five books of Moses, where we're told the word of the Lord came to somebody. This is something that happens to prophets. In other words, it was very clear, very audible, extremely strong statement by God. Do not be afraid, Abraham. I am your shield, and I am your very great reward. In spite of how clear it is, in spite of this assurance, Abraham immediately responds in verse 2 and 3 and says, I'm scared. I'm still scared. Thank you very much for this word of the Lord. But, O sovereign Lord, you said you are going to bless the whole world through my descendants. You are going to bless the whole world and bring your salvation to the world through my descendants. I remain childless. The one who will inherit my estate is Eliezer of Damascus. You have given me no child, and so a servant of my household will be my heir. In other words, God had made this promise to Abraham, and Abraham is saying to God, how can I be sure about you? I have doubts about you. How can I know you're going to do this? God responds in a very famous passage where he says, this man will not be your heir, but a son coming from your own body will be your heir. And he took him outside and said, look up at the heavens and count the stars, if indeed you can count them, so shall your offspring be. He said, I'm not just going to give you one child. You are going to be a fruitful vine, and so on. So God gives him this assurance. He's filled with doubts, filled with questions. How can I be sure of you? God says, look at this. He speaks to him, and we're told, verse 6, Abraham believed the Lord, and he credited to him his righteousness. And then, verse 7, extremely realistic. God also said to Abraham, I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it. But Abraham says, O sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it? Now, it looks like he's just coming right back with the same kind of doubts, and he is in a way. It's realistic. It's realistic that the doubts go for a little bit. How long? What, one verse? First, they're gone, and now they're back. But they're not quite the same, and here's why. When God says, I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it, he's reminding Abraham of a covenant he's made with him. And that covenant, I am the Lord, which, of course, is a covenant name. It's a word that is a name that we have an agreement between us. We have a relationship. I'm giving you this land, God says, if you walk before me, if you obey me. And therefore, now Abraham's actually filled with doubts, and they're not quite the same. You see what he's saying? See, before Abraham said, you made this promise to me, but how can I be sure you'll keep it? I have doubts about you. Now, he says, we have this agreement in which I have to obey you, then give me the land. But now, I don't know whether I will come through. How do I know if I'm going to actually be up to this task? Now he's actually saying, I have doubts about me. I got doubts about you. I got doubts about me. I don't know whether you're going to come through for me, God. I'm not sure if I'm going to come through for you. And therefore, I'm not sure that all these things you say are going to happen in our lives because of a relationship between the two of us are ever going to happen. And God begins to respond to that as well, and we'll get to that in a minute. But let's stop for a moment and see what we learn from these first eight verses. Here's a couple things. One is, on the one hand, God is actually quite open to the doubts. I mean, it's pretty interesting here. God shows up and says, I am the Lord. I will do this. I will do that. And Abraham says, how can I be sure you're going to do all that? I mean, this is the God of the universe, God, Abraham. question me? You little thing. But he doesn't. He answers him. And then when Abram shows more doubts, as we're going to see, he answers them again. And then thirdly, it's actually, he answers his fears. He gets doubts. He answers his doubts. He gets more doubts. He's about to answer again. So on the one hand, God is very patient with doubters. On the other hand, he does not let you stay in your doubt. He doesn't just say, oh, well, you know, you're a human being. You're going to doubt. He keeps coming back and coming back and coming back. It reminds us very much, I think, of the most famous doubter in the Bible, who's Thomas. In John chapter 20, we're told that Thomas wasn't present when the disciples saw the risen Christ appear. And when he was told, Jesus is risen, he says, I doubt it until I can see him, until I can actually put my hand in the nail prints in his hands. And when Jesus Christ shows up to Thomas, he says, here, Thomas, touch me, see me, stop doubting and believe. Now there's the perfect balance. Because on the one hand, Jesus does not show up and say, how dare you? Instead, he says, you want to touch me here? Go ahead. On the other hand, he says, stop doubting. There's, on the one hand, a refusal. God refuses to let you acquiesce in your doubts. He doesn't sit there and says, no, no, it's fine. You know, you're going to doubt. That's just all there is to it. On the other hand, God does not, uh, uh, he's gentle with doubters. He's solicitous with doubters. He says, if that didn't help you, let's try that. It's perfect balance. And I'll tell you why it's important to keep it in mind. Not only because a lot of you may be struggling with doubts and you've gone back and forth yourself between either acquiescing in them and just letting them stay there. You have spiritual doubts, you have religious doubts, and you just sort of never change. You never get any better. You don't work on it. You just, you acquiesce. That's no good. On the other hand, you may have come, uh, from a situation in which no one, maybe you came from a setting in which you're never allowed to doubt. Oh, you don't have doubts. You don't question. This is God's word. You don't question at all. Churches in which it's unsafe to doubt, create skeptics. They create them because as they're growing up, especially as teenagers and young people, they, uh, if you're, if you're unable to be open about your doubts, you get no answers. On the other hand, we live in a city like New York in which I get, I don't know how to put it. Secular sophisticated culture assumes that anybody who has any kind of certainties about faith at all is a naive rube. Uh, that it's considered sophisticated to always be doubtful about everything, skeptical about everything, who knows about anything. So you have a kind of secular culture that actually makes doubt into a virtue and you have, maybe I could say a traditional culture in which doubt is a no, no. And then you have God and you have the Bible gentle with those who doubt, but never accepting that that's a place where you can live forever. And actually, uh, since we, we should occasionally be suffering self-referential, it's one of the keys, I think, to what has made Redeemer what it is. Our church has always been seeking that balance. Uh, we want to be different than either the world or a lot of the traditional church when it comes to doubters being welcome. That's the first point. But now what does God do? How does he answer? Uh, I don't know about you and I don't know about me. How does he answer the doubts? Well, he says to Abraham, look down here, let's get started on it. Verse nine, Abraham, he says, uh, so the Lord says, bring me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon. That's all he says. Bring me these. And Abram, even though he's not given the instructions by God, Abram brings them, but then he cuts them in two, arranges the halves opposite each other. The birds, however, did not cut in half. In other words, he takes these animals and he cuts most of them in half, the bigger ones, not the small ones, the birds. And then he arranges them opposite each other. So he creates an aisle, an aisle, which you can walk down. Now it's pretty clear that God just was able to say, bring me these, these animals. And Abram knew right away without being told that God was talking about something that was familiar to, they were all familiar with it. God doesn't have to lay it all out. Abram's familiar with it. God's familiar with it. Abraham knows what God is calling Abram to do. But you and I don't. So what's going on here? And the answer is, they're about to make a covenant. They're about to make a contract. Now in our written culture, how do you make a contract? In other words, you write your name on a piece of writing. Why? In our culture, that's how we hold each other accountable. You make a promise. You enter into a contractual relationship. How can I be sure that you're going to do what you say you're going to do? I have doubts about you. How do I know you're going to do it? You say, I'll sign on the dotted line. See, that's your way of assuring the other person. So you sign, and you write something on a piece of paper that has already written down certain stipulations, et cetera, and that's how a covenant or contract is made. We know that if you do that, everybody knows that's a convention by which society will hold you responsible for doing what you say you're going to do. But that's not how covenants or contracts were made in oral cultures before we had written cultures. How did you do it in an oral concrete culture? You acted. Those of you who are actors get excited about this. You had to be, you had to do a drama. You had to do an action. You had to do a physical action. And what that physical action was, was that you acted out the consequences of not obeying the covenant, the consequences of breaking your vows. You acted out what was called the curse of the covenant. And how did that work? Here's a very interesting passage from Jeremiah 34, totally, totally obscure unless you link it to Genesis 15. This is Jeremiah 34, 18. This is God speaking. He says, this is what the Lord says. You have not obeyed me. The men who have violated my covenant and have not fulfilled the terms they made, I will treat them like the calf they cut in two and then walk between the pieces. I will hand them over to their enemies and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth. Did you hear that? The way you made a covenant back then, there was more than one way to do it, but a very typical way was you cut animals in half and you walked between the pieces and you said, if I do not do everything in the future that I am saying I will do today, if I break my vows, may I be as these animals. May I be cut to pieces. May my body be food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth. That's what you're doing. You're walking between the pieces and you're identifying with the pieces and you're saying, let this happen to me if I don't obey. So you're acting out the curse of the covenant. Pretty vivid. Next time you're having some work done on your apartment and you're entering into a contract with some contractor, say, well, let's not do the old paper and pencil thing. Let's do something like this. I must say, if the person is willing to do it, you'll probably get better service. I mean, because it's very, very, I mean, yeah, I'm not sure. I'm not sure things have gotten better over the years. Civilization, there's some drawbacks to it. There's one more thing you need to know about how covenants were made in those days. When you had non-equals, when you had a king entering into a relationship with a vassal, in fact, very often what would happen is if a king would conquer, a great empire, emperor would conquer three or four smaller nations, very often the smaller nations would enter into a covenant with the great king. And when there was a king entering into a covenant with a vassal, the vassal only walked between the pieces. The vassal only took the oath because, of course, the great king was being very gracious and allowing you to enter into a covenant with him. And so the great king would just sit on the throne or wherever and it would be the vassal who would walk between the pieces and take the oath, et cetera. And therefore, see, Abraham was absolutely sure what was happening. He was totally wrong, but this is what he thought, that he was going to be asked to walk between the pieces and to take a vow and to say, I will do this and I will do this and I will do that. And if you think about it, you realize that that wouldn't have been much of a help. Abraham was saying, I don't know whether I can trust you, God, and I don't know whether I can trust myself to follow through on all these things. So it really wouldn't have been much help. But anyway, that's what Abraham thought was going to happen. But that's not what happened. What did happen, what happened is one of the most amazing things in the entire Bible and one of the most dramatic scenes in the entire Bible. You have to sort of dig into the text a little bit to see it. Here's what happened. So he's got it all out there. He's got the aisle of dead animals. The sun was setting, verse 12. And here's what we're told. Abraham fell into a deep sleep. But all the commentators say it doesn't mean he just got sleepy and fell asleep. This isn't normal sleep because it says a thick and dreadful darkness came over. terror. A terror fell on him. A dread fell on him. A kind of a spiritual darkness fell on him that went along with the physical darkness of the sun setting. It was so dreadful. He was so crushed into the ground that he was essentially not in the same kind of waking state he normally would be. And then God speaks to him. But for a moment, let's jump over God speaking to him, because what happened as soon as what God says is over, it says, verse 17, and when the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking fire pot and a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces. Now, these two terms are really, really hard to translate. And if you go to three different or four different translations, you'll see a whole lot of different things. There are actually two words. The one word here is being translated, a smoking fire pot. The other one is being translated, a blazing torch. The one word could be billowing smoke. And the second one could be blazing lightning. These are two words that both appear when God descends on Mount Sinai, which means these are tokens, these are emblems of God's immediate presence. This is God himself showing up physically. But here's what's so weird is that second word, blazing torch, is a word that's often used for lightning. And what this means is something like this. As Abraham watched, a searing streak of lightning appeared and held its shape. See, you and I only ever see lightning, and it's blazing. It's a searing streak of lightning appeared and held its shape. Imagine the fire. Imagine the radiance. Imagine the smoke. Imagine the crackling, the sparks. And it held its shape. And it passed between the pieces. And Abram knew that God was not just simply reiterating his older vows when he said, I will give you this. And I will do this for you. And I will do that for you. And you will go to your fathers in peace. And I will give you all these things. He wasn't just reiterating it. He was making an oath. He was walking between the pieces. He was identifying with the pieces. And he was saying, if I don't do everything I've told you I will do, may I be torn to pieces. May I die. May I be cut to ribbons. That's astounding. That is utterly astounding. Here's the reason why. What God is actually saying. This is God talking. God's going between the pieces. And he's actually saying, Abraham, if I don't bless you, may my immortality become mortality. May my immutability become mutable. May the impossible become possible. May I die. May I be cut off. Cut off. That's covenant language. May I be cut off. If I don't bless you, may I be cut off. I will if I don't bless you. But I want you to see, as crazy as that is, as astonishing as that is, how amazing that is, that's not all that happened that was amazing. Because God passes through the pieces and he makes the covenant. He takes the oath. But then, look carefully. Look, verse 17, and when the sun set and fallen, a smoking firepower blazing torch appeared and passed through the pieces. That's God. And then verse 18, on that day, the Lord made a covenant with Abraham. Bang. The covenant's over. It's done. It's not just amazing who walks through the pieces. That's amazing. But the second most amazing thing, and equally amazing, is who doesn't walk. Who doesn't give an oath. Who isn't asked to do a doggone thing. And you know who that is? It's Abram. And you know why that is so astounding? For God to say, I will bless you and pass through the pieces. And to say, I will bless you. And even if it means being torn to pieces, I will bless you. What he's actually saying is, not only will I pay the penalty if I am not faithful to the covenant, I will pay the penalty if you're not faithful to the covenant. Because your faithfulness has nothing to do with this blessing. This blessing is coming to you unconditionally. And I will be torn to pieces. If necessary. If either you fail or I fail, I'll be torn to pieces so that I will still be able to bless you. Now, Abram could not imagine. Abram must have been utterly perplexed. Here is an unconditional grace covenant. Here's a covenant that says you can be absolutely sure this is going to happen, whether you fail or not. Whether I fail, I won't. But if I fail, I'll pay the penalty. In other words, God is saying you can absolutely be sure that this... Abraham must have said, wonderful, incredible, a grace, unconditional covenant, incredible. But you and I know how. Do you know how it happened? Do you know how God could do this, how this worked? Mark chapter 15, verse 33. And at the sixth hour, 12 noon, darkness came over the whole land. When Jesus Christ went to the cross, darkness came down again. The thick darkness, the darkness of terror and dread. And Isaiah 53, verse 6 says, about the suffering servant, he was cut off from the land of the living. He was cut off from the land of the living. What does that mean? That's covenant language. When Jesus says, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? What was happening? Don't you see what was happening? His immortality was becoming mortality. His immutability was becoming mutable. The impossible did become possible. God was cut off. He died. He experienced. Jesus Christ, the son of God, experienced all this so that he could bless you even when you fail him. So that your salvation could be an absolutely unconditional salvation. Such was the final cost of God's astounding oath of grace that night. Because Galatians 3, 13, 14 says, Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us. He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abram might come to all through Jesus Christ. Christ. Now, what difference does this make? Let us just lay out a few. What are the implications of this? I mean, what does this mean for us? Let me say, let's draw some lessons. First lesson, there is no other religion on the face of the earth, anything like this. Please do not say, well, all religions are saying basically the same thing. Everybody ought to love one another and God will bless them if you... No, no. Please don't ever say anything like that. Religions either have an impersonal God who could never do something like that because he's just a force or they have God. Many religions have a God who say, our God could never become a human being. Our God could never suffer and die. He could never go through all these things. I'm offended by the very idea that that's possible. But if you'd open your heart, you'd say it's the most beautiful thing you've ever heard of. There isn't anything like this. There's no other religion that comes close. No other faith on the face of the earth that even comes close to saying, it doesn't matter how much of a failure you are. If you enter into a covenant with God the Father through what Jesus Christ has done, you're saved by grace, sheer grace. It has nothing to do with you. You didn't have to walk between the pieces. You didn't have to take the oath. God took it all on himself. There's no other religion like that. It's a grace religion. Every other religion says, do this and God will bless you. Only Christianity says, God came and did this so he could bless you unconditionally. Every other religion says, here's how you can find God. Christianity says, here's how God came to find you because you never would have found him. Absolutely different. Okay. First lesson. Second lesson. The book of Hebrews talks about, let's get back to doubt and assurance because that's really why in many ways what this whole passage is about. And in Hebrews chapter six, we read this. When God made his promise to Abraham, he swore by himself saying, I will surely bless you. And because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear, he confirmed it with an oath. And we have this hope as an anchor for our souls, firm and secure. We have this hope as an anchor for our souls, firm and secure. It's a long time now, but when our family was young and my boys were young, we used to go to Lake Erie with my wife's parents. And one of the things that my kids wanted to do was go, and I knew nothing about this, want to go fishing in Lake Erie. So we would, we would get out pretty far. Lake Erie is pretty big. The Great Lakes are pretty big. And I had an anchor and I used to try to lower the anchor to take hold of something down there. So we wouldn't keep drifting farther and farther out toward Canada so that I would be able to find my way back. I mean, we'd go out pretty far in order to get the fish. And I remember being very, very, uh, there were a couple of years in which I clearly didn't have enough rope or I went out too far and the anchor didn't grab. And, and we were always, I was always in danger of, you know, getting out of sight of land and it was pretty frightening. Uh, and that's just Lake Erie, a little boat. Uh, anchors are pretty important obviously. And for the, uh, for the book of Hebrews to come and say, everybody needs an anchor. Everybody needs to have something that you say, if I have this, I'm safe. If my soul is resting in this, I'm safe. only safe anchor, only safe place to put your anchor of your soul, the only safe place. And how could it be any safer? It's not based on your performance. It's based on what he has done. How could you want anything more secure than that? Uh, one of my professors in seminary tells a story that has haunted me my whole life. I mean, in a good way, as some of you know, he told about two young women where he was teaching in college and became Christians and they wanted to go overseas to a poor country and be missionaries and help the poor and that sort of thing. And their parents were very upset because their parents didn't share their Christian commitment. And when they found out that these girls, when they graduated, wanted to go off into the blue and help the world, they got very upset and came to them and said, uh, Oh, honey, how wonderful you've had a religious experience. Wonderful. That'll look good in your resume. And, uh, if you know how to do it right. But the point is you need a master's degree and a good career before you go anywhere else, because it's the only way you get real security, real security in life is if you have a good career. And Dr. Leach said, I think to the parents, if he did, it was probably offended him terribly. He says, well, it depends on how you look at life. See where every one of us on this little ball of rock called earth, just a little ball of rock spinning through space at zillions of miles an hour. And even if it doesn't run into anything at a certain point, a little trap door is going to, is going to open under each one of us. We're going to fall off. It's called death. And underneath are either the everlasting arms of God or absolutely nothing. And maybe you need a master's degree for some security. He says, there is no place to anchor your soul. There is no place to anchor your soul. Everything is going away. Everything is passing away. Everything is crumbling except this. So you see, if you, if you say, well, I'm not even sure if I am a Christian, all I could say is there is no better place to put the anchor of your soul. Anything else is going to, you're not going to get your anchor down into anything like this. Whatever else you try, you think you're anchored, you're going to find that you're drifting. Everything goes away. But if God is your great reward, more than anything else, nothing will ever move you. If what he has done is so precious to you that he is the thing that is your great reward, nothing will ever move you. So I would say, if you don't say, I'm not sure I even am a Christian, then you need to find a way how to make this covenant yourself. If you say, well, I'm in this relationship with Christ, but I don't have this assurance. Just remember this, go to God. There's place after place. It's not just Thomas. It's not just Abraham. When Abraham says, God, I don't have the security I need in you. I don't have the certainty I need. I've got doubts. I don't have the assurance I need. I don't have the poise and confidence I need. God's never going to say, what's wrong with you? It's in the Bible. I don't know. God doesn't do that. He says, let's, let's do this. Let me, let me show you this. I mean, that's how he is. So go to him. Romans 8, 16. God's, Paul says, the spirit bears witness with our spirit that we're the children of God. This is a kind of just a picture of that. If you go and say, I think I'm a child of God. I, I, I, but I want more assurance. I want more of a sense of your presence. I want to be, I want to know, and I want the incredible confidence and boldness, the anchoredness that comes when I know that, then go to God. And you know what? May not be right away, but God is not going to ignore you. He's going to say, let's, let me show you this. Let me have you read this. Let's try this. What a great God. There's real confidence in him. Let's pray. Our father, we thank you that you have made this oath that you, uh, you pass through those pieces and then you fulfilled it because when we failed to obey the covenant, you paid the penalty for us so that you could bless us unconditionally. And the promises that you made to Abraham will come to us as we believe in Jesus Christ. Thank you that you're a promise keeping God. Thank you that you keep your oaths to your own hurt, to your own death. Make us similarly people of integrity, people who keep promises, people who say and what they mean and mean what they say, do what they say they're going to do. Make us people of integrity for each other, but most of all, make us people of confidence and boldness and assurance and poise as we. to put our anchors down into you, so no matter what happens, we have an anchor for our soul. Thank you for this, Lord. Thank you for giving us all these things in Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
