TITLE: Accepting the Creator
SCRIPTURE: John 1:1-11
TOPICS: Creation
SERIES: The Apostles’ Creed; Getting a Vocabulary for Faith
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/accepting-the-creator/

============================================================

I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ's only Son, our Lord, and so on. And each week we're taking a look at one vocabulary word, one theological concept, and going to the book of John to understand it, because you really have to have vocabulary to make your way through or around any field of knowledge at all. Now what we want to look at this week is maker of heaven and earth. God's the creator. What does that mean? What does it mean when we sing praise, let all things their creator bless, and worship him in humbleness, which is a doxology we sing in the morning service. Now what do we mean? Well, here's what we're going to do. We're going to see what we can tell from this passage and around the Bible. What is the biblical teaching about creation? And secondly, how do you practice the biblical teaching? And thirdly, how can you be empowered to practice it? What is the teaching? How can you practice it? How can you be empowered or enabled to practice it? Now first of all, when we start off, I got to say one thing when we say, what is the teaching? What is the teaching of creation? The, um, got to start with a negative. The biblical teaching about creation is mainly not how God created the world, but why. Not mainly the method, but the meaning. Now the reason I have to say that, I only take a minute here to say that, is because there are an awful lot of people who feel that the biblical doctrine of creation has more to do with the method. That is, they would say, uh, the thing the Bible teaches about creation is that the world was created, uh, in a seven, 24-hour day period several thousand years ago. They say, that's what the Bible teaches. Now I want you to know personally that, uh, I'm not going to go into my understanding of Genesis 1 here. We're looking at John 1. Partly because I want to look at the meaning of creation rather than, uh, think about the method. And I'll do a question and answer time after the service if people want to ask me. Or you, uh, back in June of 1998, I did a whole sermon in this service, evening service, on Genesis 1. I don't understand that the Bible tells me much at all about when and how God created the world. I mean, I understand that I, I, I've been reading the Bible for a long time. It's my job. I have a high view. I believe in the infallibility of the Bible. But for example, I don't think we know how long ago God created the world. So, people say, well, don't you, can't you add the genealogies back? Doesn't the genealogies go all the way back to Adam? Doesn't it say so-and-so begat, so-and-so begat, and lived so many years? Can't you work your way back? No. No, you can't. If you want to give an example of this, Matthew chapter 1, verse 8, says that Joram, uh, was the father of Uzziah. But if you go to 2 Kings chapter 8, verse 11 and 12, and 14, you'll see there that Joram was actually four generations before Uzziah. He was the great-great-grandfather of Uzziah. Well, you say, well, is that an error? No, no. The point is the genealogies aren't complete. When, uh, the Bible gives you genealogies, they say so-and-so begat, doesn't mean that necessarily was the father. That just, that's just an ancestor. And therefore, you can't go adding up, and you can't know how far back Adam lived. And therefore, we really don't know that much about how and what happened and when and so forth. If somebody says to me, ah, but you're opening the door to evolution. Well, you know, I have, uh, you know, I'm not much of a scientist. Uh, don't know much biology. But, and several other things. The, the, as a complete layperson, when I, I, I, the books that I read that are critical of evolution, the scientific theory of evolution, are very, very, uh, plausible to me right now. But all I'm trying to tell you is not that I, it's one thing or another about evolution. I'm just trying to say, the Bible doesn't really tell me how long. Doesn't tell me how far back. Doesn't tell me whether there have been, you know, ages and ages through which God could have used natural selection to adapt species or not. Doesn't tell me that. Because, really, what the Bible is most concerned about, the doctrine of creation, the biblical teaching about creation, is not so much how, but why. Not so much the method, but the meaning. Okay? Because the biblical doctrine of creation is wonderful at showing us how we're supposed to relate to the physical world and nature and, and, uh, this created world. And it sets us off from most other religions and philosophies in a remarkable way. Why, but the point is, it doesn't tell us so much, the biblical doctrine of creation is not so much the how as, as the why. Now, why, or what is the doctrine of creation? Four things. It'd be better to go through the doctrine quickly and then get to the practice, I think, tonight. So, here's what I mean. The Bible says that when God... created physical world, nature, is real, is good, is designed, and is finite. Is real, good, designed, and finite. It's real as opposed to the teaching of pantheism. It's good as opposed to the teaching of legalism. It's designed as opposed to the teaching of secularism. And it's finite as opposed to the teaching of paganism. What do we mean? All right, start at the beginning. First of all, Eastern religions, what can be called pantheism, have always taught that the created world is really an illusion, that there was no creation. There was no time in which God created. But rather, the physical world and the laws of the physical world and all that are basic an illusion. Essentially, we're all part of the great all-soul. And pantheistic religions have always been very attractive because they tend to say that if you could just overcome the illusion of the physicality, you could transcend it. One of the great appeals of the movie, The Matrix, the premise of The Matrix, the physical reality you see, isn't actually there. And therefore, if your mind, if somehow with your mind you could transcend that, if you could penetrate the illusion, you could fly, or you could dodge bullets, or you can do all sorts of things. That's very, very, very attractive. And that's, there's a number of, you know, Western versions of pantheism that are very popular today that talk about, yes, you know, you can create your own reality. But you see, the biblical doctrine of creation is that creation is real. Look, verse 1, verse 3, there was a beginning. There was a time in which there was no things. Then suddenly, verse 11, verse 3, there's all things. All things were created. They're real. See? In other words, we believe that there's a reality there. And you have to submit to it, as opposed to thinking that you're a godlike creature that can somehow create your own reality. So, first of all, it's real, versus what pantheism says. Secondly, it's good, versus what legalism says. You see, somebody might say, well, it's pretty parochial, narrow-minded of you to say all Eastern religions are wrong, so you're about to say that Western philosophy and Western religion is right. No. No, no. Because, you see, when the Bible was being written, when the prophets and the apostles were revealing these truths about creation, in the East, a physical world is an illusion. But in the West, the physical world was seen as bad. The Greco-Roman philosophy, the Greco-Roman religions, the Greco-Roman worldview basically understood that the spirit was good, the body was bad. That the body is the prison house of the soul. And therefore, pleasure is guilty till proven innocent. Physical pleasure, self-denial is important. We deny ourselves. We pummel the body if we're going to have spiritual enlightenment and illumination. And this view, of course, has come down into the church, but it's not the biblical view at all. This view has come down into many, many religions, many, many faiths. It's basically legalism. It loves the restrictions. It self-denial is a means, not a means to an end, but it's an end in itself. Denying yourself pleasure is just considered virtuous, period. Now, many Christians, by the way, buy this. I call it the negative will of God theory. Now, the negative will of God theory is when Christians say, okay, how do I discern the will of God? There's two things in front of me. Which one is God's will? Well, the one that hurts, probably. The one that's miserable. The one that makes me deny myself. The one that is completely unpleasant. That's got to be the will of God. I mean, that's the way it is. You know? But see, no. No. The Bible shows us in the very beginning, God with his hands in the dirt. Boy, can you imagine? The Greeks, the Romans would never have believed that. All of their creation myths are always, creation is usually an accident or it's a form of rebellion by some of the lesser gods or something like that. God has his hands in the dirt. And then, of course, God sends his son. See? In other words, here's the word before all things. That's Jesus. But then down in verse 10, he goes into the world. And in verse 14, which is not printed here, it says the word became flesh. So, you see, God is so committed to the goodness of creation that he enters it. He seeks to redeem it. He resurrects it. And, you know, in Revelation, you'll see what is the paradise. And only Christianity has this. Christianity is the only one that has a physical paradise. The paradise, the eternal, the kingdom of God, the future that Christianity shows that God is bringing is a physical one. We're going to run and not be weary. We're not going to float. We're not. We're going to dance in the kingdom of God. We're going to hug. We're going to eat. Jesus. Isn't he spiritual now? Jesus has a body now. We sing about it. Immortal, invisible, God only wise, okay? We sing about it. Rich wounds, yet visible above. Anyway, listen, what you have to do, you have to recognize that Christianity is, in the best way, the best possible use of this term, is the most materialistic of all religions. Thirdly, the doctrine of creation is not only that creation is real and is good. Thirdly, it's designed. Secularism says it's an accident. This is the reason why a lot of people are, a lot of people who are Christians are trying to say, well, the earth is very young and therefore evolution couldn't have happened. I just try to say that I don't think that's how you get out of evolution because I don't think the Bible tells me about that. But here's one thing is for sure, and that is secularism says we're an accident. You're an accident. I'm an accident. What is true about you is only the result of natural selection. It's the result of blind forces. Now, here's the only problem with that, and it's a big problem. If you believe that you're not created by design, if you believe that you're an accident, then there is absolutely no way in the world that you must ever talk about right or wrong for somebody. You must never talk about justice or injustice. Why? Well, think about it. There's no such thing as a good person or a bad person. There's no such thing as a good anything in the abstract. You can never judge goodness or badness apart from the context of purpose. Now, I've probably used this illustration before. For example, how do I know if this is a good watch? I can't say, oh, it's a good watch unless I think, well, what is it made for? See, this watch cannot hammer nails well. This watch does not show me the right direction. It's not a compass. It's not a hammer. It tells me the time. If it tells me the time, I consider it a good watch. Why? Because that's its purpose. If it can't hammer nails, do I say it's a bad watch? No, because it's not meant to hammer nails. And therefore, it's meaningless to talk about something being good or bad apart from its purpose. If that's true, how do you know you're a good person? How do you know anyone's a good person? If you have no purpose, if you were made for no purpose, there is absolutely no way you can say to anybody else what you've just done is bad. See? If we're an accident, if creation didn't really happen, this is the non-creation view, secularism is right, then you must never talk about right or wrong for anybody. You must never say that's unjust. These people have individual rights. You mustn't trample on their rights. Who says? But you see, the doctrine of creation says there is a purpose. You were made. You were designed. And because you were designed, there is a right and wrong. And to find that right and wrong, just like, you see, a fish is only free, not when it's out on the street, but when it's in the water, because it was designed for the water. So you only know the liberty of obedience when you find the purpose for which you were created and you realize it. Then lastly, the biblical doctrine of creation is not only that creation is real, and secondly, that it's good, and thirdly, that it's designed, but fourthly, it's finite. You see, there's a fourth kind of view of things. Pantheism, legalism, you know, pantheism, it kind of ignores creation. And legalism basically is afraid and disdains it. And secularism exploits it. It says, I can do what I want. It's up to me. There's no design here. Paganism worships it. Paganism is the religion of old Europe before Christianity got there. Paganism is the religion of witchcraft. And what it's, it has a very positive view of nature, but it's, it's too positive in some ways. It sees all the incredible energies in the, it sees the spirit of the mountain. It sees the spirit of the water. It sees the spirit of the trees. And it seeks to tap into the spirit and tap into those energies. But you see, what happens when you do that is you make those things an idol. And when you look, when you don't look behind the created to the creator, you will, your heart will rest in those things. The things that you say, oh boy, there's nothing like, I get so much meaning out of music. I get so much, I get so much meaning out of, out of, out of love and romance. In other words, you take a look at certain things that are created things and they have pleasure involved with them. But if you don't find the creator behind the pleasure, this is what C.S. Lewis says, and he's perfectly right in saying this. He says, the music or the things in which we find beauty will betray us if we trust to them. The beauty and the joy and the power and the life is not in them. It only comes through them. If they are mistaken for the thing itself, they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshippers. scent of the flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have never really heard, news from a country we have never visited. Now, what is he saying? It'll break your heart. Because it says right here, in him was life. He created the world, but in him was life, in him was light. Now, if you believe the doctrine of creation, you don't exploit it like the secularist might, you don't ignore it like the pantheist might, you don't fear it or despise it like the legalist might, but you don't worship it like the pagan might. Well, what do you do? You're committed to it. Now, that's the second point. The second point is, if you were to start living a life in accord with the doctrine of creation, as a Christian, who really believed this, my press, I'm going to press you on this, my belief is that most Christians are influenced more by the secularist or the pagan, or the, certainly the secularist and the legalist in particular. In this, we are more influenced by other approaches to creation than the biblical one. And here's why. First of all, if you really, really, really press this, if you really live this out, first of all, you'd be, you'd enjoy creation more than you do. Jesus Christ, John chapter 2, first miracle, right? In his very first miracle, which of course has got to be significant. You know, when you open a campaign, you make sure that the first thing you do is very symbolic about who you are and what you're about, right? It's not, it's not an extraneous thing. It's not a, it's not a peripheral thing. It's not a tangential thing. It's got to be central. What does Jesus do in his very first miracle? The very first miracle, he turns 150 gallons of water into wine. Why? To raise the party to new heights. What? Do you consider that unworthy? Do you consider that an unworthy use? See, when Jesus Christ turned water into wine, he was showing that he has the master of creation. He was the master of the physical laws. He could turn water into wine like that. But what does he do with his power? He's the creator, but what does he do with his power of creation? He gets you to enjoy it. He throws a party. He comes as Lord of the feast of creation. Jesus Christ is saying, you know all those old Bacchanalian and Dionysian stories about the forest running with wine in the trees, dancing for joy, kids stuff, compared to what I have in store for you. If you're a Christian and you believe what the Bible says about creation, pleasure, physical pleasure is innocent until proven guilty. It's not guilty until proven innocent. Lewis puts it this way, C.S. Lewis says, and I'm going to read this twice because the first time it just blows my mind and I need to reflect on it. The faint, far-off results of those energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter when he made the worlds are what we now call physical pleasure. Get this? God's creative rapture. I'll read, let me, let me, let me break this down then I'll read it again. When God created the world, there was rapture. The Father was with the Son. God was not just sort of walking around, you know, God was not just this being kind of floating in space saying, I will now create. No. It says, in the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God. With is a relational word. It's an intimacy word. And the Word was God and they together created the world. What does that mean? Withness means love. Withness means joy. Withness means communication. The Son was in the bosom. Down in verse 18. It says, the Son was in the bosom of the Father. The Father was in the bosom of the Son. They had this, they, they had, they had a rapture. They were pouring love and joy completely back and forth into one another's hearts and they decided, let's get some others. Let's create some others so that they can be part of the circle. Let's get some others so they can experience the same joy we are. And that's why, that's why, when God created the world, when the Father and the Son created the world, it says, their creative rapture was implanted in matter. And though they are the faint far-off results of those energies, these things are now called physical pleasures. Physical pleasures are the faint far-off results of the energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter. And listen, it says, and even filtered, they are too much for our present management. But what will it be like to taste, though at the fountainhead, of that stream of which even these lower reaches are so intoxicating? Christians knowing where creation came from should be the most playful of people. Christians are the people who should be the most able and desirous to enjoy the most simple pleasures, the sunset, great music, a terrific meal. not to say, oh, that felt good, but to know where it's from, the glory of where it's from, and what it's pointing to you're going to have someday. Nobody has the resources for enjoying the simple pleasures of nature in their view of things than Christians. Not only that, I'll give you another push. If you believe in the doctrine of creation, not only would it be incredible enjoyers of nature, of creation, but you'd be incredible rebuilders of it. Let me read you another C.S. Lewis quote, and he has a, he's got a curse word in here, and he keeps it in because he's making a theological point with it. You say, what? Yes. Lewis says, confronted with cancer or a slum, the pantheist can say, if you could only see it from the divine point of view, you would realize this is also God. Now, he's being fair. He says, you see, there's, the pantheist, or the eastern religion, would take a look at a slum or cancer and say, well, you know, this is an illusion. Someday we're going to transcend this. Confronted with cancer or a slum, the pantheist might say, if you could only see it from the divine point of view, you would realize this is also God. But the Christian replies, don't talk damn nonsense. Christianity is a fighting religion. It thinks God made the world, but that many things have gone wrong with the world that God made, and that God insists and insists very loudly, we put them right. Now, he has a, you read this passage, it's in mere Christianity, where he says, don't talk damn nonsense. And he has a little asterisk, and he says, you know, some of my readers and my listeners were kind of offended that I, you know, I'm giving this Christian talk, and I use the word damn in the middle of it. But he says, he did it on purpose. Why? Because he said, if you believe in the doctrine of creation, if you understand the doctrine of creation, you get mad when you see cancer or a slum. This is, God is so committed to creation that he sent his son. God is so committed to creation that he would suffer. God is so committed to creation that he would enter into it. He wants to resurrect it. He wants to rehabilitate it. And if you look at cancer and a slum, and you don't get mad, you're not committed. You don't see that this is what God created, and it's broken, and he wants it, he wants it mended. He, if you see his commitment to creation, you would be committed to creation, you would be a rebuilder. Now, let me ask it to you again. If you understand the doctrine of creation, look, a pantheist, a secularist, a pagan, they might be all involved in trying to heal disease, and trying to help get rid of poverty, and being involved with social injustice, and social justice, and so forth. But Christians have far more resources in their doctrine of creation to get involved, to get mad at cancer, and to get mad at slums. And to say, I'm going to do something about it. I have to do something about it. We have incredible resources. Are we, do we outstrip all those other people in the way in which we tackle cancer and slums? The answer is no. No, we don't. Why not? We don't believe the doctrine of creation. See, if you really believe that, let me, if you really believe the doctrine of creation, we would be so different. But why don't we act like that? Why don't we live like that? Now, you say, well, because we're not, we don't try hard enough. Well, it's not, that won't work. We can't end the sermon right here. We said, we saw what the doctrine of creation is, and we saw, if we started living it, how different we would be. How we would really, in many ways, excel everyone else at our rejoicing in the doctrine, in creation and nature. We would excel in our desire to rebuild it. Let me give you one other example. We would also excel in our desire to conserve it. You know, Psalm 19 says, the heavens are declaring the glory of God. The sun, the moon, the stars are declaring the glory of God. Everything in nature reflects the glory of God in some way. But now, when a Christian considers his relationship to nature, you know, your job is not to trample on nature, not to exploit it, but rather to help nature be itself so that it can praise God, which means we have a tremendously deep theological resource for trying to care for creation and trying to care for nature. Betty Ellett used to put it this way. She used to say, clams glorify God better than you. Why? Well, a clam is being exactly what God meant it to be. Clams glorify God in a certain way. Oh, clam, when a clam is being a clam, it doesn't glorify God as much as a human being glorifies God when it's being a human being. But the point is, clams are being exactly what they're supposed to be, but you're not being exactly what you're supposed to be. Therefore, humble yourself before the clam. Humble yourself before the tree. Bow before them. Why? There'd be this enormous respect you would have for nature. Why? Not because you're worshiping it, because they're worshiping God better than you are. are. There should be this reverence for nature, not the way the pagans do, to say, how can I worship it? Do Christians have this attitude? No. Well, what are we going to do about it? Try harder. Yeah, sure. Why aren't Christians more involved in social justice? Why aren't Christians more involved in conserving nature? Why aren't Christians more, why aren't Christians more playful? Why aren't Christians the one who enjoy pleasure and take pleasure and pleasure more than anyone else? Why not? Here's the answer. It won't be enough for you to just simply know. God's a creator. He created things. Therefore, no, no. You're never going to be committed to creation unless you see how God the creator was committed to you. If you take a look at verse 1 and 2, you get a little insight, if you think about it, into the very life of God and what it cost God for him to take us, creation, and do something about our sin, and do something about our brokenness, and do something about what's wrong with us. We're told, in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God. Remember what we said? The father and the son were having this enormous love. Let me explain this. In verse 18, it restates the word was with. The word with is an intimacy word. It's a relational word. And in verse 18, it says, the son was in the bosom of the father. Now, right now, the only person, I think, in the world that has the guts and the audacity, if I'm laying on a sofa or laying on a bed, to come and lay right up against my bosom and kiss me is my wife. She's the person I have the greatest intimacy with. The only person probably, I think, even my sons, I don't think, would really feel quite now that they're grown, like they've got that kind of intimacy or that audacity. They do, but they probably won't try it. Now, here's what's going on. When the father and the son are in the bosom of each other, but they don't have bodies. When it says in the bosom, they were in each other's bosom for all eternity, that means they had absolute and complete love and delight in each other. Now, if there's anybody in this room who afterwards says, I hated that sermon. I hate this church. You come up to me and you say, I never want to see you again. I'll feel bad, but it depends on how well I know you. If I've never met you, I'll just feel bad for about a day. If I've known you for a while, I'll feel bad for a week. If you're somebody I've known in the church for years, I'll feel bad for a month. If my wife does it, if my wife comes to me after this service, she's not here, by the way, and she says, you, I never want to see you again. I never want to be back here again. I never want to come here ever again. And she leaves. I'll never get over it. Because, you see, the deeper I am into somebody's intimacy, the greater the rupture is an enormous pain, an enormous misery, an enormous violence. The Father and the Son were with each other from all eternity. I mean, everybody knows that if your spouse walks out on you, a divorce is the most traumatic thing anybody can go through. But, you know, even with a spouse, you're only in one another's bosoms, even for 20 or 30 years, and only physically, and even spiritually and emotionally, you can only get so close. But the Father and the Son, from all eternity, were with one another. But Jesus Christ left it. Jesus Christ came to earth, and he was rejected. See? He was in the world that the world was made through him. The world did not recognize him. But it wasn't just that. On the cross, he was rejected by the Father. That's how committed God is to his creation. Now, until you see that, until you see not just that God is the creator in general, but Jesus the creator was willing to be uncreated, to be pulled into pieces, so that you could be recreated. You hear that? Until you see that your creator was willing to be uncreated so that you could be recreated, until that moves you, you're going to be, on the one hand, you're going to be scared of creation. On the other hand, you're going to be addicted to it. See, for example, Paul says in 1 Timothy 4, very interesting passage. 1 Timothy 4, Paul says this. He talks of people whose consciences are seared as with a hot iron. Got that? Conscience is seared with a hard iron. They forbid people to marry and order them to abstain from certain foods, but everything God created is good. Now, what's Paul saying? If your conscience is bad, if you don't know God loves you, if you're not absolutely sure God loves you, if you don't feel absolutely accepted by him, you're going to be a forbidder. You're going to say, oh, I'm going to have to stop that. I'm going to have to stop that. You see, you see, pleasure is you're going to say, I've got to say no to everything. That's the only way I can assure myself that maybe I'm good. So until you know God really loves you, until you see that the Creator was willing to be uncreated so you could be recreated, until you see that kind of commitment to you, on the one hand, you're going to be afraid of pleasure. You're going to restrict yourself. Or, on the other hand, Paul has another fascinating quote in 1 Corinthians 7. And in 1 Corinthians 7, he says this, Let those with wives live as if they had none. Let those who mourn as if they wept not. Let those who are happy as if they laughed not. Let those who buy as if they possessed not. For this world, in its present form, is passing away. Now, what does that mean? Let those who have wives live as if they had none. Let those who laugh as if they didn't laugh. Here's what he's saying. He says, if you understand the gospel, then you're going to be able to sit loose to everything in this world. You're not going to look at your spouse and say, You are my creator. You are my maker. You give me my identity. You make me feel good about myself. You are my very worth. See, if you're in love, you're not going to turn your lover into your creator. If you love music or you like making music, you're not going to turn music into your salvation. If you have a great career, you're not going to turn your career into your... You're going to look at those things and say, Oh, no, no, no. Even though they're good things, they're wonderful things. I enjoy them. But I'm not addicted to them. Why? Because they cannot save me. Only the one who, though he was my creator, was uncreated so that I could be recreated. Unless you really know that, you're either, on the one hand, going to be afraid of pleasure or you're going to be addicted to it. You're going to be afraid of nature and creative things or you're going to make them too important to yourself. You know, Michael Musto, you know, the guy, he has a column in The Village Voice. There's one wonderful place where he says that every time Fashion Week comes along and he sees all these beautiful people rushing to parties frenetically, having a good time, he says, actually, he says what they're dealing... He says the reason they're partying so hard, and this is a quote, they're dealing with that nagging sense of soullessness we have. You see, it's one thing to go to a party because you love creation. It's another thing to try to get a soul. It's one thing to die just to try to be healthy. It's another thing so that you can feel good about yourself, so you can have a soul, so you can feel like I'm worth something. Until you know that the great creator was willing to be uncreated so that you could be recreated, you're either going to, on the one hand, your conscience will be seared, which means on the one hand, you'll be a forbidder maybe, a legalist, or on the other hand, you may be someone who's addicted to pleasure, or you may be doing both at the same time. But until you see, though he was with God, he left for rejection. Have you accepted Jesus Christ in your life as your creator? You see, it's one thing to say, I believe he's my savior. It's another thing to understand the full ramifications of the great doctrine of creator. That's the creation. That's the reason why we sing, let all things their creator bless and worship him in humbleness. Oh, praise him. Hallelujah. Pray with me for a second. Father, as we go to the Lord's table, we ask only that you would help us see in these created things, in these physical things, the bread, the cup, that you are so committed to giving us a new heavens and new earth, that you're willing to be broken, to become physical and then be broken. We ask, Lord, that you might make us people who enjoy this world yet do not rest their heart here, who are able to work very hard to repair this world and conserve this world, but at the same time are not addicted or enslaved to it. Give us that kind of greatness. Give us those kinds of great lives. as you renew the reality of what your son did as we celebrate the supper of the Lord. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
