TITLE: Active Discipline
SCRIPTURE: John 8:31-39
TOPICS: Discipleship and Spiritual Growth Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Growth in Christ, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/active-discipline/

============================================================

John chapter 8, verses 31 to 38. To the Jews who had believed him, Jesus said, If you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples. Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free. They answered him, We are Abraham's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone. How can you say that we shall be set free? Jesus replied, I tell you the truth. Everyone who sins is a slave to sin. Now, a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever. So if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. I know you are Abraham's descendants, yet you are ready to kill me because you have no room for my word. I am telling you what I have seen in the Father's presence, and you do what you have heard from your Father. And let's right there end the reading of God's word. If you hold on to my teaching, you are really my disciples. Then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free. In the evening service, we've been talking about Christian growth. And we get back to that, as we, last week and this week, we've gotten back to that series after a small hiatus for the holidays. When we talk about Christian growth, we talk about a great thing. Let me repeat. Let me repeat it. He can make the filthiest and feeblest of us into bright, immortal creatures, pulsating all through with such radiance and goodness and greatness as we cannot now imagine. He can turn all of us, each one of us, into a bright, stainless mirror that reflects back to him, on a smaller scale, his own boundless goodness and wisdom and love and delight. That is what a Christian is in for. Nothing less. Do you remember that? Now, when you think of that, whenever I read that, and I reflect on that, it's so bittersweet. Because it's, on the one hand, you say, that's what I want. And on the other hand, you say, how far away that is. We're all caterpillars yearning to be butterflies. No matter what you think you've done with your life, no matter how far you've come, you say, I was just this, but now look at where I am in life and look where my standing is. But when you look at Jesus Christ and you see power and yet gentleness, when you see majesty yet total humility, when you see tremendous firm conviction and yet total openness and approachability, when you see sensitivity and empathy, but complete and unqualified and unending joy, when you see him, and you know that the Bible says that we can be like him, you feel like a caterpillar. And you say, oh, that's what I want. That's what I'm in for. It seems to be too good to be true. Now, the Bible tells us that the way we get there is through a process of Christian growth. The first step is when we receive Christ as Savior, we have that remarkable verse, 2 Peter 1, verse 4, that says we're partakers of the divine nature. His nature comes into us. We receive his actual spirit in our lives that has in seed form, just like the whole tree, the whole forest is in the acorn, even though the acorn is so small. So all of those great attributes we talked about, all those great qualities are in that seed of holiness that's planted in us when we belong to him, when we cross the line, when we're converted, when we're regenerated, when we're reborn. When that comes in, however, just like a real acorn, it has to be fertilized and watered and given the proper soil and the proper treatment for all of its potentialities to burst forth. And over the last few weeks, we've talked about some of the ways in which that happens. How can that tremendous potential, if you belong to him, be released? And we began by talking about the Word of God and study of the Word. We talked about prayer and communion with him. Last week, we talked about fellowship between the members of the Christian community. Tonight, we have to talk about, in some ways, the simplest of all of the disciplines. you have got to obey. You have got to obey. As you obey him, which is the simplest and the hardest of all of the ways in which we grow, of all the tools for growth, we have to obey. And as we obey him, we change. We're transformed. It says in Philippians 2, verse 12, it says, work out your salvation with fear and trembling. It doesn't mean that to be saved, to go to heaven, is something that you have to be good and work for. work it out. What it means is, take, take the power that's come into your life and work it through your life. It's a little bit like, you know, here you've got, you're making cookies or a cake or something like that and you're whipping the batter up and then you have to throw in a chunk of chocolate or you have to throw in a chunk of butter or something. Then what you have to do is you have to work it out or work it in, work it through everything else. It takes a lot of arm power. Essentially, there's no fast way to do it. Of course, you're thinking of the mixer, but, you know, help me, help me, all right? You know, all illustrations fall short, help me. Obedience, there's no mixer in the Christian life. It's all you and the spatula, you know, it's all you. You have got to obey him. Or all this running around, going to Christian meetings, coming and listening to people talk, reading your Bible for a little bit every morning, all the busyness of being a Christian is not going to do a thing unless you obey. That's the arm power. That's the thing that actually takes and works the spirit and power of God through your life and begins to make you the way you want to be. You long to be like Jesus. And that's the only way it can happen. There's no shortcuts for it. No shortcuts at all. Now, what we're going to look at here is the fact. It is about obedience. But let's keep this in mind before we begin reading. What the Bible says about freedom and what society says about freedom are really two different things. Society mixes up political freedom with individual freedom. John Guest, one of my favorite guys, who is an Episcopalian minister. He's British. And at some point when he was in his 20s, he came to this country from England. And he was struck walking through some part of Philadelphia where there were a lot of old buildings and plenty of Revolutionary War memorabilia around. And he saw a sign that had been put up in a tavern. Evidently, it was the kind of sign that was often put up in American inns during the Revolution. And it said, this is interesting, he walked in and there was this great big sign that was put up. And it said, we serve no sovereign here. We're Americans. We don't have kings. We don't have monarchs. There's nobody we bow the knee to. And he began to realize that especially in America, but now in all of Western society, the idea of freedom is completely, completely wedded to the idea of self-rule. And the 4th of July is our Independence Day. That's the day that we threw off the yoke, you see, of tyrants. Six Semper Tyrannus. You know, that's Virginia's little seal, you know. Thus to tyrants, you know. Up your nose, tyrants. That, you know, that's essentially what that means in Latin. Six Semper Tyrannus. Up your nose. All sovereigns. And John Gass, when he saw that, began to realize, began to think and meditate on that reality and how different that is from the Christian understanding. Christians say, the Bible says, don't import what happened in Romania. Don't import what happened in many places where there has been real, you know. We've thrown off the time. We've thrown off totalitarian governments. We've thrown off kings and dictators. And we've gone to a democracy. Don't mistake that for your relationship with God. In fact, the Bible says that the day you become a Christian, the day you finally become free, is your dependence day. It's the exact opposite. The Bible and society agree on what freedom feels like. In fact, you can even agree in some ways on the definition of freedom if you just simply define it in terms of how it feels. Freedom is the fulfillment that comes when you're doing what you most deeply desire. Freedom is the fulfillment that comes when you're doing what you most deeply desire, at the bottom. The difference between what the Bible says and what society says is the Bible says, if you know, if you know that man is not what he ought to be, if you know that a human being, to a great degree, is warped, is selfish, is self-centered, is self-absorbed, is sinful, and therefore our desires are at war with each other. They're conflicting. Freedom is not necessarily the ability to do anything you want. But freedom happens in our lives when we obey our deepest desires, desires, the ones that God put in us from the beginning, most of which, many of which, maybe I should say most of which, are unconscious. Because the thing that we most desire to do is to be fulfilled by submitting to our Creator. We were built to do that. The trouble is, for us to know consciously until the Holy Spirit opens our eyes to it. And therefore, though everybody agrees, Christians and everyone else, that freedom is the fulfillment that comes from doing what you most deeply desire, the Bible says that only happens when you're willing to be completely dependent on God. See, becoming a Christian is like this. The day you become a Christian is the day you look at God and you say, you know, Lord, all along I've been dependent on you. I've been dependent on you for everything. You've kept me alive every moment. You kept me alive. I'm dependent on you for every breath. I'm dependent on you for keeping my molecules together. If it wasn't for you holding me together, my molecules would go off in a billion different directions at once. And where would I be? And even my rebellion against you, even my desire to live my own life, in a sense has been like I've been slapping you in the face the way a little girl slaps their father in the face. She only can slap him in the face because he's holding her up. And I see all along I've been dependent, but today I declare my dependence. Today I make you my master. I give up my right to organize my own life. I will obey you and your word and not all of my contradictory, conflicting impulses. I will do what you say and I know then I'll find myself because I was built to obey you. That's Dependence Day. That's the day you begin to know what real freedom is. And that's what this passage lays out with three principles. And I'd like to go through them and show you. Three basic principles about obedience. And before we lay them out, before we lay them out nice and briefly, really, let me say this. You might, after hearing this, reject this whole idea of obedience being the way to freedom, of giving complete allegiance to Christ, giving up self-mastery and giving yourself to him as being the way to freedom. You might say, I reject that. But I'll tell you this, if you reject what the Bible says, you better not reject it because it's dull or stupid or foolish. The only fair reason to reject what the Bible says is because you might say, it's too good to be true. If you understand what the Bible teaches about this, if you understand it clearly, you might reject it because it's too good to be true. Because you say, I just can't believe in something that great. That's fair. I'll listen to somebody who says that. But somebody who says, how awful, how, to be under his clammy hands, how restricted, how constricted, I'd be stifled and stagnated. You don't understand. You don't understand at all. Let me try to make it clear. Look, first, to the Jews who had believed him, Jesus said, If you hold my teaching, you are really my disciples, then you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free. They said, we're Abraham's descendants. We've never been slaves of anyone. What are you talking about? How can you say the truth will set us free? And Jesus replied, Oh, yeah? You are slaves if you're not my servant. I tell you the truth. Everyone who sins is a slave to sin. Now a slave has no permanent place in the family, but a son belongs to it forever. So if the son sets you free, you will be free indeed. There's three things this teaches, I think. Number one, the essence of Christian obedience is not do's and don'ts, but personal allegiance to Jesus. The essence of obedience is not do's and don'ts, but personal allegiance. Then secondly, Christian obedience is a matter of disciplining yourself through obedience to the truth. Once you get straight, Jesus is your Lord, then discipline is, is a matter of disciplining yourself to what he says. Or put it this way, Obedience is more, it's more than detailed, how do I say, detailed conformity to God's word. It's more than that, but it's not less. First of all, obedience is a matter of personal allegiance. Secondly, obedience is a matter of discipline to the word. And thirdly, obedience is the way to freedom. That's the three things. The person of obedience, the method of obedience, the, you know, I'm making this outline up as I go along, the results of obedience, all right? Let me just look at these three. Number one, I just said, and it's pretty important to keep in mind, and he says, if you hold to my teaching, you are really my disciples. Jesus doesn't want people simply who are robots, who are going through the motions of obeying all the regulations, all the regulations and rules. He wants people who make him Lord, who personally give him allegiance. The reason Christians talk about obeying God is because we want you to treat him as a person. How do you relate to impersonal objects? radios and televisions? How do you relate to impersonal objects? They have no will of their own, so they're there just to be used. You use an impersonal object. You have goals, it has no goals, so you use it for your goals, and that's how you treat an object, right? How do you treat persons? Some of you, probably, because many human beings, treat them the same way. They don't find out what their desires are, you don't find out what the desires of those persons are, you have your goals, and you see how you can use them to reach your goals, and those people eventually get out of your life because they don't like being treated as objects. When you have a personal relationship with someone, you find out what that person's will is, you find out what that person's desire is, and you adapt. And the more love you experience for somebody, the more of a joy it is to adapt, to actually seek out what that person's desire is and try to please them. And the greater the person is, and the more intimate the relationship is, the more you need to find and you want to find the will of that person so you adapt and change, rather than use that person. You see that? Now, when it comes to God, you have a person infinitely above you, and the only way to treat him personally is to obey him. Many, many people come to God like this. I got problems in my life. All right, I'll get religious. I'll start reading the Bible. I'll start doing things. I'll start obeying if I begin to see things happen in my life. So you come with a bargain. What you're doing is treating God as the TV set. You come with your will, and you see God and say, how in the world can I work? How can I need something to get to my goals? Many, many people are like that. I mean, especially in New York, where you have so many little self-help kinds of courses. It's incredible to see what people pay for self-help courses. You need that extra push. You need that extra enrichment. You need that clarity of mind. You need inner peace if you're going to make it. And so the idea of Christianity being one of those self-help courses appeals to you. You look at somebody and you say, you know, I remember him. I remember her. She was a lot more messed up, and now she's sort of gotten religion. I guess I had to look at this. I guess I had to look at this. I'm a little nervous about it. I don't want to actually give up my freedom, but if it can make a difference in my life, maybe. And you are, you see, you want a God, but you don't want obedience. You want a God who loves you, who gives you that love, who gives you that peace, who comes in and enriches your life, but you don't want obedience. You are using him. You're relating to him as an object. Don't you see why the Bible says you have to obey him utterly, submit to his will, if you're going to treat him as a person, if you're going to have a personal relationship with him, if your religion is personal, you have to be utterly obedient to him. You see how that works? That's why Jesus says, the purpose of knowing the truth is to be my disciples. I would be your Lord. I am your master. You are my disciples. That's so important to understand. That's so important to get down. And an awful lot of us will come on into Christianity, sort of, you know, with two toes at a time, and we look around and we say, I just hope he doesn't ask me to do anything that I feel is going to really hurt me. I hope he doesn't ask me to do anything impractical. So what you're doing is saying, Lord, I'll come in on my terms. You're using him. There's no personal relationship yet. By the way, one of the best tests of whether or not your relationship with God is a personal one or not is whether or not you are a personable person. I know plenty of very religious people who are so unapproachable. Don't you? They put people off. They're condescending. Their lives are moral paragons. They're beautiful like a snowflake. Intricate, symmetrical, and freezing. That kind of person does not know what it means of a real personal relationship with God. It's even possible to be awfully rigid and moral and still be using him. You use him as a way of making yourself feel better than the rest of the human race. You have to have religion so you can look down your nose at other people. But real obedience says, I come to you as a person, and I recognize what your will is, and I submit to you. One of the reasons, frankly, I believe, that Eastern religions and the New Age is so interesting, even though there's so many million varieties of it, all of them, all the New Age varieties, and all of the Eastern religions agree I wonder if you can have a great deal. about God as a he, but basically God doesn't have a personality. He can't talk to you, you can't talk to him. He's a force, you see. May the force be with you. And the force is it. The force is something you use to deal with Darth Vader. The force is something you use. The New Age says that God is a consciousness that you have to use, but you don't sit down and say, Lord, is there something wrong with the way in which I'm treating my wife? Lord, is there something wrong with the way in which I'm doing my business? See, you don't have a God in that particular worldview who talks. You don't have a God who speaks in propositions, who says, do this, don't do this. You don't have a person. And as a result, you can use him. He's like your TV set. But the God of the Bible is a person. Do you want a person? Do you want someone who loves you? Do you want someone who's your father? You have to obey. No more of this using him. And that's the real issue. You are controlled by whatever you live for. If you live for money, you're controlled by money. If you live for reputation, you're controlled by reputation. These things master you. You do not control yourself. I was looking again at Oliver, you know, the Charles Dickens novel. One of my favorite characters is Nancy the prostitute, who lives with Bill Sykes, you know. And because she lives with Bill Sykes, because she builds her life around him, she does all kinds of things she knows are wrong. But she does it anyway, because he's her master. In fact, in the musical, he sings, she sings, and I think it's pretty true to the Dickens character, I know that he needs me. Remember that? And that's the reason I have to do the things that I do. I have to. He's her master. A lot of you have made relationships a master, or a particular relationship a master, or a career a master, or maybe you're one of these people that say, yes, I know those weak kind of people that build their life around these things. I'm not going to let anybody be the center of my life, or any career the center of my life. I make sure that I don't live for my job. I don't live for all these things. And what you've done is you've made a God out of your independence. And you can't commit to anything, and you won't commit to anything. Friends, we're all controlled by something, and the only master that does not enslave is Jesus. Let me give you an example. You've really got two masters. You've got Jesus or your own ego. Here's two people that go to a party, and they both are deeply insulted by somebody who is just waiting for you to show up, so they could put you down. And the one person, what is the that one person do? The first person, what does he do? He gets flushed. He gets angry. First, he has to put the guy in his place. Secondly, he goes home, and he tosses and turns all night in bed. The next day, he gets up, and he slanders this person to everybody he can possibly get on the phone. Next, he feels guilty, but he also feels upset because maybe what the guy said was right. Maybe that's why he feels so upset. Maybe he is as bad as all that. He gets depressed. He goes back to bed. Great day. Great day. Why? Because his own ego is a master, and his own ego can't take that criticism. Now, here's the second person. Goes to a party. The same sort of thing happens, but this person's a Christian. This person has a different master. He's put down, so he sits there, and he remembers salvation. And he says, ah, somebody's called your bluff. Somebody has said, you're not such hot stuff. Wasn't that what you were just saying to God yesterday in prayer anyway? Why are you so offended when somebody else says what you just said to God? Well, it hurts, and to some degree, it's unfair. But if he only knew, if this guy really knew all the things that I do do that are so bad, my gosh, what a field day he could have. The important thing is that God knows these things about me, and that's been dealt with. What this man says, that's bad, and it's a painful thing. Of course, it's a painful thing. I don't have to hate him. He's only telling me sort of accidentally and in a perverted way what I know to be true anyway, and God and I have dealt with that, and God accepts me, and he loves me, and I don't have to hate this guy or be enslaved by that. Don't you see? This person is continuing in the truth because Jesus is his master. He's liberated. He moves on in life. If you continue in my truth, you are my disciples, and then you'll be free. The issue of obedience is who is your Lord. That's number one. Number two, the second principle is having made that decision, you do have work to do. Obedience is not a one-time thing where you say, okay, I'll make God Jesus Christ Lord. I'm obedient. No, it doesn't quite work like that. Once you make... and you say, okay, I give myself to you, and then you say, I have a great marriage. That's not true. The wedding day is quite festive, but you've got a lot of work to do. You may have promised when you take those vows, but frankly, you haven't delivered anything yet, hardly. And so the same thing is true. Jesus says, if you continue in my word, and boy, this would make for a, there's plenty to say about this, except the word continue, or in the New International Version that I read, it says, if you hold to my teaching, this little Greek word here, meno, means to stay put. To stay put. In fact, most of the time in the Bible, this word means to stay in a place, to settle down. It's very interesting, isn't it? To settle down and live somewhere. When Jesus says, continue in my word, he does not mean, you know, run by the Bible in the morning and get a few blessing verses out of it to give you some inspiration. He's not talking about that at all. Instead, he is saying, you have got to settle down in my word and stay there. You can't, for example, talk about my word on Sunday, and the rest of the day act as if you're a lawless person. Or you can't say, in my private life, I'm very obedient, but in my public life, I can act like anything I want. Or vice versa. In my public life, out in the open, where people see me, I can live according to God's word, but there's certain private areas where I do something different. You can't do that. You have to continue. You have to stay in it. You have to live in it. And you begin to see that when you do sit down to study the Bible, it's not just a way of getting a little blessing in the morning to get you through the day. It's a battle. And you have to take the word of God and put it into the center of your life, where it controls you. How many times have you ever taken a test the night before you were studying and you got to a particular paragraph or chapter and you said, I know that, because you recognized it immediately. And when you get to the test and the question is there and you know you have to recall that page, you suddenly remember, oh my word, I knew it enough to recognize it, but I don't know it enough to use it. There's that sinking feeling. I'm sorry, a couple of you have that sinking feeling right now. But the fact is, that is what it means when the Bible says, let the word of God dwell in you richly. It's not enough to say, I know that I'm saved by grace alone. I realize that God's in control of all things. I know that. I could take a test and I could get an A on it. I know all these things that you're telling me. But do you worry? Do you toss and turn when someone criticizes you? Do you find yourself going in and out of self-pity all week? Then you don't know it. You say you know it, but you don't know it enough to use on the test. It's one thing to recognize. It's to say, yeah, I've read that before. It's another thing to push it into the center. And that's what it means to continue in my word. Lastly, if you continue in my word, you will know the truth and the truth will set you free. Well, we've already alluded to this, but freedom always comes from discipline. And even though I said there's certain realms like, you know, the Romanian revolution, and say, look, these people threw off the mastery and they're in the self-rule and now they're free. And I said, you can't translate that into the spiritual realm. But there's a lot of other areas that you can translate into the spiritual realm. When I watch people, when I watch Sam, my brother Sam, play the piano, he was playing here tonight. He is so good. And I get jealous because I realize that, you know, here he's sitting down and playing what we ask him to play. But my guess is that he must get a lot of enjoyment out of just getting down when there's nobody around and just playing. It must be a tremendous way of expression. Some of you are so talented in music and I just wish I could play things the way you play. But you know, right? The reason that you have this tremendous freedom is because somebody sat over you and said, 30 minutes of practice today when you were four years old. And by the time you were 12 years old, it was an hour a day. And there's all these scales. And, you know, your fingers are bleeding on the strings. And no, play, play some more, practice, practice. And you realize the reason you got to this place of freedom is because you were chained. You gave yourself. You were enslaved to that instrument so that today it's an instrument of freedom. That's the way it is. When you see a sailboat out on the water, the reason it's sailing like it is is because it was built in accord with the laws of the wind and the surf. And because whoever's out there is using it in accord with the laws of the wind and the surf. And it goes like the wind, but because it's obeying what is there. And the driver of it or the sailor of it, the driver of it, the sailor of it. The way it was run away, the moment in the air vivir and you'll have the wind today. Between the winds set up and the other endinas And it goes like the wind, but because it's obeying what is there, and the driver of it, or the sailor of it, the driver of it, the sailor of it, she says, what a seafaring man I am. You know, the captain is obeying its design, and that's why he's experiencing freedom. What if he says, you know, I'm tired of going around here on the bay. I want to go right up Main Street. You know, I mean, I want to be free. Well, go ahead, try it, and see how far you get. And what is freedom for the boat? Freedom for the boat is when it's obeying the will of the designer. It was built to go on the water. You go down Main Street, you get for a ways, and yeah, I've never been here before, but will it be free there? All beaten up, absolutely immobile? No. The reason we're freed by obedience is because we're obeying the will of our designer. And also, remember, I said people have a tendency to say, well, freedom is doing whatever you want. If you know yourself, you realize you don't know what the heck you want. For example, I want to be slim. I want to be healthy. I want to eat all the ice cream in the world. Now, does that make sense to you? What is freedom for me? To do what I want? I don't know. You know, I mean, those are two totally, very strong, as a matter of fact, desires. They're totally contradictory. Which one will free me? I know which one will free me. If I die, that frees me. It's hard. It's a disciplined way. I realize when I, you know, I want to be healthy. I want to be able to move around. I want the feeling of being, you know, in a physically healthy way. And I also want to gratify my need and desire for ice cream. Which of those two desires is going to free me? I need to, I know in my one case, in this case, it's the desire to be healthy and to eat right. So what I have to do to be free is not to do what I want, but to ditch the feelings that enslave me. The Bible and the Bible alone can tell you which of the desires enslave and which of the desires free. Only God knows who you are. I remember reading about a man, a salesman, used to fly from place to place in his own plane. And he used to fly along. Very often these little planes fly down low. And he used to very often go over these little winding roads. And he would see down, he would look down and he'd be on these roads. He'd see roads that he knew. He'd seen them for years. He'd driven on them himself. And here's this poor little car behind this great big truck. And the truck's going 20 miles an hour on a road that should be 55 miles an hour. But it's because it's so windy and so windy that the poor car can't pass. Why? He can't see what's ahead. So, you know, the pilot's up there and he says, Gosh, if the guy only knew there's no car coming for a long distance, if only I could communicate with him. If only I could tell him what I see from my vantage point, then he would know what to do. God is the pilot. God sees it all. God knows how you're built. God knows the consequences of behavior. And he has communicated from your vantage point. And he tells you things that may look suicidal from your vantage point. He says, Do this! Don't do this! He's the pilot. He's the designer. He knows how you're built. Obey him. Let me close with this. Psalm chapter 1. In Psalm 1, it tells us about the godly man and the ungodly man. It says, The godly man is like an evergreen tree. In any season, he bears fruit. He's steady. He endures. He's always growing. And you look at that and you say, Boy, I wish I was like that. Always on an even keel. Always bearing fruit. Always producing. And it says, The wicked is not so. The wicked man is like the chaff driven away. The wicked man, you know. And you say, Yeah, that's, I don't want to be a wicked man. You know, you're reading Psalm 1. You say, I want to be a godly man. What's the sign of the godly man? What makes a difference? The Bible says the godly man is not somebody who prays day and night, though he probably does. Psalm 1 doesn't say the godly man is the one who witnesses on the street corners day and night, though hopefully he will. It says, The godly man delights in the law of God, and on it he meditates day and night. The godly man loves to have God tell him what to do. The mark of the godly man is he likes to change. The mark of the godly man is that he says, Lord, show me where I should change, and I'll do it. Show me where I should obey, even where it's hard, and I'll do it. That's the difference between the evergreen and the chaff. Which are you? Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray.
