TITLE: Ain’t That Good News: What African-American Spirituals Teach Us about Heaven and Hell (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Heaven and Hell Suffering Hope
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/ain-t-that-good-news-what-african-american-spirituals-teach-us-about-heaven-and-hell-an-open-forum/

============================================================

I'm sorry. I actually asked them to come back out again. They just pushed me out here. Oh, my. And remember what I said, and I've only one more little, start my next lecture with just one or two more things about what I don't know much about, which is the music itself. Well, but you notice how easy it is to make the case that though, for reasons we don't understand, spirituals developed in the United States, in our soil here, and the experience of slaves that were brought here. Out of it has grown. Look, it's pretty obvious jazz grows out of the spirituals because we were able to just insert it right in there tonight. And blues, rhythm and blues, and gospel music, of course, and arguably rock, and all kinds of things. And there it comes. Now, but what I have to be here to talk to you about tonight is the content. And it's pretty easy for you to get caught up in the sound, but the singers, you know, these weren't performed usually. These songs were sung, sung by congregations, sung by communities. And the words are simple. They're usually pretty repetitious, but because they're so simple and because they're so repetitious, they sink deep into the hearts. And therefore, the content, the messages of the spirituals are what we want to look at now. Now, I'm going to do this for about 25 minutes, just to let you know, and then we're going to do a Q&A. But here in the beginning, I'm going to make a couple of introductory remarks. You need to know something, however. Because we ordinarily have a worship service here, I'm going to ask the ushers to come forth and take the offering. This is not bait and switch. If you're a guest or a visitor, you don't have to feel any need to give. But this is the way we just support the work of the ministry. So in my introductory remarks, you know, so obviously what I'm about to say in the next 90 seconds isn't all that interesting because I don't mind having the basket come through. But you might find this interesting. Somebody might, if you're not in a great mood tonight, you might say, why is a white guy up there telling us about African-American? And if you're in a real bad mood, you say, why is a bald white guy up there doing it? And part of the reason is because we have here at Redeemer, we've, over the years, we've done over 50 of these open forums. And this is my job to bring to bear what I know about philosophy, theology, and culture to bear on the issues. It's my job. I know my limitations, though, tonight. In fact, what I'd like to refer everybody to is a pretty important work that I will quote several times. But actually, I know my limitations, but I also would point out there's some value in having a white man give the kind of high tribute to African-American faith and artistry, which I'm going to do tonight. There's some value to that, too. And one thing I would suggest you get a hold of, if you can, Howard Thurman, who was a great African-American scholar and minister in the middle of the 20th century, pre-Civil Rights Movement. He was a contemporary of Martin Luther King Sr. And he gave a lecture on life and death in the Negro spirituals in 1947 at Harvard that is tremendous. And I'm going to, it's so tremendous, I'm going to be basing a lot of what I say on it. And I'm going to read you some very eloquent sections from it. Howard Thurman, who gave that lecture in 1947 at Harvard. And you have to keep something in mind, that when you were an adult, an African-American adult in the 30s and 40s, you knew plenty of people who had grandparents and even parents who were slaves. So what he says has a certain poignancy. Now, I'm going to suggest tonight that there's three things we can learn about what African-American spirituals tell us about heaven, hell, and the afterlife. There's three things. There's three things that if you listen to them and if you sing them, sink deep into your heart. And they give us three things. They give us the gift of hope, the basis for justice, and the promise of rest. The gift of hope, a basis for justice, and the promise of rest. Now, first, the gift of hope. If there's one thing that the spirituals give us is it's a world with windows. What do I mean by that? Do you ever see the special Cosmos back in the 80s? Carl Sagan did a bunch of PBS specials. And at the beginning of his specials on the Cosmos, Carl Sagan intoned this statement. He says, is, or ever was, or ever will be. The cosmos is all that is, or ever was, or ever will be. Now, that is a very vivid and compact expression of what we would call secularism. The Latin word seculum means this age, age, and secularism is the view that says this world, this age, time and space, is the only world there is. There is no world alongside of this physical world like a world of God and demons and angels, and there is no other world at the end of this world like heaven and hell and judgment day. There's no world alongside. There's no world in the future. This world is all there is. This world is all there is, ever was, and ever will be. It's called secularism. African-American spirituals are absolutely opposed to that view in every way. Almost all of the spirituals are constantly talking about the world alongside of this physical world, angels and demons and God, and the world at the end of this world, which is heaven and hell. In other words, African-American spirituals give you a world with windows. This world that you're living in has windows. And if you listen to the music and you sing the music, you can look out into the supernatural world and the future world and heaven and hell. This world is not all we're stuck in. Now, there are plenty of people over the years who have felt like that's not good, that the spirituals are always talking about heaven and hell. You know, think about it all. They're always talking about heaven and hell and judgment day. You know, ain't that good news? I've got a harp up in the kingdom. That's good news. I've got a robe up in the kingdom. That's good news. I've got a savior in the kingdom. That's good news. Or the city called heaven, where you're singing, I don't have any hope for tomorrow or even the next day, but I'm making heaven my home. Looking out the window of this world into the next world. And a lot of people say, well, that's bad. Howard Thurman, in his lecture in 1947, said many people, even, he says, the children and grandchildren of the spiritual singers today, he was talking 1947, are saying maybe it's time for African-Americans to become less religious and less concerned about the afterlife. It's intriguing that studies show that African-American people in this country are the most religious people group. And you might say, why is that? I believe to great degree it's because of their art. The artistry is so powerful and it automatically gives them a world with windows. Whereas most of us live in a secular world where we're not allowed to look out the windows. We say there's nothing out there. And Howard Thurman at one point actually says, there have been many critics of this emphasis on the other world. And he says this, he says, many critics say, quote, they feel the emphasis on the afterlife is a kind of soporific, making for docility and submission. Some feel it was that Christian belief in the afterlife rendered the slaves, manipulated them into a position that rendered them defenseless. See, a soporific means you lose your passion, you lose your activism, you lose your drive. And maybe all this talk about, you know, heaven in the future made them docile, made them submissive. And here's what he says. He turns on the critics. And here's what he says. It's brilliant, actually. He says, the facts, however, make clear that this sung faith served to deepen the capacity of endurance and of the absorption of suffering. The spirituals taught a people how to ride high in life, to look squarely in the face, those facts that argue most dramatically against all hope, and to use those facts as a raw material, the facts of heaven, of hell, of judgment. They looked at those facts and they used those facts as a raw material out of which they fashioned a hope that the environment with all its cruelty could not crush. This enabled them, the slaves, to reject annihilation and to affirm a terrible right to live. The center of focus was beyond themselves to a God who was a companion to them in their miseries, even as he enabled them to transcend their miseries, and that was good news. Now that's a powerful argument. Think about this for a second. Secularism. This world is all there is, or ever was, or ever will be. How could the slaves, with that view, have looked at that? This world is all there is, ever was, ever will be. This is it. There is no judgment day. My deepest desires for love and joy will never be fulfilled in the future. There is no future life. There is no judgment day in which all this injustice will be put. world as it is, at that for them, and developed a hope that this environment with all of its cruelty could not crush? They couldn't have possibly done that because their hope was Heaven. Their hope was Judgment Day. Their hope was God. That's the reason why, as Howard Thurman says, because they believe that, they could live high. They could lift their heads high. Can you imagine, he says, somebody saying, well, I and all my grandchildren, my children and grandchildren, are consigned to lives of endless brutality and grinding poverty. There is no Judgment Day in which any wrongdoing will ever be put right. There is no future world in life in which any of my desires will be satisfied. This life is all there is, but I'm going to keep my head high. I'm going to have a hope that nothing here crushes. That's ridiculous. There is no hope. Everything's crushed. The facts argue that this hope in an other world enabled them to look at life with all of its cruelty and say, you can't crush my hope. I've got a hope that you can't crush. Nothing you can do can destroy it. That's a living hope, and it's a gift of hope. And entire people got that hope by singing about it. Now, by the way, and since I feel like I've got secularists on the ropes here a little bit, because honestly, in other words, the African American spirituals are the opposite of Carl Sagan's secularism. They say, if that's all I had, there's no way we could have gotten through what we got through. And when people say it's a soporific, you know, the idea of heaven and Judgment Day makes you passive. It doesn't make you active. Well, by the way, a lack of belief in heaven and the Judgment Day can be a soporific. Let me give you two intellectual giants, Leo Tolstoy and Woody Allen. Let me give you Woody Allen first. In 1977, it was a very famous 1977, I know some of you said, gee, did they have print back then and writing? People wrote? In 1977, there was a very interesting, Frank Rich did an interview with Woody Allen in Esquire magazine. And in it, Woody Allen says, every so often, he suddenly realizes that there's nothing after this world. And he just goes all limp. He says, I always see death's head lurking. I might be sitting at Madison Square Garden at the most exciting basketball game. And they're cheering and everything is thrilling. And one of the players is doing something very beautiful. And suddenly I think, he's only 28 years old and this is as good as it's ever going to be for him. The fundamental thing behind all motivation and all activity is the constant struggle against annihilation and against death. It's absolutely stupefying to realize you're going to die. And it renders everyone's accomplishments meaningless. For as Camus wrote, it's not only that he dies or that man dies, but you struggle to do a work of art that will last. And then you realize that the universe itself is going to die. And that destroys all meaning. And you say, oh, well, Woody Allen. Let's move on then to Tolstoy. You know, maybe this will have a little more credibility. Tolstoy, in a very interesting essay called Confession, just called his Confession, talks about the fact that right around the age of 50, when everything in his life was looking up, he had a wife, he had kids who loved him, he was getting famous, he was making a lot of money. And suddenly he began to get depressed. And people thought, you know, he wasn't eating right. People thought it was psychological. And he said, it's not psychological. It's intellectual. He says, my life came to a standstill. This all happened when I had a wife who loved me, good children, large estate without much effort on my part, improved and increased. I was respected more than at any previous time. My name was famous, but I could give no rational meaning to any single action or to my whole life. I was only surprised that I could have avoided understanding this from the beginning. Today or tomorrow, sickness and death will come. To those I love or to me, nothing will remain but stench and worms. And sooner or later, my affairs, whatever they may be, will be forgotten and I will not exist. Then why go on making any effort? How can I fail to see this before? That's what was surprising. One can live while one is intoxicated with life, but as soon as one becomes sober, it's impossible not to see that all of life is a fraud and a stupid fraud. There is nothing either amusing or witty about it. I may be told, well, you can't understand the meaning of life, so don't even think about it. Just live. I can't live. I have already done so too long. The two drops of honey which diverted my eyes from the cruel truth longer than the rest. My love of family and of writing, art as I call it, were no longer sweet to me and here's the reason why. When I ask science, why do I live? It answers, in infinite space, at infinite time, infinitely small particles change their form in infinitely complex ways. So the answer of science to what am I and what is the universe? The answer is nothing. My question is... the verge of suicide, was the simplest question. Lying in the soul of every man, a question without an answer to which one cannot live, it was, what will come of what I am doing today or tomorrow? What will come of my whole life? Why should I live? Why wish for anything or do anything? Is there any meaning in my life that the inevitability of death of me and of the whole of human civilization and the world awaiting does not destroy? See, not only should we never say, oh, belief in heaven and hell and judgment day is a soporific. Not only do we have to say that historically speaking, it's what enabled slaves to live with their heads up. It would enable them to have a hope that they were able to, nothing, nothing could crush. Not only that, to not believe that there's any other world but this world, if you think about it rationally, is the worst soporific of all. It's the worst deadening of the soul. It destroys your desire to do anything, if you think. See, African-American spirituals, you could feel it, could you not? You could see it, could you not? What if this was the, what if this was the main, your main artistry, the thing that you were soaked in day after day after day, all the time, it gave you the gift of hope. And you know, it was a realistic living hope because on the one hand, it was powerful enough to say, there is something coming, there is a good coming that will make all of this, all of this seem small by comparison. All of our suffering is nothing compared to the glory that will be revealed in us. But on the other hand, it's realistic because we know this life has its limits. It's only ever going to get so good. So there you have an absolutely realistic hope and yet a powerful living hope in the African-American spirituals giving it to you. The second thing that the spirituals gave us and gave the singers and the listeners was a basis for justice because it didn't just talk about another world here, you know, alongside of us, another world here in front of us. It also talked about judgment day. Now, you know, there's a tendency for us not to realize this, but there's a whole lot of talk in the spirituals about Gabriel's horn and about that trumpet and about that big day coming. That's judgment day. Now, who's singing about this? Slaves who don't know justice. There was no justice for them. And so when they're constantly singing about judgment day, what did that do? It did a lot. Again, back to Howard Thurman. He has a great statement on this where he says, in the second place, this religious emphasis, see where I'm getting all my points from Howard Thurman's lecture in 1947 at Harvard on the meaning of the spirituals. In the second place, this religious emphasis, again, talking about spirituals, did not paralyze action. It did not make for mere resignation. On the contrary, the pragmatic result of singing the spirituals for them was an awareness that against their darkness, something was fighting. It was the work of God, and therefore, who could say to them nay? Taking their clue from Jesus in the Gospels, the judgment was the climax of history. This made a tremendous appeal to the imagination. And he lists some of the spirituals that talk about judgment day. Here's one. Oh, he sees all you do. He hears all you say. My lords are writing all the time. See, God knows what you're doing. God sees what's going on. He sees the injustice, and he's got a record of it. It's going to come out on judgment day. Here's another one. Well, of course, all the ones about get your trumpet, Gabriel. Here's a great one. Oh, get your trumpet, Gabriel. I got a key to that kingdom, and the world can't do me no harm. See, judgment day, that's safe. Nothing can turn that back. And therefore, this world cannot do me no harm, because eventually, justice is going to be done. My Lord, what a morning. My Lord, what a morning. When the stars begin to fall, you will hear the trumpet sound to wake the nations underground, standing at God's right hand when the stars begin to fall. And by the way, one of the spirituals that you hear about, you hear, it's actually pretty famous. We didn't sing it tonight, is Rock My Soul in the Bosom of Abraham. Do you know what that's talking about? There's only one place where it really talks about someone being in the bosom of Abraham. It's Luke 16. Go look that up. Somebody came up with that spiritual after reading Luke 16. And in Luke 16, we have a poor man who has to live begging for crumbs at the gate of a rich man. But when the rich man and the poor man die, the rich man goes to hell, and the poor man is in the bosom of Abraham. Do you remember that? It's all about justice. And to say, Rock My Soul in the Bosom of Abraham is a way of saying, there is a hell. Injustice will be punished. There is a rich man who... he deserved. And that's what that song's about. You see, that's the reason why Howard Thurman says the pragmatic result was not resignation, talking about Judgment Day. There was an awareness that against their darkness something was fighting. It was the work of God. And who could say them nay? Now, let me just, again, let me suggest two things about this idea of judgment. A lot of people say, oh, if you believe in Judgment Day, you believe in a God who judges people. That creates all kinds of problems. Really? Well, let me just suggest to you and propose to you, no, it actually doesn't. It gives you a balance. Because on the one hand, the idea of Judgment Day gives you a basis for justice. The African-American spirituals are based on an idea of natural law, not positive law. Today, the reigning doctrine, the philosophy of law today is positive law. What is positive law? That is, there is no higher law. There's no God's law up here. Positive law means laws are created by us. If there is human rights, it's because we created them. And then we can take them away. Positive law basically means that all truth, all ideas of truth and justice are socially constructed. We construct them. That's not what you have in African-American spirituals. They have a philosophy of natural law, that there's a higher law, God's law, by which laws down here are judged. And if the laws down here are unjust because they don't match with the higher law, then we change them. And therefore, out of African-American spiritual comes the letter from Birmingham Jail. Martin Luther King Jr. in jail in 1963 in Birmingham because he's protesting segregation. And this is classic. Martin Luther King Jr. is writing a letter to white ministers who say, you're a rabble-rouser. How dare you disobey the law? How dare you do civil disobedience in order to overturn segregation law? You're a rabble-rouser. You're a minister. How can you disobey the law? And here's what he says. I am in Birmingham jail because injustice is here. You ask, how can you advocate breaking some laws and not obeying others? The answer is very simple. There are two types of laws, just ones and unjust ones. Now, how does one determine whether a law is just or unjust, says Martin Luther King Jr.? A just law is a man-made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God? An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony with the moral law. To put it in terms of the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas, an unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law. It's awfully interesting that people look at the slave trade and they look at the horrible suffering out there in this world and they say, how can you believe in a God who lets all these horrible things happen? And of course, that is a problem. I don't know actually why God lets all these horrible things happen. I don't know. I don't think anybody does. But if you say, well, then forget the whole idea. I don't believe there is a God. That creates more problems than you had before. Martin Luther King Jr. says, okay, you don't like all the injustice out there. If there's no God, then who's to say what is unjust? What you have now is nothing but evolution, a strong eke the weak. That's the way life is. How can you even say this is unjust unless you believe there's a judgment day? And even though Martin Luther King Jr. is talking about St. Thomas Aquinas, you know, and quoting all the highfalutin philosophers and that was good and he's right, he got this from the spirituals. So on the one hand, the spirituals, the idea of judgment day gives you a basis for doing justice. But on the other hand, though it keeps you from being too passive and saying, well, who's to say? Who's to say what is right and wrong? It keeps you from being passive because you say, no, there is justice and we're going to work for it. On the other hand, it keeps you from taking justice into your own hands. The idea of judgment day can keep you not only from being too passive against injustice, but being too active and becoming oppressive and violent yourself. Here, I will move out of the African-American world for a second and let me just read you what Miroslav Volf says about this. He's a Croatian thinker. He's at Yale. He's a professor at Yale. And he says, when people think that the idea of judgment day leads to violence, they don't understand what the Bible teaches. He says this, my thesis is that the practice of nonviolence requires a belief in divine vengeance. Listen, my thesis is that the practice of nonviolence requires a belief in divine vengeance. Do you hear that? What is he saying? My thesis will be unpopular with many people in Western society. But imagine speaking to people as I have, this is in Croatia, whose cities and villages have been first plundered, then burned and leveled to the ground, whose daughters and sisters have been raped, whose fathers and brothers have had their throats slit. What do you say to them? Don't retaliate? Why not? Why not retaliate? Oh, don't take vengeance. Why not? They say. only means of prohibiting violence by us is to insist that God alone has the right to judge. Violence thrives today secretly nourished by the belief that God is not going to do that. It takes the quiet of a suburb for the birth of the thesis that human nonviolence is the result of a God who refuses to judge. In a scorched land soaked in the blood of the innocent, the idea will invariably die, like other pleasant captivities of the liberal mind. If God were not angry at injustice and deception and did not make a final end of violence, that God would not be worthy of our worship. Here's what he's saying. If there's no God, if there's no judgment day, and I see people wronging my family, I'm just going to get up and shoot him. I'm just going to get up and kill him. Why not? The only thing, Miroslav Volf says, that's powerful enough to make people peacefully seek justice is to say, but God is going to put everything right. Otherwise, I'm just going to pick up the sword and go get him. And therefore, the idea of judgment day does not lead to violence. The idea of judgment day actually keeps you from being too active or too passive against injustice. So the spirituals not only give us the gift of hope, they also give us this incredible balance approach to justice because they do believe in judgment day and they do believe in hell for injustice. But lastly, they also give us the gift of rest, the promise of rest. Here's the last thing I'm just going to read from Thurman. He's just great at this. He says, the last thing that the spirituals give was heaven. He says, heaven was an intensely personal thing. It was as intensely personal as the fact of judgment day. Here at last, heaven was a place where the slave was counted in. He had the dignity of personal registration. And one of the lines of the spiritual says this, oh, write my name, oh, write my name. The angels in heaven are going to write my name. You know, on earth, can't even vote. On earth, not even there. On earth, you know, doesn't count at all in human society. But heaven was a place where the slave was counted in. And listen to this. There, there will be no prescription, no segregation, and no separateness. Family ties are restored. Friends and loved ones are reunited. The most precious thing of all was the fact that personal identity was not lost in heaven, but heightened. And he goes on to talk about how Eastern ideas, you lose personality. You've just become an impersonal part of the old soul, but not in heaven, not in Christian heaven. And then he says, we're not surprised to find a great emphasis on reunion in the spirituals. There was nothing more heart tearing at that time of madness than the separation of families at the auction block. The possibility of never seeing one's loved ones again was a reality. The conviction grew through the spirituals that this world, however, this universe, however, will not ultimately deny the demands of love and longing. And therefore, God would make things right. And heaven also carried with it the idea of rest from labor, labor of being able to take a long sigh, cushioned by a deep sense of peace. And he ends like this. At the very end, he's, you know, he's speaking at Harvard, Howard Thurman is, and he realizes that most of the smart white people out there listening to this African-American, you know, PhD talk about spirituals is sitting there saying, well, that's wonderful. Of course, we can't take what the spirituals say literally. They're wonderful symbols somehow, but we can't take them literally. And he, he turns on his people, his listeners, I think. And he says this, in the end, to reject the literal truth of the spirituals is to deny life itself. To deny life of its dignity and man the right of necessity. In such a view, the present moment is all there is. And he's talking about secularism. If you deny the literal truth of what the spirituals are talking about, in such a view, man becomes a prisoner in a tight little world of momentary events. No more, no less. That's a world without windows. For these slave singers, such a view was completely unsatisfactory. And therefore, they thoroughly and decisively rejected the idea that these things were not literal truths. And this is the miracle of their achievement, causing them to take their place alongside the great creative religious thinkers of the human race. They made a worthless life, the life of chattel poverty, worth living. They yielded with abiding enthusiasm to a view of life which included all the events of their experience without exhausting themselves in those experiences. To them, this quality of life was insistent fact. Huh? The things they were singing about were insistent fact. them they discovered of God and of his far-flung purposes. God was not through with them. And to know God was to live a life worthy of the loftiest meaning of life. So the three things African American Spirituals gave the singers and gave the listeners and can give you is the gift of hope, a basis for justice, and the promise of rest. And that's it. Now, we're going to move into the Q&A time. And in the Q&A time we can talk about issues of life and death and that sort of thing. However, what I'm going to do is I'm going to close in prayer and there are some people who for all sorts of really, really perfectly valid and good reasons need to leave or want to leave. We know this. And therefore, you should do it relatively quickly because what I'm going to do after the prayer is I'm going to give you two or three minutes to kind of vamoose if you want to vamoose. And then I'm just going to get a little chair place to sit right here and we'll put the mics out and we'll have about a half an hour to 40 minutes of Q&A and we'll be done at 8 o'clock. So let me close in prayer if you don't mind. Father, it doesn't seem right to end even a lecture on African-American spirituals without praying, without opening a window into another world and talking to you. We thank you that you are in this world and that someday that other world, heaven, is going to descend and purify this place and all injustice will be put down, all brokenness will be healed. And we look forward to that day. And Father, we pray that you would continue to raise up people of faith who can look out and see the worlds outside of this world and sing about them. And we pray that you'll continue to raise up artists who can teach us about these things in such a way that those realities shape our lives as the writers and the singers and listeners of the spirituals have been shaped. Thank you for this time. Thank you for our musicians. And most of all, thank you for giving us the gift of this art. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
