TITLE: An Identity That Doesn’t Crush You or Others
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Questioning Christianity (2014)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/an-identity-that-doesn-t-crush-you-or-others-2/

============================================================

Thank you for coming out. It is awful. I knew that we certainly have a group of faithful people who would brave it all, but it's nasty. But I am very, very, I've really enjoyed, this is the third time we've met, I've enjoyed the fact that we are, in a sense, a kind of temporary learning community. We're seven weeks, but each time I talk to you, you ask me the questions, I go up to the fifth floor, and we have great conversations as well, and it does feel much more like a learning community than just simply a, you know, I don't feel like a content provider. I feel like I'm a part of a community, and I appreciate that. Thanks for your involvement. Thanks for coming out tonight. And thanks for those of you who watch this online. Come out next week. I'm sure the weather will be better. I just want you to know that. We're exploring the character and claims of Christianity to see if they make sense emotionally, culturally, and rationally to contemporary people, especially contemporary New Yorkers. Now, why do we put it like that? Even briefer than last week, you can prove some things. You can prove how many species of fish there are in a particular lake, but you really can't demonstrably or empirically prove any of the things that are really important in life on which your life is based. You can't prove what's right and wrong to do, what's worth spending your life doing. And we've been trying to say you can't prove there is a God or that there's no God. And all of those things that I just mentioned, you can't live without some kind of faith assumptions. So you actually have to take some of these things by faith. You can't prove them, but you can't live without them. So, for example, if you decide there's no God, or if you decide, well, there might be a God, but he doesn't care. If there is a God, it doesn't matter how I live, or this God doesn't care what I believe. Or you might decide there is a God and he can be known. See, you can't prove any of those, and yet your life is going to be lived in very different ways, depending on which of those you assume, and you're assuming it by faith. So, now, the extremes is, the two extremes that you want to avoid is the idea that since you can't prove any of these things, you just take a blind leap in the dark. Or, on the other hand, that you only live on these ideas if you can prove them. And I've tried to say, no, you can't. Something in the middle is how we come to our beliefs. Things that emotionally resonate with our intuitions, with our aspirations. Also, things that seem to make sense when you see them fleshed out in real life, in people's lives, in social life. And then, there is evidence. There is logic. There are arguments, and we're going to put them all together and cumulatively decide what makes the most sense. I'm here, of course, to say I think Christianity makes a tremendous amount of sense. The last two weeks, I have come to you, and I've said, here's two things that Christianity offers, meaning in life that suffering can't take away from you. And last week, a strong basis for doing justice. And in both cases, I was basically saying, here's how you live life if you don't believe in God, and here's how you live life if you do believe in God. And I wasn't all that specific about Christianity as much as I was saying, if there is a God, then there's this, if there's no God. Now, starting this week and from now on, I'm going to be talking much more about the Christian version of belief in God. And you'll see as we go. So, tonight, I'd like to give you a third thing that I think Christianity offers. And that is, Christianity offers an identity that doesn't crush you or others. And the outline of our talk here is three. One is identity. What is that? Secondly, Christianity gives you an identity that is not based on performance, therefore it doesn't crush you. And thirdly, Christianity gives you an identity that's not based on difference, and therefore it won't crush others. Okay? So, first, what is identity? Not crushing you, not crushing others. So, first, what's identity? Let me suggest that identity has two parts. First of all, your identity is what makes you distinct, and then secondly, our identity is what gives you some positive self-regard, some sense of worth. Now, when I say what makes you distinct, is the word identity means what makes you identical. I'm a husband to my wife, I am a father to my sons, I am a brother to my sister, I am a pastor to the people of my church. So, we've all got these roles, right? We've all got these different hats. But your identity is whatever is identical. I just love the way sociologists talk. It says, identity is, where is that? It's a stable core, oh yeah, it's whatever makes you stable within every one of your roles, which is another way of saying there's got to be something that's true in every situation. If there's nothing, if you have nothing in common, then there's no you. You're just a bunch of roles and a bunch of masks. But your identity is what makes you distinct and what is identical about you in all the roles. What is the core? What is the most true about you? When I'm with my sister, there are certain things that are true about me that when I'm with my wife or with people of my church, I'm somewhat different. But what is there that's always the same? What is there that always makes you you and distinct? Secondly, what gives you a positive self-regard about what makes you distinct? What gives you a sense of worth or value? Now, with those two ideas in mind, let me say that all the sociologists and psychologists talk about identity formation, and identity formation is how you go through a process of coming to know who you are, what is the most true about you, what is true about you in every situation, and what gives you a sense of affirmation, a firm self-regard or worth and value. What is it? And I would like to, I'm going to oversimplify it first and I'll immediately backtrack, but I would say that right now out there in the world, there's basically two ways to do identity formation, traditional cultures and identity formation in contemporary Western cultures. Now, in traditional cultures, and some of you, either your parents are from these cultures or you're from these cultures, and even though you're living here, so you know what I'm going to be talking about. In traditional cultures, what really matters is the family or the community. And your identity is locked up in who you are in the family or the community. And therefore, what makes you distinct is the role that your family or community gives you to play. You know, you're a father or a mother, you're a son or a daughter. You play roles in order for the good of the community. Another way to put it is you are your duties. Because the way you get positive self-regard in a traditional culture is you fulfill whatever role it takes to help your family or your community or your tribe, you know, move forward. And you do it sacrificing your own self-interest. That's how you feel good about yourself. You give up what you would like to do for the sake of your family, for the sake of your tribe. And that's how you become a person of honor. However, that's how you become a person of honor. So in traditional cultures, you become a person of honor. You have no identity outside of who you are in your family or your tribe. And you fulfill the role that's assigned to you. And you have honor if you sacrifice your own personal, individual interests for the sake of the group. In modern Western culture, as you know, it's exactly the opposite. By the way, how many of you had parents that grew up in a traditional culture and they moved here and raised you in this culture? I mean, I just guess just by looking at some of you who you are. And they brought you to a place in which identity formation is exactly the opposite. Because in modern Western culture, what really matters is who you are as an individual. And modern Western culture, again, I got this from a sociology book. It says, in modern Western culture, each person is understood to have a unique core of feeling and intuition that must be unfolded and expressed if you're going to come to a true identity. And the way to do that is actually to move away from other communities and families. What really matters is that you have to be who you want to be and who you feel you are. You have to look at your desires. You have to look at your dreams. And you need to roll them out. Now, by the way, in the Western culture, you can get really, really dedicated to your people. Or you can become a social activist and say, I'm going to be part. But it's your choice. See, if you want to sacrifice for your people or for your family, it's your choice. You've decided that that's how you feel good about yourself. That's totally different than in a traditional culture, which is a sign to you. You're still an individualist. So, in summary, who are you? In traditional cultures, you are your duties within a community. And your self-regard depends on your sacrificing, your interests for the community, and then you're a person of honor. Whereas Peter Berger, who is a sociologist of religion, said in traditional cultures, what matters is honor. But in Western cultures, what matters is dignity. Two different things. And in Western cultures, you are your dreams, not your desires. There's your... There's your... are your duties and that's how you get to know that you're a good person because you do your duty and in western society you are your desires and your dreams and you know you're a good person because you fulfill those dreams you execute on those dreams you become the person that you feel that you need to be do you know how different these places are listen excuse me i'm just gonna i'm gonna take 60 seconds on this let me give you two songs the battle of malden it was an old anglo-saxon epic written in traditional culture it's a place where it's it's a song it's and a and a poem about a great battle and at the end the anglo-saxon warriors realize that they're outnumbered so what do they do well brithwold shook his spear of ash and called to his remaining comrades who were standing not by their dead friends and he says this thought must be harder hearts may be keener minds be the greater as our strength lessons here's lies our prince all huge and glory and gory i will not away but i myself beside my lord so love the man think to lie okay honor i'm gonna go down fighting i'm i'm i'm so glad that i can die with me okay here's another um song a little more recent climb every mountain ford every stream follow every rainbow till you find your dream and by the way if you know the stories those are two very different understandings of vows in one case you are your vow you take a vow that's all there is to you you follow the vow the other approach is you know vows are okay if they help you climb every mountain ford every stream follow every rainbow and find your dream but if it doesn't then you you ditch it and you go do something else i'm not i'm not picking on maria funtrap she was a nice lady so anyway but you you got the idea it's enormously different now um however oh by the way real quickly i know that it's not as simple as i made it for example um let's just say and i know this to be true uh let's just say uh because i can i'll tell you a story in a second um uh let's just say you're an italian family moves to new york city in the 1920s and the father is italian and he and his identity is largely being italian and being part of a family he's also a um a craftsman of some sort and he's proud of that too but it's being italian that matters so his son is born in new york and grows up here and his son who's not italian but italian american his son now becomes a lawyer okay what is more fundamental to his identity see his father it was at the top being italian next to that craftsman but now son at the top i'm a lawyer you know i'm making money and i'm good and secondly oh i like my italian roots too it's so it's what it's done is it's moved down see most of us are kind of combinations of these things so i i realize that somebody's going to ask me a question i'm going to say it's not that simple but still those are the two basic ways of identity formation now point one that's identity okay positive self-regard uh and what makes you distinct secondly second point christianity gives you an identity that doesn't crush you because it's not based on performance my first point my first argument is that both the traditional and the western contemporary approach to identity formation is crushing now because i'm talking in the middle of new york city i probably don't have to take much time to talk about the problems of the traditional model for example here's three first of all an enormous number of people in the traditional model go and do things with their job you know they do they go into careers or they go and work and do things that they hate and that they're no good at but their families say you've got to go there and it in many ways it's bad you know for you secondly in the traditional as you know the traditional culture women are often exploited but thirdly there's very little social mobility that you might just find this interesting 45 seconds my grandfather was born in italy in a little town uh north of naples in 1881 or something like that and uh when he grew up his parents told him look there's only three things you can be you can go be a priest of course any italian young man who wants to be a priest you can be a priest secondly you can go in the military thirdly you have to make pots our family has always made pots we're potters so my grandfather said what if i don't want to be a pot maker what if i want to do something else he says i'm sorry you're part of our family and you could they wouldn't hire you anywhere else they would say oh you're a clemente that means you make pots in fact they wouldn't even probably let you move to another town they say you belong over in that town you could saw you could call that a stratified society no it was a traditional society in which the family who you are. So he came to New York City and worked on the subway and all that kind of thing. One of the first subways, he came through Little Italy and so on. So most of us do not have to be argued into the idea that the traditional approach to identity formation can be very exploitative and can be very smothering. But I would like to make the case that our modern Western approach is probably even more crushing. There are a lot of people, I'm not the only one, there's a lot of people, and by the way, Christians aren't the only people saying this. Plenty of folks are saying that the contemporary individualistic Western approach to identity formation is not sustainable. It creates enormous amounts of anxiety. It creates a tremendous amount of drug addiction. It's terrible. Why? Okay, let me go through it. Basically, it's crushing because you have got to decide who you want to be and then you've got to go out and achieve it yourself. The role isn't something that gets assigned to you and then you're a good son or a good daughter and you do things and you help the family and then you're a good person. Oh no, you've got to go out then you've got to, so for example, in traditional society people work, they do work, okay? They work in order to live, they do work. But in our society you work to get an identity. To a great degree you work to get an identity. Dorothy Sayers was a, at one point she's a British novelist and essayist, at one point she says, she says, most people today, she's talking about modern times, modern Western times, she says, most people today work to make money and get a position in society. And therefore, she says, most people that she knows become doctors not primarily to relieve suffering but to bring themselves and their families up in the world. Most people become lawyers that she knows not to do justice, a passion for justice, but to bring themselves and families up in the world. Now, that's probably harsh to say most people, but you do realize there's something to it. A guy named Nugent wrote an article a little bit ago, here it is, The Upside of Distraction by Benjamin Nugent. He's just a writer, he's a novelist, I think a writer, and he was writing in the New York Times about the huge pressures there are on us today to get an identity through our work. So, this is what he said, listen carefully. He says, when good writing was my only goal, I made the quality of my work the measure of my worth. For this reason, I wasn't able to read my own writing well. I couldn't tell whether something I had just written was good or bad, because I needed for it to be good in order to feel sane. I lost the ability to cheerfully interrogate how much I liked what I had written, or to see what was actually on the page. I could only see what I wanted to see or what I feared to see. And see, what he's doing there, he's exactly right. When you work just to help your family, that's one thing. But when you work, so you can say, I want to feel good about myself, I want to know who I am, I'm an artist, I'm a lawyer, I've made money, I'm making a contribution. Whatever these things are that you're saying, this is what makes me feel good about myself, those things will drive you into the ground. They become your identity. And he says, I needed, I couldn't interrogate myself, I couldn't be honest about how good a writer was, because if I wasn't good, I wasn't sane. Because if I wasn't good at what I've chosen to be, I don't have a self left. And therefore, there's a sense in which, if you're getting your identity out of your work, it's not really about the work. See, Dorothy Sayers is right, you're not doing it for the people that you're helping, you're not writing, you know, to give people the pleasure that writing gives, you're doing it for yourself. It's about you, it's all about you. If you make work your identity, and you're successful, it'll go to your head. If you're a failure, it'll go to your heart. It'll destroy you either way. If you're successful, you'll think too much of yourself, and think you're brilliant in every area. And it'll give you an inflated identity. On the other hand, if you're no good, you won't feel sane, you'll feel like I don't even have a self left. Now, what's interesting about this guy, you might find interesting, did you notice what he said, if I can find it, what he said was, when I made work my only goal, remember that? He says, I realized, basically, he was getting his identity out of his work. So, he realized that it was killing him, it was killing his work. Now, see, you've got to get your identity out of something. And you're living in a Western culture where just pleasing your family and, you know, being a good member of your community isn't enough. You know, that's honor, we need dignity. So, what did he do? If you read the rest of it, he was trying to do was he said, you know, I don't want to get all of my self-regard out of my work. I want my girlfriend. Well, that's a problem, too. Ernest Becker, who was a Pulitzer Prize winner of the... He's not very well known anymore. He's a Jewish author, not a believer in God, who wrote in the 70s, 60s, 70s, and 80s. I think his Pulitzer Prize winning book was called The Denial of Death. And basically it's a book about how do you live in a world where we don't believe in God anymore. And one of the most astounding parts of the book, which I think is remarkable, is where he decides that the reason why there is so much emphasis on love and romance, so much emphasis on sex, love, and romance, is because we're trying to find our identity now in a way that wasn't true before. It used to be I tried to marry somebody to have a family and to carry on the name, etc. But now, he says, we're really looking for somebody to make us feel good about ourselves. We're really basing our identity on a person that looks as good as that. Likes me? Wow. And so now we're not talking about love here. We're talking about how do I develop a self? Again, it's selfish. It's self-absorbed. Becker says something very interesting. Let me read you what he says. Now, he's referring to us, modern, secular people. You know, he's just assuming that thoughtful people don't believe in God anymore. He says, we need to feel heroic to know that our life matters in the grand scheme of things. We still want to merge ourselves with some higher self-absorbing meaning, in trust and in gratitude. But if we no longer had God, how do you do this? One of the first ways that occurred to the modern, contemporary, secular person was the romantic solution. The self-glorification that we needed in our innermost being, which he says used to come from the idea that God loves me. The self-glorification that we need in our innermost being, we now look for in the love partner, from the love partner. What is it, oh, this is great. What is it that we want when we elevate the love partner to this position? We want to be rid of our faults, of our feeling of nothingness. We want to be justified, to know our existence has not been in vain. We actually want redemption, nothing less, if we're willing to admit it. And then he goes on and says, no human relationship can bear the burden of Godhead. However, much we may idealize and idolize the love partner, he inevitably reflects earthly decay and imperfection. And if your partner is your all, quote-unquote, then any shortcoming in him becomes a major threat to you. After all, what is it that we want when we elevate the love partner to this position? Redemption, nothing less. Needless to say, he goes on, human partners cannot give this. Now, all I'm trying to say, do you see that what happens is when you have to develop your own identity, then work, love, everything you do, you put so much weight on it. And in traditional, in history, when, I mean, it still hurts if you're not doing well in your career. It still hurts. It always has hurt if you break up with somebody you love. Of course it does. But Becker is right, and I think Kierkegaard talks about this as well. He could see it happening even many years ago. So, is that you get away from God, then you've got to put, in a sense, something in its place. I'm really showing my age here. But there was a group when I was young called the Righteous Brothers. Have any of you ever heard of them? Have you heard of them? And one of the, you know, one of their big songs was, You're my soul and my heart's inspiration. You know, you're all I've got to get me by. You're my soul and my heart's inspiration. Without you, baby, what good am I? Okay. And then at one point, that's the chorus. But at one point, there's a kind of, you know, somebody's in the back of the room going, ooh. And there's a little monologue. Do you remember this? The guy with the high voice. There was a guy with the high voice and a guy with the low voice. I don't remember their names. But the guy with the high voice during the woo, woo, woo in the middle has a moment to do a little soliloquy. And here's what the soliloquy is. Baby, I can't make it without you. And I'm telling you, honey, you're my reason for laughing, for crying and living and dying. You're my reason for, you're saying, why are you telling me this? When you say, I can't live without you, you're my reason for laughing, for crying, for living, for dying. I think Becker was on to something, what he was saying. Look, we've always had that. There's a tendency when you're in love to talk like that. But he says, now is there something different going on? Because when you say, you're my reason for laughing, crying, living, dying. Without you, baby, what good am I? That's worship. I mean, you might not call it worship, but... at my writing, and I can't be sane if I don't believe I'm actually writing something pretty good. I need to feel good about these things. You know, I kind of go nuts. What is that? That's an identity breaking up. And the reason is because anything that you make as the basis of your identity essentially is a god. It's essentially something you worship. You can't live without it. If something threatens it, you go nuts in fear. If something blocks it, somebody blocks it, then you get incredibly angry and bitter toward them. You're just being driven by this. Again, I think traditional cultures are smothering, but there's astounding amount of pressure in Western cultures. So ultimately, let me just say, before saying something about what Christianity does here, is you really shouldn't ask the question, who am I in Western culture? You should ask the question, whose am I? Because you are not your own. If you're living for, let's just say you're trying to, let's just say you're trying to control your life and create a safe life by making a lot of money and socking it all away, not spending any money on yourself, but just lots and lots, you're being controlled by money. If you're living for approval, you're being controlled by the people you want to control. You do not, you're not your own. You're basically the slave of whatever you think has to be your identity. Now, what does Christianity do? What you need is, we think, as Christians, you need to have an identity that gives you deep certainty of your worth and value that's not grounded in your performance. It doesn't go up and down depending on how you've done. It gives you astounding ballast. If you're successful in love or work, it keeps you from having your head inflated. If you're really disappointed, it keeps you from falling apart because your identity is not based on your performance. What do I mean by that? Well, you might think at this point that what I'm saying is don't be traditional cultures, living for your family. Don't be Western culture, secular culture, living for yourself. Live for God. But the problem with me saying that is that people who just live for God generically, who say, okay, I'm going to be good. I'm going to obey the Ten Commandments. I'm going to give to the poor. I'm going to pray every day. That's still performance. You're going to be just as crushed by that, if not more. You're just as crushed because what you're doing now is you're not trying to please your family. You're not trying to please your own, you know, you're trying, you're not, you're not trying to create your identity and essentially please your own standards or whatever you've decided is your identity factor. You're trying to please God and you'll, who's, who can obey the Ten Commandments? Who can follow the golden rule? Nobody can. And you'll be, every bit is crushed. Every bit is insecure if you just look to God. That doesn't work. What does work is Christians believe the gospel and here, I've got to be, I got to have one more point to make so I can't give you much time on this at all, but we'll keep getting back to it, especially if you stick with this series, is our understanding, Christians' understanding is that Jesus Christ is the Son of God who left his glory behind, took on a human nature, comes into the world and lives a perfect life. He's the only one who ever loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind. He's the only one who ever loved his neighbor as himself. He's the only one who perfectly satisfied all that anyone would ever think a moral being should, should do. He, he lived the perfect human life, which means he earns what? He earns the love of God. He earns the reward. He earns the blessing. But at the end of his life, he went to the cross. Why? There, as our substitute, we believe, he took the penalty we deserve for all the ways in which we fail to love other people, all the ways we screw everything up, all the ways in which we live for ourselves, all the things we've ever done that are wrong. So, you see, he earns the blessing. Then he goes to the cross and takes the punishment we deserve, which means that we believe in him. We get his blessing. We are accepted in him. We're loved by him. We become an adopted child. And I don't know if you know anything, but you probably do. You know, I have, I'm a father. I have children. I have three sons. Weirdly enough, if, if I was a boss and I had three employees, the one, the one of the three employees is really acting up, disobeying me, doing bad things, what am I going to do? You're fired. But if I'm a father and I have three sons and one of them is acting up, disobeying me, giving me, what happens? I actually, I actually get more involved in that kid. In other words, it brings out more of my fatherly love and compassion and commitment to him, the one that's messing up, because my love for him is unconditional. And that's the condition, that's what it means to, when you believe in Jesus Christ, God becomes your father. course you feel, listen, of course you're still other things. Of course if you fail, you feel bad. Of course if you fall in love and you break up, you feel horrible. I'm not saying that it makes you immune to any of those things. But ultimately, what it does is it takes away what every other identity formation problem is that every other identity formation has this problem. If you're living up to your performance, if you feel like you're performing, you feel superior. You get a big head. You feel self-righteous. You might become a Pharisee. You're part of what's wrong with this world. You become a bigot. You look down at other people. On the other hand, if you're not performing, you hate yourself. You're down on yourself. And that's a big problem as well. But see, what the gospel does, the gospel of Jesus Christ is, I'm a sinner saved by grace. In myself, I don't deserve his love. But in Jesus Christ, I get it perfectly regardless of my performance because he's my father. And you know what that means? What it means is it humbles me no matter how good I am in this life. I'm no better than anybody else. Because I'm just a sinner. I'm living by grace. On the other hand, it affirms me because no matter how much I fail, I know that God is not going to abandon me. He's not going to abandon me. So it lifts me up if I'm down. It brings me down if I'm up. It makes me stop thinking about how I'm doing all the time. Kierkegaard was incredibly right about this. Kierkegaard believed that, he wrote a book called The Sickness Unto Death. You may have heard about it. He believes that if you don't ground your identity in the grace of God through Jesus Christ, you always are experiencing a kind of nausea. You're always feeling kind of sick because you're never quite living up. You're always feeling anxious. You're really not settled. You don't know who you are. And you certainly don't know whether you can really say, I'm a valuable person. Or if you are saying you're a valuable person, you're saying it hysterically because you're trying to get yourself to believe it. And that's the sickness unto death. And Kierkegaard said, the ability to ground your identity in God's grace through Jesus Christ, that frees you. It utterly frees you. Isak Dennison in the great book Out of Africa, she writes this. Pride is faith in the idea that God had when he made you. People who are not aware of any idea of God in the making of them. It says many people are not aware of any idea of God in the making of them. And sometimes they make you doubt that there has ever been much of an idea or else it has been lost and who shall find it. They have got to accept as success what others warrant to be so and take their happiness, even their own selves, at the quotation of the day. They tremble with reason before their fate. Now, in the last couple of minutes, I want to at least doff my hat to a second thing. I said Christianity gives you an identity that doesn't crush you because it's not based on performance. Secondly, however, it gives you an identity that doesn't crush other people because it's not based on difference. I can be brief about this, but I'll give you a couple of examples too. Postmodern theorists point out that all identity formation, I'm going to come back and say they're wrong because I believe Christianity gives you an identity formation that's different. But they say all identity formation, traditional, Western, whatever, is comparative. Now, the reason it's comparative is since you are getting your identity from how well you're doing in your performance. This is even really true in traditional where you're how well am I doing as a son to my father. Since everybody is getting their identity through performance, therefore, I'm comparing myself to other people as a way of bolstering and assuring myself that I'm doing okay. And therefore, I have only relative self-esteem relative to other people through comparison. So when I'm around a lot of people who are worse than me, I feel better about myself. When I'm around other people who are better than me in my identity factor, then I feel worse about myself. You know, the joke, I actually did talk to a girl years ago who showed up here from some place in the south because she thought she was the best violinist. And she was the very best violinist in her town. And she got out of the train in Penn Station and she walked by a guy who was begging, you know, playing the violin. And he was twice as good as she was. And he was begging. And it just freaked her out. By the way, there are tons of counselors I've talked to who say the problem at elite schools very often is kids who always got straight A's from the time they were in preschool. But then finally go off to an elite school, find that they, you know, you can't give everybody A's, even at the elite schools. And so kids that got A's all their life start to get a B or two and they freak out. Why? They're losing themselves. There's an identity. There's an identity. There's an identity. There's an identity. There's an identity. we do comparison, and we relatively feel good about ourselves because of how other people are doing. Now, postmodern theorists are right in saying, here's the problem with that. In order to get a self, we have to look down at somebody. If your identity is based on your performance, therefore your self-esteem is relative, it comes through comparison, you have to despise somebody. Now, because in traditional societies, identity tends to be collective, like you are your family or you are your tribe, racism is pretty bad in traditional societies. We, in the West, are really down on that. I mean, in our schools, we're just pounding people. You can't be racist. You can't be racist. You can't be racist. And even though a lot of us still have got racist attitudes, at least we're very, you know, we're always, we feel bad about them, even if we have them. Okay, so, but even in the West, you can see it. If you are proud of being an open-minded liberal person, you have to despise conservatives. You don't just, you don't, you don't just disagree with them. You don't even just dislike them. You really despise them. If you have become a self-made wealthy person because of incredibly hard work, when you see other people who just, you know, they feel entitled and they're just mailing it in, they're not working, they're not, you know, you just despise them. You despise them. Why? Because we get a self by looking down at people. The postmodern theorists say that all identity is to some degree based on difference with a capital D. That is, we're looking at people who are the other capital O and we're saying, I'm not like them. You know the old, you do know the historic prayer of a Jewish male. You know that prayer, getting up every morning and saying, oh Lord, I thank you so much that you didn't make me a woman, a slave or a Gentile. Remember that? And what is that? That's identity formation through comparison, through difference. In other words, and so postmodern theorists say we're all basically bigots or you wouldn't have any kind of identity. My question is this, isn't it possible that though Christians have a tendency to not draw on the resources that they have in this unique identity that's not based on performance, if it's not based on performance, then it's not relative to other people. If it's not based on performance, if you really think it out, it means like how could you ever feel superior to anybody since you're just a sinner saved by grace? You're not saved because you're you're work harder or you're more moral. So you shouldn't look at anybody and feel like I have to believe that I work harder, more moral because I'm a Christian. That's not what Christianity is about. There is a kind of religion, and I think Christians fall into it, a religious identity that says God loves me because I'm a good person, and then you are dangerous. And right after 9-11, I remember reading out loud to my wife, you know, in the newspaper, New York Times, like three days later, somebody said, this is where religious fundamentalism gets us. This is where religious fundamentalism gets us. You know, people who really believe they have the truth, and they believe in these fundamental truths, it may, and you know, that's partly right. I'm trying to say, if you're, you strongly believe in certain religious doctrines, and you believe you have the truth, but you think that your identity is based on being a good person, therefore you're earning God's salvation, then you are very dangerous. Kathy, my wife, listened to me and said, oh, she says, I don't think that's true. I said, what do you mean? She said, well, it depends on what your fundamental is. Have you ever seen an Amish terrorist? Amish, the Amish are fundamentalists by anybody's definition, in the sense that they think they have the truth, and they're very, very conservative. But you see, here's the point. The fundamental of Christianity is, at least we should understand, a man dying for his enemies, a man forgiving his enemies as they're killing him, a man who does not, you know, fight back, a man who's actually dying in order to save and to forgive the people who are hurting him. And if that is the fundamental, and it is the fundamental of Christianity, the only way that you can become an oppressor is if you are out of touch with it. But let me just say one last thing. Richard Baucom teaches history and Bible, he's retired now, St. Andrew's University. He points out something extremely interesting, and I think you might want to hear this. He says, every other religion except Christianity is basically local. So, for example, one of the things he points out is that 88, I mean, I'm going to make sure I get this right because somebody's going to... to get all over me. Okay, 88% of all Muslims live in the Middle East, Africa, or South Asia. Only 4% live in Europe, North America, or China, or the Far East. Okay, 98% of all Hindus live in India, South Asia. 88% of all Buddhists live in East Asia. Okay, so 88%, 96% of Muslims, 98% of Hindus, 88% of Buddhists, they all live in one or two continents. However, 25% of Christians live in Europe, 25% live in South America, Central and South America. 22% live in Africa. 15% and growing rapidly live in Asia. It'll be 20% pretty soon. 12% to 15% live in North America. Christianity is the only religion that is massively represented on every continent and in every culture, virtually. And according to Richard Bauckham, here's what he says, almost certainly Christianity exhibits more cultural diversity than any other religion. And that must say something about it. Christianity has been far more open to cultural diversity than any other religions. Every other religion has stayed, roughly speaking, near where it started. It's grown out from where it started, but by and large, it has stayed there. Christianity is the only one that's basically kind of universal. And the reason is because it is so culturally diverse. Why? Because the identity at the heart of Christianity is not based on performance, not based on complying with all the rules, not based on everything being just exactly this way, all the ways in which you bolster an identity. I've got to stop. Please consider the idea that if you get a Christian identity, it would make you more open to difference, different people. It would make you more open to welcome people who are different. It makes you more culturally diverse because it's not based on difference. And it also doesn't crush you because it's not based on performance. So that's enough. That was a little too much. So Susan will come up here and I think, right? And start to do the questions. So you need to be doing this. Great. And now is the time that we get to dialogue with you all by getting your questions. And as you'll see, there's a cell phone number behind me that you can text in your questions. But if your cell phone service doesn't work, the next best thing is then to email in your questions. And we look forward to hearing what you all have to say. And we'll get to as many questions as we can in the next 25 to 30 minutes. And if you wouldn't mind, please try to keep them on topic as much as possible. And if possible, you know, we've tried to ask some very long questions in the past. And sometimes it's been a little confusing. So we're going to try to see if we can get a few questions that are more concise. So we can try to get to as many as we can. Thanks so much. And we're also going to try something new this time. I'm getting some feedback. I'm going to try. We're going to see how it works out. I'm going to try to actually put part of the question that I'm asking Tim on the screen behind me. So you can also review it while he's answering the question. All right. Yeah. Okay. All right. Well, the first question is, Tim, it is interesting to hear you say that Christians have a reason not to oppress those that are different from them. That sounds nice. But how do you explain Christians who blatantly judge, slander, and disrespect people who have different beliefs and lifestyles from them? I tried. I tried to explain that. I said, here's the core of Christianity. If you do that, isn't it true that you're actually alienated from, you're ignoring the core of Christianity? So I've actually said that people do that because though they're Christians, they say they're Christians, uh, they very often are culturally Christians. Uh, it can be a very, very much be part of one of the problems is I would say there are many, many people who actually are, are taking Christianity into what I would call the traditional identity formation process. Are you following me on this? The traditional identity formation process is I'm part of a community and it's better than other communities. I'm part of a family and we're proud of being our family. And there's a tendency to look down on other groups. Um, uh, so traditional identity formation is I'm part of a great group and I'm looking down on other groups. I've even seen some people, but not many try to pull Christianity up into, um, the, um, the Western identity formation approach. that I'm really good at. You know, I'm doing all these ministries and I'm doing all this stuff. And actually, I hate to say it, but most of the people who bring Christianity into a Western identity formation instead of actually letting the gospel shape their identity are people in, very often, that go into professional ministry. You see, in other words, it's a career. And so, you know, if I get in here and I get people and I write books and I get a lot of people come to my church and things like that, then what happens is now I feel good about myself. So I guess I would say, and I know this is a little subtle, but you asked me the questions, I have to say, I think you can probably be a real Christian. Honestly, you can be a real Christian. But you can basically be co-opted by one of the identity formation, and they're very powerful engines out there, and then become pretty much as oppressive or as nervous. See, a person who say, I'm a Christian, I believe the gospel, but you're sucked into the Western approach. You're just as nervous and anxious, just as concerned about appearances. You know, just as stressed out, just having just as much performance anxiety as, you know, anybody else. And if you get sucked into the traditional, you can be really just as bigoted and just as oppressive. So I would say the gospel, I believe the gospel keeps you from that, but an awful lot of people don't resist. And they can't resist the siren song of their particular culture. Thank you. Next question is, isn't it equally true that the spread of Christianity is due in part to a long history of cultural imperialism, colonialism, and violence as much as tolerance and universal acceptance? I don't, not as much, no. In fact, the places where there's been a lot of violence has, Christianity doesn't do so well. I mean, I, I, I, it's a little bit controversial because everybody's got their own identity of history. Places where a particular church, if a particular church went in and was oppressive and violent, very often, um, Christianity did not really spread very well there. So I wouldn't know, and I think that question, uh, it's not unusual for people to be pretty remarkably uninformed about the, the modern spread of Christianity. You know, Africa went from, um, about 2% Christian to something like 50 or 60% Christian in 100 years from 1900 to 2000, something like that. Korea went from 0% Christian to about 40% Christian, also from 1900 to, to, to, to, to 2000. Um, China went from 0% to about 10% Christian in the last, say, 80 years. And some of you know that it was when the Western missionaries were kicked out of China. This isn't very good for some of us. When the Western white missionaries were kicked out of China by, uh, Mao Zedong, that's when Chinese Christianity really took off. It has grown enormously, partly because it was more indigenous. It was more, it was less of a Western dominant. So, so I'd say where there's been oppression, no, Christianity hasn't spread like crazy. But I mean, we're talking about astounding growth rates in most of the world. Astounding. Uh, outside of North America and Europe, Christianity is growing seven to 10 times the rate of the population at large, but it's, it's, it's, and it is indigenous. It isn't, it is not, it's being brought forward by national people now. Thank you. Next question is, how do I know that my, how do I know that my attraction to Christianity isn't just because I was born in a country that is basically a Christian nation? Maybe I'd feel differently if I was born in a country where Islam was prominent. Right. And, but see the, the problem of course is that, uh, maybe, well, I mean, let me try to turn the table on you. You would, if you were actually born in Madagascar, you'd be a Muslim without thinking about it. Um, it's true, almost certainly, uh, if you were born in, uh, maybe not, but if you were born in, um, uh, homogeneous places, you would be, uh, uh, you know, well, okay, let me start over. I can't, I can't get them all right. What you're talking about, what you're talking about, I actually, I think mentioned the first week, I could be sure in one of the questions, you're talking about the social construction of, uh, not the sociology of knowledge that to a great degree, we're influenced by the people around us and we find most plausible the beliefs of the people we most admire. There's just been study after. we think. That the people around us that we most want to be accepted by, for some reason, their beliefs seem very plausible to us. That's called the sociology of knowledge, social construction of reality, etc. The problem is when you ask that question, you wouldn't ask that question, is all belief socially constructed? Is all belief just really the product of our... Well, if it's true, then that belief, that all belief is socially constructed, would have been socially constructed. You see, you can't say everybody else's belief about spiritual reality is constructed and culturally bound, but not this question. Of course this question. Where did you get that question from? Probably from some school you went to and you were influenced by certain professors. So Peter Berger wrote a book some years ago called, it's a rumor of angels. He's a sociologist of religion, retired now, very prominent. And he's got a chapter in there called Relativizing the Relativizers. And he basically says what I just said. He says, we do know that our culture and our society strongly influences what we believe. But if you say, therefore, nobody can know the truth because everybody's influenced by culture, that belief would have been influenced by some culture and therefore not true. So in the end, to say all belief is culturally constructed is self-refuting. So in the end, he says, there's only one thing we can do. Be chastened. Realize we actually have a lot of trouble being rational. We are very affected, not by reason, not by our minds. We're affected by the people around us. But now that we're chastened, now we realize we're really not very objective. Nevertheless, we still in the end have to look at the competing claims and decide which ones we think are true. And not be, because you can't just say nobody knows the truth. Everything's culturally conditioned. That statement would be culturally conditioned and therefore not true. And so you've got to say, let's just go out there and figure out the best options. Next question. What if I am satisfied with my identity? I don't think I'm overly ambitious, but I work hard without it stressing me out. I like what I do. Why do I need a Christian identity? Well, you might remember that the question at the title of our series is why Christianity is emotionally, culturally, and rationally. Or is it intellectually? Intellectually. It makes sense. I should read my own headlines, shouldn't I? I have tonight, to a great degree, I've given you a really, really strong emotional reason why Christianity makes sense. But you're right. You may have a relatively functional alternate identity. If you had a very loving set of parents. In other words, I actually think people without Christianity can be fairly, pretty well, doggone well adjusted. I mean, if every, you know, you may not be that stressed and you're saying I'm fine. So I, in your case, I would hope that you might become a Christian because of the other aspects to see how it works itself out in life or to see the arguments for the resurrection of Jesus, all the other stuff. The emotional isn't enough of a reason. In fact, a couple of you the first week asked questions and say, you've just made Christianity sound very attractive, but how do I know it's true? Well, that wasn't that, you know, I'll get there. We'll talk more about it as, as the weeks go on. That's all I could say. The other, the other thing I quite, sorry, the other thing I could say about that is a little bit like meaning in life, Christianity gives you adorable identity. I, I would go so far as to challenge you to think about this. Maybe your identity is fine because you're not being too successful or, or, or having too much trouble. In other words, you, oh, by the way, in other words, especially if you're younger, excuse me, I have no idea who wrote that, but if you're younger, you can also talk yourself into saying eventually, I'm not really fulfilled now, but because I'm going in a good direction, I think I will be. And it is, as you get older, you get to be my age, you get to a place where you're, if accomplished as much as you're going to accomplish, and sometimes the identity runs out of gas because you realize this is as far as I'm ever going to get. And I basically been giving myself a certain ballast because I kept saying to myself, well, it's not so great right now, but it's going to get better. There's all sorts of ways in which identity can work for a good while. Christianity gives you an industrial strength identity. It's not based on circumstances. It is utterly, utterly bomb-proof. So. Next question. If both Western and traditional identities crush us, why not just do what Buddhism promotes, namely to get rid of all sense of self? Well, that's a great question. It's a big question. And, um, uh, Buddhism recognizes. of what they would call desire and the craving to create a self by bringing in desire. Now, I better say something about this now. I don't want to take too much time because it's not... You know how I keep saying this will come up later in the series? This is not coming up later in the series. I wish I could. I'd love to... It would be really helpful, but we only have seven weeks, and I just can't get to everything. But Buddhism and Christianity agree that you can't get an identity by trying to fill yourself with fulfilled desires, to say, I'm going to have love, and I'm going to have money, and I'm going to have this, and I'm going to... Buddhism says the craving that never satisfies you is what's hurting us. It's the cause of suffering. We crave and we can't get, or we crave and we get it for a while, and then we lose it, and we build all of our hopes. So in some ways, Buddhism would agree with an awful lot of what I said here, and it was... I've always appreciated that about Buddhism. But what Buddhists... You're right. Where Buddhism and Christianity go in very different directions is Buddhism says extinguish desire. Destroy it. Also, the Greek Stoics did the same thing. They say what you do is you find ways of not desiring the things anymore. You extinguish it, and there are ways to do that. Christianity says you reorder your desires. This St. Augustine. St. Augustine says you have to love God supremely. The real problem is if you... There's nothing wrong with loving your spouse, but if you love your spouse more than anything else in the world, that's like worshiping your spouse, and you will, as Ernest Becker said, destroy it. You'll destroy your spouse. No human being can be your savior. No human being can be perfect enough for that. So what Buddhism would say is extinguish this passion for your spouse. It would say that. Buddhism believes in love and compassion, but not passion. Christianity would say you just have to love God more than your spouse, and then you'll love your spouse properly. So St. Augustine would say you reorder your loves, and you love God more than anything else, and that reorders them and keeps them from destroying you. Buddhism says you just... And Stoicism says you extinguish them. I consider Christianity way more attractive. Couldn't not being a good enough Christian be as crushing as any other type of failed identity? No. Great. All right. Well, the answer is actually yes and no. See, now I have to go on longer with that. The reason it's yes and no, I said that Christianity, do I want to... If I know my... If you have a good relationship between a father and a son, the son knows the father loves him, and the son knows that actually when he screws up the father of anything, kind of almost loves him more. In some ways less, in some ways more. You know how that works? It's kind of a combination. If the son screws up and really hurts the father's heart in some ways, you know, violates some of the rules or whatever, on one hand, the son is not afraid the father's ever going to give up on him. And therefore, and he knows the father is just never really going to stop loving him and stop helping him and so on. But he also knows in other ways he grieves his father. And he displeases his father and creates great grief. So when I don't live up as a Christian, there is pain. And that pain is the pain of knowing that the relationship isn't right. There is a sense in which when I, you might say, before I became a Christian, I believed in the Ten Commandments. And I believed you shouldn't, like, say, lie. And then after I became a Christian, I still believed in the Ten Commandments. I still believed you shouldn't lie. But I did come to find that after I became a Christian and I lied, in some ways I felt more the grief of God than before. In other words, I felt a certain pain that I'd hurt my father. But it is not the same crushing feeling like I don't have an identity. Like, you know, I'm not living up. I'm not any good. You know, I'm a failure. Nobody loves me. I'm not lovable. So I would say yes and no. Of course, there definitely is a conviction and a painfulness. But it is not the same thing as just not believing I'm lovable at all. Just to know my father still loves me, even though I've displeased him, is not the same as, basically, as, you know, losing any ability to really feel good about myself at all. Okay. Okay. identity will prevent pitfalls that come from depending on other identities. But isn't it healthier to have a variety of identities, including a religious identity? Then, this is one where I'm going to actually agree with you. But it's partly because I didn't have the time to maybe flesh this out. I think all identities have layers. So, for example, here's what I actually think, is I have seen over and over again, let's just say you've got a career identity. Let's just say, you know, you're very, you're rightly proud of being, you know, whatever you do. You're rightly proud of being good at what you do. And let's just say you've also got a corporate identity. You're rightly proud of being, you know, from the Philippines or from, you know, or Irish or whatever. Okay. So, you've got the collective identity, which has got ties to the traditional identity formation. You've got the career, which has got ties. You live in the West. I don't want you to think that those aren't part of it at all. What happens, though, is if you think of it as layers, and here's the more superficial layers, and here's the more powerful and deep foundation layers of who you are. What happens is Christianity goes to the bottom. Your relationship with Jesus Christ goes to the bottom. It becomes the foundation for everything else. And in that sense, it relativizes the others. So that I actually saw this happen. Some years ago, I saw two, I had two friends of mine who were actors. They lived in New York, and they were trying to make it in acting. And whenever they would audition, I think it's awful to be in the arts where every week you go out and audition and like, or dancing or whatever, 19 times out of 20, they say you're not good enough for the job. I mean, how can you live like that anyway? It's hard. And their identities were taking a beating, and one of them became a Christian, a strong Christian. And they both went for this kind of make or break role. It was surprising that they were even being auditioned for it. If they made it, they would have made their career. It wasn't the same role. They were doing it, roughly speaking. It was very interesting that neither of them got the role. And I saw the guy that had become a Christian. It was very disappointed, but it didn't devastate him. And the guy who had not become a Christian was just literally devastated. And what happened was that by putting the relationship with Christ, I'm a son of the Father through Jesus Christ, at the bottom, it relativized the others. They just were not as crucial. They weren't as absolutely necessary. And because it had slipped to the bottom, he didn't experience the earthquake. This guy over here had an identity earthquake. I'm nothing. I've spent seven years of my life here trying to make it as an actor, and I got to go back to wherever with nothing, absolutely nothing, no money. I have no other skills. I'm a wreck. And this guy was actually in the very same spot. He also had no money. He also had spent seven years or something like that. He'd also had like, but he was a Christian. And as a result, he had a kind of, ah, all right, okay, but I do know who I am. And this guy really didn't. I mean, so you might say Christianity becomes a kind of earthquake-safe thing that keeps from those self-quakes. It doesn't mean the other things aren't still part of you. You know, you're still, if you're Chinese and you become a Christian, you don't become white or African. You become a Chinese Christian. You know, your Christianity is Chinese. It's not something else. But what happens is, frankly, the Christianity goes down there. And so it kind of, it tends to demote racism. It tends to demote, you know, workaholism. It tends to demote all those things because it goes slower. So you can think of identity as a set of layers and who you are in Christ going to the bottom and relativizing and even making the others more secure. Keep going. Yes. While it's true that identity is shaped by personal and cultural factors, much of who we are seems to be biologically influenced. Since this is beyond our control, how can we be held responsible for these aspects of our culture? I'm sorry, of our nature. Yeah. Well, you know, I wasn't there, but we had a, some years ago, we had a, you know, we had a family member who was in drug, it was in drug rehab at a very good rehab facility in the South. And my wife went down, I couldn't be there, but it was part of the family therapy. And I remember Kathy said, at one point, there were some things, sometimes people would say, thank you. can't help it. But one of the things that she heard down there was alcoholism is very, very possibly got a genetic or various sorts of addiction. There might be a really strong genetic component to it. In other words, certain people would be very prone to it. So do we say, well, that's it, you're dead? No. In other words, who you are is not just your biology, your impulses and your capacities and your feelings. It's also how you interpret those. So for example, there are some of my inborn capacities that I consider a talent. I say, that's good, I'm going to do that. There's others, like if I'm prone to, I'm not, but anyway, if you're prone to alcoholism or something like that, you say, I'm not going to give in to that. There's things I can do about it. It's not going to be easy at all. I'm going to need this, this, this, this, this, this, but I'm not. So whenever somebody says, this is my feeling, it's clearly part of my genetic makeup. So shouldn't I be true to that? The answer is nobody's true to your whole genetic makeup because almost everything is part of your genetic makeup. I mean, some people are tend to, some people tend to be pretty angry and you got an anger problem. And is that, that's not all environment. Some of that's genetic. And so, so the point is your identity is a combination of not just your feelings, but how you interpret those feelings. Uh, and that, and you interpret feelings on the basis of beliefs. So your beliefs in the end still are the ground of your identity, not your genetic makeup. Great. Finally, last question is, you claim that identity, identity gives us a sense of worth and value. However, for inanimate objects such as the Mona Lisa, value is ascribed to it rather than having it perceive itself its own identity. So why is it even important to have a sense of identity? Uh, let's see if I'm not sure I completely understand the question, but don't repeat it because I think I, I mean, I know the question, but I'm trying to figure out what's behind it. Um, there is a certain sense in which as a Christian, I believe all human beings are made in the image of God. And so from the outside, I don't need, I know that every human being is of infinite value. Human beings should not be sold. They certainly shouldn't be killed because of a cost benefit analysis. They, they are not things. Um, so from the outside, I can absolutely agree that value is assigned, but from the inside, the fact is, um, how do I say it? Uh, it was in here, uh, Christian Smith, is it on the first page? Christian Smith, a sociologist wrote a book called, what is a person? It's a sociological book. Yeah. Okay. Christian Smith says every normal human animal, every normal human, every normal human animal rejects being a something and drives mightily to be a someone. So what he says is if you've got, if you have self-consciousness, you, you feel that you can't just have value ascribed to you, that you need to know it yourself. You can't, if somebody else says you're valuable, I need to know it myself. Um, and of course, um, uh, we, uh, human beings are self-conscious and therefore we need an internal identity as well as just having value ascribed to us. So inanimate objects, of course, that's all, but they don't have self-consciousness so they don't really need an identity the way we're talking. All right. Well, that's all the time we have for Q and A this evening. Uh, Tim, before we wrap up, do you mind giving us an insight into what's happening next week? Well, next week is a harder one. I, you know, uh, next week I'd like to talk about hope for the future, but I also want to talk about love. I don't have a good title. In fact, I was thinking about it as I was walking up here through the slush. I said, okay, every week Susan says, what's the title for next week? Um, it would, uh, love, wonder, and hope for the future. Okay. Love, wonder, and hope for the future. By the way, the final three, uh, weeks are going to be a series. I'm basically, um, collecting a lot of the questions you're asking me on the fifth floor that I haven't gotten to and we're keeping a list and Susan and some others and I are kind of making up a list and the last three weeks are going to be, you're going to get a bunch of them. You're going to get like five minutes on this, 10 minutes on this. You're going to get a whole bunch of them. So the first four weeks are kind of major presentations. And after that, we're going to be basically answering questions for three weeks and taking these questions and talking upstairs. And I really appreciate your questions. They are really quite wise. And, and going to be talking about hope for the future.
