TITLE: Being a Gospel Movement: The Next Steps
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Theological Foundations for a Generative Church (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/being-a-gospel-movement-the-next-steps/

============================================================

The, our schedule tonight is not actually what's printed there. I'm going to take about 20 minutes to give us a look ahead and 10, 20 minutes for questions and answers. And so I'm going to stick pretty close to the rather short, at least for me, relatively short handout you have in here. If you were at the congregational meeting, some of you heard us talk a bit about what's going to happen the next couple of years here. The Renew campaign was all about a plan by which Redeemer turns itself over the next few years into first three generative churches that regularly reproduce themselves so that over the next few years, we have a network of churches in Manhattan, each with its own leadership, all for the next number of years, for at least, we think, the next decade. Still, in a collegiate model of a church, you know what a university is? A university is actually a network of colleges. They're all under one university, and yet each college has its own, its own structure. A collegiate model of a church is a church where I'm still the senior pastor. There's actually one central elder, board of elders. It's one church, and yet the congregations are relatively self-contained. They have their own leadership, and we've talked about this at length during the Renew campaign. But now it's time to talk about how does this actually happen? When does it actually happen? And that's what we want to talk to you about tonight, because though we don't have... Because we're a big church, and we will have, excuse me, information about this on the website, we'll probably have printed material. Still, it's through the informal but crucial buzz, you know, conversation that comes from our leaders out into the congregation that the best communication happens. When our leaders know what's going on, and they talk to people about it, or when there's a question, somebody asks one of you, and you say, oh, no, no, it's not like that, it's like this. Because that's really by far the most effective communication. It's organic. It's the leaders know what's going on, and they tell other people about it, and they guide other people in their thinking about it, and that's why we're doing this tonight. This is not what we're going to do, but that's why we're doing it tonight. So take a look at the... For about 17 minutes now, I'm going to try to go through what's on page 5. Let me tell you what... Let me think here. Probably the best... I just told you what I think you all know. So let's turn over and talk about exactly how this is going to roll out, as they say. Page 6. Next steps. All right? Let me almost read it. At least not totally, but I'm going to stick pretty close to it. Over the next couple of years, here's what's happening. For some of you, you've heard this, and I'm giving you more details. For some of you, you haven't heard it at all, and I'm glad you're here. We have been in a process for a number of weeks, months now, of doing what we're calling lead pastor selection, because the collegiate model church that we're going to develop starts by dividing Redeemer into three congregations, one west of the park, one east of the park, and one south of the park. And each of those churches will have, first of all, its own lead pastor, with whom I share the preaching, so that if you go to the west side, you get Tim and the west side pastor. You go to the east side, you get Tim and the east side pastor. You go to the south side, you go to Tim and the south side pastor. And we will also have staff and many, many ministries that will be decentralized. So whereas you don't decentralize, let's say, the counseling center, you still have one counseling center, you do decentralize the small groups. So small groups, music, Sunday services are going to be localized in that local congregation and will report to the leaders of that congregation. You know all that? Fine. Now, A, lead pastor selection. During the last seven months, we have been conducting a very thorough process. The elders plus some other non-elders, some staff, and in that process, we've been trying to identify the three lead pastors of these three first Redeemer congregations. We're seeking to have them named by the summer, the middle of the summer. We have not only assessed candidates for this position who are currently on our staff, some of which have applied, but we've also done a diligent search for candidates across the country. And... And... And... searches, this has probably been the most thorough one I've ever looked at. That means not only the most thorough going in searching all around, but also the most thorough in looking at a particular candidate, taking as it were a deep dive into that person's spiritual life, preaching ability, ministry experience, and so forth. Because in the end, when we name these folks, these three pastors, the church needs to know, and you need to know, that there was no stone really left unturned. An enormous amount of prayer has gone into it, an enormous amount of time has gone into it, and you need to keep praying because the final decision hasn't been made yet. It should largely be made in the month of June. At least that's how we're hoping. That's part one, lead pastor selection. Now, should we name those three pastors on time this summer? So by the fall, when we get to the fall, we know who they are. This is the next stage. I call this preparing for the three redeemers, which is probably going to take about a year or maybe 18 months. And here's what has to happen. Number one, the congregation is going to have to receive the pastors. Let's see. And I tell a little story down here. I hope Tom doesn't mind. I probably should have asked him, but I actually always talk about this. When Tom Jennings was relatively new in his job, which is a long time ago, because Tom's been the music director of Redeemer for a very long time, I remember how often people would come to me and they would say, I would like to make a suggestion about the music, or I know a musician who's great. I would love to have him or her, you know, perform here. They would come to me. And I would say, I'm not the music director. I'm the senior pastor. Need to go talk to Tom Jennings. And almost always what they say is, well, I'd still like to talk to you first. I say, why? Because he'll run this by you. And I want to, you know, so I want to be able to talk to you directly. And I want you to, because he'll, he'll ask you. And I say, no, he won't. Because I don't want him to. Because I put him in charge of the music ministry. It doesn't help him or me if he's got to check everything out with me. He's in charge. Okay. So in other words, I've been doing that for years. This is, you, you, you, you get good people and you put them in charge. And it doesn't mean that you don't support them. It doesn't mean you don't consult with them. But if that person feels so disempowered, they've got to run to me because everybody's going to check with me. That doesn't work. Same thing with these three lead pastors. These three guys will be in charge. They will report to me. I'm still the senior pastor. I will supervise them. That comes, I'll show you in a minute. And that's really important. And if I were them, I wouldn't want the job if they didn't know they were going to get just an enormous amount of my time. On the other hand, you go to them. Okay. They are in charge. It's really important. This isn't going to work if people don't receive them as the lead pastors of these congregations. They're being given a level of authority that doesn't exist in the church right now. Okay. And it's a new place. It's a new thing. In fact, it's a level of authority that actually has never existed in the church. And therefore, it's an important position. It still doesn't mean they're senior pastors of the congregations. It's a collegiate model, and I'm still the senior pastor. However, you have to understand how important it is to embrace them, number one. Number two, after that, or as we do that, we will identify leaders and begin to plan. Now, read this with me. This is the bottom of page six. From fall 2010 through at least spring 2011, the lead pastors will be identifying and forming their leadership teams and then planning for the launch. Now, when do we launch into Three Redeemers? Three Redeemers will be launched when these three things happen. Number one, the pastor becomes stationary and the other main preacher with me at the particular location. B, when the decentralized Redeemer staff are assigned and begin reporting up to the pastor at that location. And C, when elders, deacons, and deaconesses, fellowship group leaders, keep going, and some other lay leaders are also assigned to a particular location. As I said, we decentralize some of the ministries. We keep central some of the others. And when those three things happen, we're launched. Somebody says, when will these things, as the disciples said to Jesus, when will these things be? And then, but Jesus was able to say, I don't know, but I'm not allowed to say that. I have to say, I kind of know. And what I put down here is, we don't want to set an exact time frame, especially before you actually have the lead pastors and the leaders meeting to assess what it's going to take. could we now set a date when nobody's really gotten together to sit down and think about? That wouldn't be wise. However, sometime between the middle of 2011 and the end is likely, and here's the reason why. We believe that by the end of 2011, we are likely, God willing, and many other things being willing, to get into the West Side property. And as I put down here, that is going to be a major change point for Redeemer. Whenever this has happened, and it's happened a number of times over the years, when you move into a brand new place or you're doing Sunday worship, it's a huge transition. Everything feels different. And therefore, when you go through a change point like that, it's best to make a lot of other changes. It just feels natural to make changes. And so, somewhere near that or at that time, we will probably be launching into those three redeemers. Right around, it's either before or right around the time we get into that building. Because then you will have brought together the groups that are meeting at Ethical Culture and here, and they'll be in that one spot, West Side Congregation, East Side. And then we also bring together the people who want to do the South, and they begin meeting and they begin working for the launch. We think this is going to be somewhere between a year and a year and a half from this summer. Three. Okay? Yeah, we're getting there. Now, three is an A and a B. During this next year and a half, we have to prepare the pastors and the lay leaders. You've probably heard us talk about what I've been calling a pastor's pipeline. And a pastor's pipeline is both a way of identifying new prospective pastors through more theological training and mentoring in New York City and greatly expanded internships here, as well as a weekly mentoring time with the pastors of the congregations, not only the first three lead pastors, which will start in the fall, but in the future, other pastors of other sites. I'll talk to you about that in a minute. It's my job over the next few years to essentially transfer systematically to another generation of ministers what I know about ministry, not in a piecemeal way, in a systematic way. And so that's crucial. And actually, I have with some other people, but mainly me. I've been working quite a lot in the last number of months to try to design that pipeline. The second thing, which is the next paragraph, just as radical and extensive are our plans for increasing lay leadership participation and lay training. Redeemer has never been a place famous for discipleship in the training of lay people. The Gospel in Life series is an example of what is to come. It's one new piece of content. It's a terrific piece of content. It gets into you in eight weeks in a communal situation, you know, with a small group. You're learning all the basics of what, basically, you're learning all the basics of Redeemer's gospel theological vision for ministry. It's a terrific way to be trained. 150 people are going through it right now, but it's just the beginning. It's almost the tip of the iceberg of the kinds of training pathways, processes, events, and contents, things of content, which is books, curricula, and so forth, that we want to shower our congregation with so that lay people are not passive and not consumers, but are active, are participants, are doing ministry alongside of everybody else. Fourth, I think we can, we've talked so much about facilities. Anyways, I just told you we expect to be in the west side about by the end of 2011, but we're going to fairly soon begin looking for dedicated ministry space, seven-day-a-week ministry space for the week over on the east side as well. And lastly, yeah, look at the very bottom. As soon as we have identified our lead pastors and we've gotten into the process by which we're planning for launch, we will also begin to search for what we call site pastors. Each of the three redeemers are going to spin out groups of people with a lead, again, with a pastor leading into other worshiping communities that right now we're calling sites. So there's three redeemers and each redeemer might start over the next number of years a couple of sites, meaning we go from three to six to nine. We're going to most immediately begin looking for those site pastors. We're going through a process. And here's the thing that I put down on the first page. I didn't read it to you. We also expect to be planting churches that aren't part of the collegiate model. We believe that what we're doing is essentially... come to Manhattan and to plant churches right alongside of us. You say, aren't there already churches like that happening? Yes, we've already got other churches starting in the city, but we're going to see even more. And therefore, there's going to be a lot of other sister churches that are started right here in Manhattan, right alongside of the collegiate churches. It's going to be very, very exciting, but it also means everybody's going to have to get active. It's not just a few people doing the work. In a big church, a few people can do the work, like you, and an awful lot of other people will be really relatively passive. That's not the case when Redeemer, instead of being one church of 5,000, suddenly becomes, you know, let's say six churches of 800 or, you know, something like that. It changes everything. If you're in a church of 800, it's all hands on deck. In some ways, it's really, and the great thing about the collegiate model is even though those churches look smaller, at the same time, you have a lot of centralized services that only an enormous church has. And so, in a sense, it's the best of both worlds. But even next year, as we're planning to launch the Three Redeemers, we're always already going to be looking ahead at the other churches, the other sites, the other new church plants that are going to be happening over the next few years. Let me put it in context and then take some questions. This, I'll just, page eight and nine. Some of you heard me say that we did a study and discovered that the number of Orthodox Protestant Christian believers in Manhattan over the last 20 years has more than tripled. It's an enormous amount of growth. And there's a couple of very powerful trends that indicate that that growth trajectory is going to probably continue. I think you may have heard me say that we have gone from less than 1% of the people in Manhattan, South 125th Street, going to Orthodox Protestant churches 20 years ago to more than 3%, from 9,000 or so to like 35,000 people. That shows that there's some powerful dynamics going on there. You cannot attribute that just to Redeemer. Sorry. You cannot just attribute that to me. There's some powerful dynamics going on if you go from 100 churches to 200 churches, from 9,000 people to 35,000 people in 20 years. Lots of great stuff is happening. And one of the reasons why it's probably going to continue is two reasons. Number one, I put something about the younger generation, by that I mean under 45, that is extremely pro-city. You know, there's an enormous number of people, whenever they do polls, of younger people, younger adults. There is a love for living in cities. There's a desire to live in cities, especially New York City. And Christians who are younger are part of that generation. And therefore, it's exactly the opposite. When I was your age, we didn't want to live in cities. We thought of them as dangerous places, dying places. And if you are, say, 25 to 35 right now, you're part of an utterly different generation. There's a pro-city bias. And people want to live here. And therefore, Christians are going to want to live here. And then secondly, I put down in here that Christianity is mainly growing in this world amongst non-white people. Not to put too fine point on it. It's growing in Latin America, Africa, and Asia a lot faster than it's growing in Europe. And partly as a result of that, there's a tremendous amount of evangelism and church planning going on, not only there, but also amongst non-white people in this country, especially in cities. And as a result, there's always going to be a lot of new young people, especially out of the non-Anglo churches that are moving into Manhattan to take jobs and are going to be part of the churches that are here. There's a lot of trends that show that we're going to keep on growing. But I put down here three things to keep in mind, three barriers in front of us. Number one, I'm still not sure that many of the churches in Manhattan have really proven they know how to evangelize in any kind of major way. There are a lot of new churches, and they are growing, but I still wonder whether they're not growing mainly by collecting Christians who want to live in the city, rather than actually in a systematic and powerful way regularly seeing just dozens and dozens of people coming to Christ out of secularism, you know, or out of other faiths, every month. I'm not sure that's happening. And therefore, we cannot look at evangelism as something that just happens. It doesn't. Number two, there's something about the culture we're in right now that's awfully corrosive. So, there's a tremendous number of people who are Christians, I think, say they're Christians, but who aren't any different than anybody else in the culture. I give you an example, and I'll just read it to you just so I don't, you know, take too long. See where it says it's the last full paragraph on page eight? Let me give you a simple and notorious example. For Christianity, sex has always been... That is, it's a way for two people who are permanently and exclusively joined in the covenant of marriage to renew their commitment to each other. That's what the Bible says. In modern culture, sex is not a means of service, and it's not a means of community building. It's instead a means for self-fulfillment and self-expression. In other words, we do it to show our love and to get personal satisfaction. That's how we have sex. The simple fact is that lots and lots of people who go to Redeemer, profess basic faith in Christian truth, nonetheless have sex outside of marriage. It just happens everywhere. And they often say, oh, I know Redeemer is rather conservative on this subject. I mean, I've talked to so many people like that. But this isn't a matter of liberal or conservative. It has nothing to do with being conservative. It's a fundamental of the biblical understanding of things at many levels. I don't want to go into it. You've probably heard it, I hope. It's one of the few places that all Christians, Eastern Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Protestants, have always agreed. And so whenever somebody says, well, you know, I mean, if you say, I love Redeemer, I'm kind of Redeemer, I'm being helped by the sermons, but you still, you ask a girl out, you ask a guy out, and you go and you sleep together, that shows that you have been thinned out by the culture. You're almost useless as an agent of Christ in the world because you're no different than anybody else in the world. And so the second thing we're going to face is, yeah, the number of churches and the number of people in the churches in New York City are growing, but are we making disciples of them? Are we forming them into people who are holy people? Holy means distinct, set apart, different. And then lastly, I think we're going to have to get ready for the fact that increasingly Orthodox Christian people are going to be perceived by the general culture as being bad people. There's going to be increasing hostility for reasons I mentioned in there. When you put all that together, we've got a lot against us. And therefore, church planting, training of pastors, training of lay people, all this is absolutely crucial. We've got a lot against us. And that's why I put down here the last paragraph before the three prayer issues or the three next steps is, all this means that there are enormous opportunities for a gospel movement in New York City and also bigger challenges than I ever thought I would see from 20 years ago. Things are far better and far worse than I ever imagined they would be, and that's very, very exciting. Things are way better and way worse, and I'm really excited about that. What can you be doing as lay people, leaders, and Redeemer at this moment? Number one, you need to pray up a storm. And I am not just saying that because ministers say pray. This is not a perfunctory ceremonial statement. Oh, yes, please pray. There's a couple of very specific ways for you to pray about our future. The Pray On, Subvert the Status Quo, All-Night Prayer Meeting, June 18th. See page three. Or there's a prayer walk around West 83rd Street on July 23rd. Please participate in those, at least one of them, if you can. Number two, lead those you serve, the people that you know, to get them ready, I should say, get them ready to commit their time, giftedness, and innovation to one of the three congregations. Talk this up. Talk about it. And then thirdly, when the lead pastors are named, welcome them, support them. Okay, that's a kind of overview of what's coming. Let's talk. If you're at the congregational meeting, you know there was a zillion questions, and we didn't have much time, so here's a little bit more time. Actually, we do have mics, don't we? If you're close enough, just speak to me. I can hear you, and I'll repeat it. Otherwise, go to a mic. Questions? Yeah, Carol. What defines south? South? Well, it's south of Central Park. Actually, when I wrote this up, I originally said lower Manhattan, and then everybody said, hey, did we ever define it? So the answer is no. It just, it could be, yeah, it could be right against the, I don't know, somewhere south. Probably it would be better if it got as far away from the other two, but I don't know. This is the problem. I don't want to start telling people before we actually have folks committed to it where they have to be. No, no, no, it's, it's a, it's a, you know, there's a lot of real estate south of Central Park. So there's, it's, these are for people who, you know, want to roam and look around and, you know, so, so we haven't ascertained it. Yes, Glenn. How are we going to encourage people not to move around like they do now, but identify what the congregations. Are we saying, because they have to walk around? You say, because they have to walk alone around like they do now. How are we going to encourage people not to move around like they do now, but identify with the congregations? No, we're going to say it's time to choose sides, right? Choose this day whom you will serve. No, we're not going to do that. We're going to say, we're going to suggest, listen, we believe in general that for you to serve in, you know, to go to the congregation closest to where you live is the best, and we would certainly hope the majority, the vast majority of the people who live there in that place would go to that church, and the vast majority of people who go to that church will live there, but there's, you know, there's too many good reasons why, in fact, I could imagine a lead pastor on the west side talking to some layperson who's got something that the church really needs who lives somewhere else and just says, for the time being, could you come here? I mean, there's too many reasons why people might just do the crisscross, but are we going to really encourage people to identify with the church? Yes. Are we going to ask them to identify geographically? Yes. Are we going to police that? No. In fact, you're going to find that if you're a leader in one of these churches and you're meeting together to talk about it, you're going to know some people that you wish were coming to your church because of what they can do and they live somewhere else, so you're going to have to, you know, work that out. But I think what you're going to find is when you have stationary staff, pastors, and so many of the lay leaders, the congregations are going to take on a, they're going to take on distinct flavors in a way they don't right now. As different as it seems to be, you know, you come over here, the vibe is so different than it is on Hunter College, and a lot of people will come here just because they like the vibe, and it is different, and yet the differences are going to be even more marked because of the, you know, who's the regular preacher. So I think people are going to see it's time to choose and not to keep circulating. So we're going to encourage people to identify strongly. We're going to identify, encourage them to go to their local. Chris? What kind of relationship do you have to be presently? That's a good question. Well, okay. Let me repeat your question. What Chris is asking is what about, we have three or four churches already in Manhattan, they've got pastors, to what degree can they participate in the training, in the fellowship, in the mentoring, in the, you might say the resources of the pastor's pipeline? Whenever we, Chris, whenever we map this out, we've got a couple of different ways of doing that, but I don't, I don't perceive of leaving them out. But there's, frankly, there's going to be A, B, C. In other words, there's going to be, depending on your level of responsibility, there will be more time, more focused time. And when we think of, let's just say one day a week I give to mentoring, it could be that there's a very large group that meets together, you know, a group of 20 that meets together for an hour, and after they leave, I go down to four and spend the whole rest of the morning with them. So, see, there's ways of having layers and being fair about that. But the reason for involving them in some way is that we, I believe that about 20 years from now, essentially what we're creating is a new Manhattan presbytery. If you know what a presbytery is, it's a fellowship of churches that are in the same denomination. And it's very likely that 20 years from now, we could have 25 instead of three or four like we do now. And that could be really quite exciting. So, we've got to make sure that we're kind of on the same page. On the other hand, we'll have to see. It's also voluntary, and we have not talked to them too much at this point. Yeah, great. Yeah, the second one's easier. Can I do that one? The second question is, what is a seven-day-a-week ministry site? Some of you may have noticed. 78th Street, West 82nd, 83rd Street, Westside property, which is weekday ministry space, you know, fellowship hall, you know, classrooms, an auditorium, it's worship space as well as weekdays. Some of you may have noticed, it was pretty expensive. Millions and millions of dollars, okay. And perhaps we will do this again in the future, but the fastest way to get a presence in a neighborhood and to get lay people involved in reaching out to the neighbors is to, in the east and maybe somewhere in the south, find smaller, not worship space, which of course is very expensive to own all the time. I mean, to have a place this big all the time is expensive. In order to have the classrooms and the smaller meeting space for, you know, groups of 100 or something like that, we want to move forward and get those facilities that would be seven-day-a-week ministry space, but then you'd have to rent some other place for worship on Sunday. Okay? We are certainly, it would be wonderful if somebody plopped, you know, an old church with a sanctuary in our laps in the places where we're trying to, you know, locate, but nevertheless, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it, you know. Will there be future capital campaigns because somebody suddenly, you know, gave us a Roman Catholic church, you know, on this spot, but it's going to cost 10 million bucks and it needs 5 million to renovate. That kind of thing could happen, and then we have to suddenly go to the mat. But at this point, we're looking for seven-day-a-week smaller ministry space, not worship space. Okay? The first question I have avoided because it's pretty hard. There's no way we turn people back who live outside of Manhattan, but our neighborhood groups, we talked about this last time, where we get the small groups together and have neighborhood fellowships that think about outreach, we're going to make all the provisions for people who live inside Manhattan. And we're not, when people start to say, we need neighborhood groups in New Jersey or other places, we're probably not going to respond to that. Because, see, at this point, we're, I would say probably because this is still in discussion. And whenever this subject comes up, there's a lot of opinions expressed on all sides. So, I don't feel like I can speak for the elders or the leaders on this at all. I'm just telling you right now, it seems like the best way, since we're moving in a position where we want to have lots of churches in various neighborhoods, we're moving away from the big regional center, which Redeemer is right now, where people come in from all over because there's, you know, we have such a stash of opportunities and talent and stuff. We're moving into these more neighborhood or focused churches. And therefore, I don't think we can, I think when people are coming in from outside of Manhattan, we're going to suggest starting churches out there, unless there's a church there that they feel like they can be part of. So, we probably won't discourage them overtly, but we probably won't encourage them either much. Sorry, that was the hardest question anybody will ask. I got time for a couple more. Yes, go ahead, Mark. It's actually a two-part question. One is currently there's sort of a different style to each of the services, more or less, or at least the West Side evenings, different from Hunter evening, different from Hunter morning. Do you anticipate that the lead pastor will be trying to figure that out, or how is that going to work? Secondly, can you just give me a little more information on Gospel in Life? What about Gospel in Life? What it is? Yeah, a little more detail of how it works. Well, it's something we want to get all of our leaders through. It's an eight-week curriculum that is done in a small group. And in a sense, we're doing not a, it's more than a pilot. We already had a pilot. We're getting the first 150 people through it as a, and we're going to get feedback from them. But we're really hoping it's the sort of thing that you would have almost all of your leaders go through in every one of the congregations. It's a very fast way of getting the basic Redeemer approach to ministry, the balances, the Gospel-centeredness, and so forth. We will probably produce three or four other kinds of training processes like that, that all the different congregations can use. But here's the good thing. We can create the product, but the different congregations are going to create the processes in which they'll use it. The first question was on… About the style of each service. Yeah. Look, here, I'm going to just tell you what I'm going to say. Not that, this isn't written down. You have to, when you come into an existing situation as a pastor, you have to both put your, or you have to lead the church because they want a leader. And now, I'm going to just talk a little bit here. constantly innovating. You also have to respect the, you have to respect the past too. And I want you to know right off the bat that when you go into a brand new situation, like a new building, change feels natural. If, for example, if you've been coming, say, to the 5 o'clock or 715 service here, and somebody puts a kind of major change into the worship experience, like drops the doxology or puts in a new kind of music or a different instrumentation, it'll feel very jarring. If, on the other hand, when you move into the new building, there's a lot of changes, it won't feel very jarring. A good, a smart, wise pastor is sensitive to those things and knows that there are places and times in which you can introduce change. For example, frankly, the South Congregation, because it's going to be so much from scratch, it will feel not jarring at all to do quite a lot of things that are different than the way we do them here. Whereas if you would introduce these changes in a place that's been meeting together for years, it'll feel more jarring, and therefore there's no one answer to the question. But in general, change will be there. Where the pastors do have the right to make those changes, it's not going to be as centralized. But they need to respect the institution and the history of a church. Okay? Thank you. Okay. Yeah. Hi. I have a couple of questions. The first question is, last time we discussed outreach ideas and we had a lot of sheets of paper. Yeah, yeah. It was great. I'm just wondering, is that going to be happening on our own initiative or how the church is planning to implement some of those ideas? And my second question is kind of like a comment as well. Okay. In that I have no doubt that Christ would want to reach Manhattan and I'm sure he loves all of Manhattan. But I do also know that he loves the world and the nations. And seeing that we are in New York City and it is one of the most diverse cities in the world, including the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, which has the majority of the population in New York City. I'm just wondering how we as a church plan on reaching that community. Redeemer City to City. I have my Redeemer hat on tonight. And Redeemer's job is to become a network of churches where we are, which is in the center of it all. That's what Redeemer has always been, a center city church. Redeemer City to City, which we try to talk to you more about on Sunday and you need to get to know, is not only planting churches in Manhattan. It's planting churches in other parts of New York City and other cities in the world. Very, very important. And we want to raise the number, well, we want to raise more money so we can do more of it. But anyway, we formed City to City. It's really a new organization just so we can plant more churches in places outside of Manhattan and places outside of New York. Your first question was? Yeah, I do. Oh, the outreach. I do think that as a church we need to have a vision for a little bit more than Manhattan. Yeah, no, I just said that, right? No, I just said we absolutely have to. Redeemer City to City is funded to a great degree by Redeemer. Redeemer City to City is Redeemer's mission arm. I've been in many other churches that had a missions program, but Redeemer City to City goes way past any missions program I've ever seen. So we will be supporting them. This congregation in Manhattan is supporting the local churches in other boroughs? Is that what I'm hearing? Yeah, Redeemer City to City has planted churches in the other boroughs too. Through outreaches and volunteer. Yeah, now let me answer your first question though. Wasn't your first question about all those ideas we generated? I'm not sure. I should probably ask Bruce, but the stash of ideas, which are very exciting, will be given to the planning groups that are deciding how we're going to reach out in the West, East, and the South. So, in other words, we're going to be breaking into these churches soon enough that those ideas won't be implemented until you are thinking of yourself as a West Side leadership team or an East Side leadership team or in the South. And you'll be able to take that stuff and implement it as you see fit. Or until we all see ourselves as evangelists, right? I, that's, listen, I'm an evangelist before many things else, and therefore nobody wants that more than me. Time's up, I think. Right? Okay, I'll take you guys. Okay, come on, let's, I'll be probably briefer than I need to be, but go ahead. I'm just wondering what qualities you're looking at when you choose the lead pastors and where they would be. There's seven, I should tell you. They have to be ordainable in the PCA, which means there's theology that has to fit our denomination. ministry experience or else, well, yeah, basically you need to know they can live and function and do well in a place like Manhattan. They have to have a balance of entrepreneurship because they're almost like replanting these churches, and yet they have to have the ability to lead a large organization. They need to know how to delegate, and they need to know how to get alignment. In other words, this is very hard. A church planter can be a person who's a great entrepreneur but doesn't really know how to lead a large organization, or a person who runs a traditional church can lead a large organization but not be very entrepreneurial. These people have to combine that. So you have this combination of statesmanship and entrepreneurship. You have the ordainable in the PCA, urban ministry experience. A really good preacher, deep spirituality, not weak there, and I'm missing one. There's seven. I'm missing one. Oh, double Redeemer DNA, not just at the top level but the bottom level. I mean, for example, we pay our musicians. Let me show you how. You don't think of that as Redeemer DNA. We have always paid our musicians because we feel like, hey, we pay our ministers, we pay our counselors, why not pay them? There's plenty of people out there who think it's wrong to pay musicians in church. You know that. So I'll check for that. I don't want somebody to come and, you know, have such a completely different approach to music ministry that it doesn't respect our tradition. So I'm going to look at whether or not this person can live with the kind of ministry DNA we've had here. So there's seven selection criteria. And, by the way, when I go through those seven, you'll realize that though we've had tremendous numbers of names, we've filtered an awful lot of people out really fast because there's not a lot of people that have all those seven qualifications. Yes, sir, one more. All right. As a fellowship group leader, I see my role not exactly as someone who's discipling. And you've been mentioning at the congregational meeting that there's something like a catechism that's going to be about. Yeah, yeah. So I just, I was hoping maybe you could give a little more information or even what distinction you do envision between fellowship group leaders and whoever and who will be discipling. No, I don't think I'm going to answer your question. I mean, I know it because I'm afraid I'm going to get too far ahead of the people who are working on this. We do not want to turn small groups strictly into discipling groups and Bible studies. They are there for fellowship and pastoral care and outreach. They're multidimensional. And there are churches that turn the small groups into the vehicle for all discipling, all instruction, all Bible study. And it makes them very cognitively oriented. It makes them too content heavy. And they lose their ability to really function as small communities in a sense, pastoral care communities, loving communities, sharing communities. Therefore, we are, but we also want to inject lots and lots of content. We want to theologically train people better than we ever have. We want to disciple people. How does that mesh with the small group system and the neighborhoods? All I can tell you is we're working on it, and we're not going to say, oh, it's too hard. You know, let's not get to it because it's the key to our future, I think. Just about as key as pastoral mentoring. In fact, in some ways it's more key because I understand pastoral mentoring. I know we can do that. I can do it. But this is still, we haven't found it. We haven't found the best way of meshing a very, very strong emphasis on discipleship and training and catechesis with what we already have. And all I can tell you is we're working on it very, very diligently. That's all. And I know what you're saying. Some of you probably will say, however you decide that you're going to carry all that content into people's lives through discipling and training, you say, I want to be part of that rather than just a fellowship group leader. That would really be more my calling. Great. We're going to need people like you. That's all I can say. But right now I can't tell you exactly how it's going to work. Sorry. Keep coming.
