TITLE: Being a Gospel Movement: Lay Leadership
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Theological Foundations for a Generative Church (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/being-a-gospel-movement-lay-leadership/

============================================================

Okay, the teaching. Take a look at your handout and get yourself to page three. Now, the 10-year plan, which we'll talk a little bit more about, we're already talking about it. We've talked about the 10-year plan during the Renew campaign. We'll talk about it actually some more tonight. But what I want to do in these in October and here in January and then again in April, these three major meetings, I want to go underneath and look at the biblical theological underpinnings for what we're trying to do. The 10-year plan is to turn Redeemer into a movement, to turn Redeemer into a network of congregations. And underneath that are a couple of three very, very important biblical theological commitments. The first one we looked at back in October, and it had to do with what it means to be a movement as opposed to just an institution. Tonight I want to look at leadership, and particularly lay leadership, and what the Bible teaches about it. Though I realize some of what we said under movement has to do with lay leadership. But tonight I want to not re-go over, I don't want to go back over and recapitulate anything that was in the handout last time. Instead, I'd like to move forward and talk to you about a couple of metaphors of biblical leadership and then apply those metaphors to what we're going to do in the 10-year plan and how we're going to be creating a culture of lay leadership in a way that we haven't in the past at Redeemer. On the first page, which is basically page three, this is not line by line at all. Let me give you the top-level summary of what's on this page. There are two metaphors the Bible uses to discuss ministry leadership. One is that of a steward. Both Jesus and Paul talk about ministry leadership as stewardship, and a steward in those days was a servant in authority over the other servants. So there was a great estate, and somebody had to run the estate, which is like a small company, and the lord of the estate would choose one of his servants to be the leader over all the other servants. That was a steward. The other metaphor that's often brought up, and actually it's brought up more often to discuss leaders, is the shepherding metaphor. In fact, even though you've heard us talk about prophet, priest, king, these are all aspects of ministry in both the Old Testament and the New Testament. And yet prophets, priests, and kings are all called at various times shepherds. And what a shepherd, of course, is, is a shepherd is, again, the leader of sheep. But what the steward metaphor and the shepherding metaphor have in common is this. In both cases, it's getting across the idea of servant leadership. The steward is a servant in authority. The shepherd, of course, is very much in authority over the poor sheep, but he's tender, you see. He's, you know, he's not a cattle, this isn't cattle, this is sheep. Sheep need a lot of tender, loving care. And so both the idea of a shepherd and the idea of a steward gets across this idea of servant leadership. It also gets across the idea that the job of a leader is to grow your resources. The work of a leader is not just to guard, but to grow, to nurture your resources. The steward was an investor whose job it was to grow the resources of the Lord. The shepherd was also, you know, the shepherd was involved in what's called animal husbandry, which means it was the job of the shepherd to grow the flock. So in one way, both stewards and shepherds are the same. They're servant leaders and their job is to grow the assets, the resources that they're given. But they're also a little bit different because stewards tend to be managers of resources and shepherds tend to be people workers. And one of the things, and I hope nobody worries about this. I mean, the elders who are present, you know this. After 35 years, how many years, more than that, 35 years of working as a pastor with elders, I've always noticed over the years that some elders are better stewards and some elders are better shepherds. Some elders are better at overseeing and managing assets and some are better at people work, one-on-one people work. They don't necessarily have the same, the sort of thing that excites some elders is working with people and the thing that excites other elders is essentially managing this great. both, they have overlap, and I don't think it's just elders that are like that. I believe that these are gift mixes. They're stewardship kind of gift mixes, they're shepherding kind of gift mixes. They're the same and yet they're different. Now, putting all that together, what now is a ministry leader? Now, would you please turn on over? I'm going to give you, this will be page four. I'd like to give you three characteristics of a lay leader and a fourth. Three characteristics of a lay leader and a fourth, okay? The first characteristic of a lay leader is leaders own the ministry of the church. Church, you are a ministry leader when you stop thinking about Redeemer as them and you start thinking about Redeemer as us. When you stop thinking about yourself as a consumer and you start to think of yourself as a provider. Now, I'm not going to go back over what we talked about last time, or at least it was in the handout last time, that the Bible says over and over again that while you have evangelists, people who are called into full-time evangelism, yet every Christian is supposed to be an evangelist if they're willing to pick it up, up their responsibility. Now, what usually happens, and this is the same thing with shepherding, with every aspect of ministry. So, I put down here in the third paragraph under this number one, which is actually over, yeah, at the very bottom of page four. Yes, there are evangelist counselors and teachers who are specialists, full-time, often ordained ministers, and yet the Bible says every believer has the duty to evangelize, that's Acts 8-4, to admonish, counsel, nourish, and encourage other believers in the Scripture, Colossians 3-16, Hebrews 3-13, and so on. A lay leader is somebody who recognizes that the responsibility for the evangelism of this church, the responsibility for the outreach, the responsibility for the level of care, the responsibility for the discipleship, the responsibility for the ministries of this church is yours, not theirs. See, if you come in and say, well, Redeemer's not doing the job for me, you're not a leader yet, because you're saying, I'm a customer and I'm not getting good customer satisfaction. When you pick up a sense of responsibility for the ministry, that in some way you are going to contribute, you're going to make that ministry better. You're going to be a provider of the ministry. You have crossed over from being a sheep to being a shepherd, actually. You've crossed over into stewardship. You've crossed over into taking responsibility. You've crossed over into lay ministry leadership. So that's the very first thing. You've got that mindset. And that's the first thing. Leaders, lay leaders are people who own the responsibility for the goals of the ministry of the church. That's number one. Number two, top of page five, okay? Leaders take risks. Again, without reading through all of this, but I hope you will read it. The steward who does not risk is called a wicked, lazy steward. You remember one of the parables in which we're talking about a lord who gives three stewards, gives servants talents, and it's the job of the stewards to invest the talents. Remember that? And one steward, one servant, invests his master's money and makes this much. Another one invests this much. And the third steward buries the talent. Remember that? This is Matthew 25, I think, right? And when the master comes back, he says, look, master, I've given you what I owe you. You know, I've given you back what you gave me, and so it's safe and sound. And remember what the master calls him? A wicked, lazy servant. He says, it's your job to risk. It's not your job just to sleep. You're not just the white, how do I put this? A steward is not a night watchman. A steward's job is not just to watch and make sure nothing goes wrong. The steward's job is to invest the assets. And that always means risk. That means exposure, and that means vulnerability. And the second characteristic of a lay leader is somebody who's making sacrifices. There's plenty of folks in New York that do not want to get emotionally involved in people's lives because then they're going to want something. Okay, that's exposure. That's vulnerability. A lot of people in New York do not want to make time commitments because, you know, you want to keep all your options open. I mean, it's even down to the fact, I don't want to make a commitment for Tuesday night because who knows what I might want to do on Tuesday night. That's not a leader's mindset. A leader's mindset is exposure, vulnerability. called to risk. And if they don't risk and they don't expose themselves and make themselves vulnerable and make commitments that can hurt them, and they're called wicked and lazy if they're not willing to do that, but don't forget the shepherd, Jesus says, I'm the good shepherd. I'm not like the false shepherds because false shepherds, when the wolf is at the door, the false shepherds run. The false shepherds do not put themselves in danger for the sake of the sheep. But I am a true shepherd. I put myself in the way of harm, and he did, did he not? See, when you, over the years, I just see people who are afraid to get involved in lay leadership. And they're afraid to get involved because they know they can get hurt, they can get disappointed. Or they can get involved in people's lives, and the people don't do what they ask them to do. Or you lead a small group and people don't come. Or you feel vulnerable because you have a lot to learn, and you don't feel like you're very, you know. People in New York are all experts at something. Otherwise, you wouldn't be here. And then when you move into lay ministry, you suddenly feel like, you know, a rookie again. You know, and you don't like that. You like to feel on top of things. Well, unless you're willing to take these kinds of risks, experience these kinds of vulnerability, you are not a lay leader. But lay leaders are not only those who own the ministry of the church and say, this is my ministry, this is my church, I'm responsible for it, it's not their church, and I'm just coming to it. And then secondly, they're willing to risk. They're willing to make commitments. Personal commitments, emotional commitments, time commitments, financial commitments. Now you're a lay leader. Now, third, go over to page, no, the bottom of page five. The third aspect of these metaphors that help us understand what it means to be a lay leader. You're not a leader. You're not a Christian leader. How do I put this? Okay. There are non-Christian leaders who understand that if you're a leader, you have to take responsibility, and if you're a leader, you have to make risks. People out in the world understand that that's crucial to being a leader. But a Christian leader is somebody who also is willing to do all this and not get the glory. You're not a Christian leader if you go into it saying, I'm going to do this, but I want a lot of thanks. I want a lot of affirmation. I want a lot of pats on the head. I want a lot of people telling me what a great job I'm doing. You know, I want a lot of recognition. There's no doubt that in the world people go into leadership because they desperately want recognition. They're trying to prove themselves. They're trying to prove that they've got what it takes, and they go into leadership to meet an inner need. And that's not a Christian leader. A Christian leader is not supposed to be getting into leadership in order to fill a hole. Christian leadership is supposed to be the overflow of an already full heart. It's supposed to be the overflow. It's something God's doing in your life, and you want to share it. And what that also means is if you're a Christian leader, then you just know, look, shepherds, and especially stewards, are servant leaders. Though they have authority, they are servants. You know, well, you know, that place in Luke, well, it's actually Matthew 20. Well, there's a couple of places where basically Jesus says the mark of a steward is to say we have only done our duty. It doesn't matter what I'm paid. It doesn't matter whether I get thanks. It doesn't matter whether I get acclamation. Attention, I'm a servant, and a servant's job is to do the duty of the master, and I'm the Lord's servant because he bought me with a price. See, I'm not my own. I'm bought with a price. That attitude very often is not there in people who are in lay leadership. You're not really a Christian lay leader unless you're willing to not just own the ministry and not just take risks and be vulnerable, but also to be willing to serve without a lot of recognition. Now, by the way, it's the job of the church to do as much recognition as we possibly can, but it's not your job to demand it. So, in other words, we ought to be trying to recognize each other all the time, but nobody should be quitting because nobody's giving me the thanks that I should have. Now, one last thing is there's a fourth mark of a leader. I told you there's three marks of lay leaders and then a fourth. Well, here's why I called it and a fourth. I would like you to consider there's two kinds of lay leaders. And if we're going to be…if we're going to be a movement, if we're… need more of these, of this particular kind of leader. In Redeemer, as in any Presbyterian church, as in any church, there are leaders and then there's leaders of leaders. Isn't that right? There are leaders. You're a home fellowship group leader. You're a leader. You're an usher captain. You're a leader. In other words, you're a leader if you are doing all these things we're talking about. Then you have the leaders of leaders. These are the people who are deploying leaders and recruiting leaders and training and supervising and so forth. That's a leader of leaders. Now, in institutional churches, in churches that are, we've talked about this last time, you've got leaders of leaders and leaders. But the leaders of leaders are always formal. That is, elders, pastors, deacons, you know, the deacs are formal. They're elected. They're put there and they're overseeing, you know, whatever everybody else is doing. But in a real dynamic movement, a church that's really vital and not just an institution, there's really a need for a lot of these leader of leaders that are not necessarily, they don't have formal jobs. And I put down here, just to take a look at the larger, yeah, okay, yeah, one, two, three, four, the last full paragraph on page six. As the tenure plan unfolds, we need other lay leaders besides elders and deacs, pastors, staff, who can motivate, organize, and give direction to many lay ministers in a particular area of work. We need other, I'm calling them type two lay leaders. A type two leader has relational and organizational gifts that enable him or her to have a broad influence on a lot of people and who therefore exert shaping, direction giving influence over a particular area of ministry. Redeemer needs not only to get a greater percentage of its members into type one lay ministry, which is what the first three marks are. But we also need to grow the number of type two lay leaders. And type two lay leaders are operating in advisory teams. For example, you need type two lay leaders in advisory teams similar to the Hope for New York board or Redeemer City to City board. So many of our ministries are going to need overseers, advisors, type two leaders who aren't formally, they're not, they haven't been elected by the congregation, you know, they're not paid staff or anything like that. But they're, they're, they're getting, they don't want to just simply serve in a ministry on the ground. They really want to see ministry expanded. They want to start new ministries. They want to see them going to the next level. And that means type two leaders. And type two leaders need more support. They need more training. And at this point, Redeemer doesn't have enough of them. We don't have enough of either kind. But I wanted to at least put that concept in front of you. Now, let's keep running on. What kind of lay leaders will we need now? This will be fast, but important. In the 10-year plan, now, you know what I'm thinking about? I'm thinking 10 years from now. When there's multiple congregations, what kind of leaders are we going to need? Let me suggest you can think about networks of leaders under these five headings, which I've called in, out, up, down, across. Inward, we're talking about we need a network of leaders whose emphasis is on pastoral care and shepherding, really caring for people. This is still basically the small group network. Small group leaders, fellowship group leaders, and their apprentices, and coordinators, and interns, and staff, and elders, and other people who support them at the top in trying to make sure that our shepherding ministries are better than they are right now. They need to improve. They need to get stronger as the church expands. So that's one. That's inward facing. Secondly, outward facing. This is the leaders of a whole new kind of network of ministries that we have talked about a little bit during the Renew campaign, and that is we want to see people brought together, Christians brought together in their neighborhoods of anywhere from, say, 30 or 40 up to 100 people who get together, who they live in their neighborhood, and they get together to say, how are we going to reach out in this neighborhood? How are we going to do outreach of evangelism? How are we going to do service? How are we going to do cultural engagement in our neighborhood? Those groups do not replace small groups. They don't meet as often, but the leaders of those groups are going to be outward focused. Lay leaders. This is not going to be staff run. number three, up. Every country. a Sunday is going to need all of the hundreds of leaders that we have right now, because right now we have three sites, but what happens when you have seven, eight, nine, ten? Where are all the musicians coming from? Where are all the Sunday service ministers? Where are all the ushering, you know, children's ministry? What happens to make the worship experience on Sunday, you know, dynamic? There's going to be a whole network of leaders around every congregation and across the six, seven, eight, or nine congregations we're going to have. So that's what I mean by there's a network of lay leaders that look up. There's a network of lay leaders that look in, look out. Now try number four, down. As I mentioned during the Renew campaign, Redeemer does not, and this is the last thing I'm going to say these last five minutes, Redeemer does not have a culture of training yet. Redeemer's never had a culture of training. We've never been big on training materials, training processes, instructional and educational sequences. We've never had that. And we're going to need a whole cadre, a new cadre, a network of leaders whose expertise is in the area of training and teaching and education and leadership development. And then number five is a cross. My understanding is there's going to be many ministries that go across all of the congregations. And I put down here ministries such as evangelism and justice and mercy and faith and work will maintain important ministries that will serve across all the congregations, such as the vocational groups, such as the entrepreneurship initiatives, such as the Hope for New York volunteer ministries that happen all over the city. So we're going to continue to need what I would call all city leaders as well as training leaders, as well as congregational worship leaders, as well as neighborhood community outreach leaders, as well as the small group shepherding network. And those are at least five matrices, you might say, of leaders that are going to have to largely be grown up because we certainly don't have enough lay leaders right now, type one or type two, to make all those things happen. Lastly, okay, what leadership dynamics, this is the top of page eight, what leadership dynamics will need to be in place for Redeemer to realize the 10-year plan? That is, what has to happen if Redeemer is going to be systematically growing and utilizing enough lay leaders to sustain its vision? What has to be in place for us to have leaders constantly coming in, growing up, going out? And I would say there's three things, in a sense, that you have to give the church and then three things that the church has to give you. And in other words, if I'm a lay leader, what do I owe the church? And then if I'm a lay leader, what does the church owe me? So one, two, three things that the lay leaders owe the church and one, two, three things that the church owes the lay leader. And here's what they are. The three things that you need to give the church or you're not a leader is you need to be committed to the vision. Secondly, you need to adopt a rule of life. You know what that is? You cannot be a lay leader unless you pull yourself together spiritually, unless you commit yourself to a set of spiritual disciplines, of journaling, of Bible reading, of accountability, of regular repentance. There has to be a rule of life. I explain what that means. You represent the church. Once you take on the responsibility of being a lay leader, you represent the church now. You represent Jesus now in a way you didn't before when you were just sitting there as a passive participant. And that means that you have to take responsibility for your Christ-likeness. You have to be totally committed to the vision. And by the way, these things are beyond the other stuff I talked about, owning, you know, and sacrificing and servant leadership. You have to be committed to the Redeemer's DNA. I make a little list of some things that are in there. Number one. Number two, you need to adopt a rule of life. And number three, reproduction. You know what that means? You cannot be a lay leader unless you're constantly thinking, how do I give away what I'm doing now to somebody else so that they can do it? You have to have a replication obsession. You should never be doing anything without thinking about it. to do the job I'm doing right now and help them get to be good at this. You should always be thinking, I don't know what you want to call it, apprentice or assistant or somebody. You know why? Whatever you're doing in the church, you need to find two or three other people that you're encouraging to try to do it as well for a couple of reasons. One is turnover. What if God just for various reasons, you have to leave the city? There's nobody to do what you do. And not only that, growth. If you're always working on a couple other people to do what you're doing, then A, the church won't be hurt if you do have to move away, and B, whether you do or not, the church will actually be able to grow that ministry instead of just maintain it. So those are the three things you've got to bring. That mindset of replication, that willingness to adopt a rule of life, and a complete commitment to the DNA, the vision of Redeemer. On the other hand, what does Redeemer owe you? These three things. Now look up here. Don't look down here. Basically, what makes a person into a leader is three things. They don't have to happen in any particular order. For you to become a leader, you have got to, first of all, have a challenging real-life experience. A challenging real-life experience. You've got to be thrown in there where you're actually doing something in that area of ministry. Then secondly, because you're doing something in that area of ministry, you need to get really great expert instruction on how to do it. Then thirdly, you need supervision, mentoring, support, and help. Emotional, spiritual, personal. You hear those three things? In other words, when I was training ministers in seminary, the worst thing was to get somebody who had never really been in ministry but who was just sitting in the classroom because that person had never actually been in the experience of ministry and therefore really didn't have the right motivation and didn't know what questions to ask. Here I was with my expert instruction, but they hadn't had the experience to know what there was that I was saying that was of any value to them. You need to have an experience. That's the reason why you need to always be finding apprentices, finding people who you bring along so they're getting a taste of what the ministry is. Then you have to have all kinds of great training, and I give some examples. Training in the vision, training in the faith, training in the job. There's nothing more empowering than the feeling that I've been well-trained, I've been well-educated. The church has got to give you that. So there's the experience, there's the instruction, and then you need either peer support or direct supervision by somebody who knows a lot about the ministry you're doing. Otherwise, you're going to drown unless you have that kind of touch, that kind of support, that kind of sense that somebody, I've got somebody I can talk to about this. And if we have the, if the church provides those three things, leaders grow. If the leaders bring these three things, leaders grow. And actually, they enhance one another. But if we don't do our part, the lay leader does, you know, in other words, if the, in a sense, if the type two leaders do their part, the type one leader does their part, then leadership develops and grows. So, look, that's an overview. My time is up. You might want to read this through more carefully. Do you see the challenges of it? I would say that an awful lot, if not most of the people in this room, are already owning, sacrificing, and by and large, from what I can tell, serving without need for affirmation. A lot of you need to be willing to make the commitments to become type two leaders, to become leaders of leaders. A lot of you need to sort of step up in these other areas of replication, mindset, and rule of life. A lot of you need more training in the vision. And by the way, that's what the gospel in life is. You know what that is? That's the most rudimentary way of training lots and lots of people in what the DNA vision of Redeemer is. It's a kind of prerequisite for any kind of lay ministry, lay leadership. And the Redeemer has to step up in every way. We have to create internships. We have to create fellowships. We have to create, we have to create training. We have to step up in almost every single way. And actually, that's what we raised the money to do. So that we, the whole idea behind the Renew campaign was not simply to raise money for the building. The other thing was to raise money for the 10-year plan. And the 10-year plan means doing over and above what we ordinarily do, which is mainly to develop these leadership dynamics. So what I'm going to do now is I'm going to introduce a couple of our, the chairs of our Renew campaign. I'll tell you why. First Rochelle's coming, right? And then Dan Kramer's coming. But stay right there. Hold it. you why I'm having them come up here to talk to you, lead you in a conversation about the next steps from the Renew campaign. Rochelle and Dan are great examples of our future. That is, they're lay people who are stepping up. Now, they're doing something that staff people couldn't have done. They've done a great job. Renew campaign's been very, very successful, and I want to thank them for their work, and I want to thank you for, you know, your participation. But not only are they a picture of the future, but the Renew campaign is basically about that 10-year vision. And so we have to, we can't wait around for a couple of years to say, well, yeah, the 10-year plan, where are we, what are we doing next? We need to get right into it, and so what we're actually going to do is have first Rochelle and then Dan come up and share, lead you in a conversation about the next steps toward the 10-year plan. And after that, I'm going to introduce Pamela, who's going to come up and lead us in a time of prayer. But first, okay, now Rochelle, you can come. Sorry, I didn't mean to push you down. Come on. Come on.
