TITLE: Blueprint for Revival: Introduction (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Acts 2:37-47
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit
SERIES: Revival
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/blueprint-for-revival-introduction-part-1/

============================================================

Acts chapter 2 verses 37 to 47. High humidity. I can't really get my pages open here. Good idea. Thank you, John. Thanks. Okay. Now Peter has just preached a sermon, and then we're told in verse 37, when the people, when the crowd heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, Brothers, what shall we do? And Peter replied, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. The promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, for all whom the Lord our God will call. With many other words he warned them and he pleaded with them, Save yourselves from this corrupt generation. Those who accepted his message were baptized. About 3,000 were added to their number that day. They devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and to fellowship, to the breaking of bread and to prayer. Everyone was filled with awe, and many wonders and miraculous signs were done by the apostles. All the believers were together and had everything in common, selling their possessions and goods they gave to anyone as he had need. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to their number daily those who were being saved. Here ends the reading of God's Word. This series, and I guess the best way to put it is a series on revival, renewal. This series I'm doing for a couple of reasons. One is a growing sense on my part that whereas God has blessed us mightily this year by attracting a number of people who want to see a new church started and also in an encouraging way bringing a good number, an encouraging number of people to Christ through the ministry in the last year. Roughly the church is about a year old. On the other hand, there is a sense I have that we're kind of like at a building site and there's all the blocks laying around and all the materials are here. There's all kinds of stones everywhere, but they haven't really been built into one another very well yet. And because of that, there's a need for us again to do something a little bit more in depth, and that's what we did last week and this week and the next couple of weeks, in which we're going to take a look at a particular understanding of how the Holy Spirit operates in a church to help us understand how a church is really supposed to act dynamically. Now by dynamically, I mean, you know, you can look on the outside of a car and you can see a lot of things that work in it, but it's the engine and more than that, it's the little explosions happening inside the engine, inside the cylinders, the spark plugs, you know, taking the fuel and there's an explosion that pushes the pistons up and down. It's what runs the car. You know, for a long time, I drove in cars as a kid, and then after that, I even drove a car before I ever figured out what the dynamic was, what really makes it run. And because I didn't know what the dynamic was, I could never work on cars. And now that I live in New York, I'll never be able to learn to work on cars again. You know, I was beginning, when I was a suburban, I was beginning to learn, and now those days are past probably forever. But, you know, in other words, it's, you can't really understand, if you don't understand how a car operates, if you don't understand that internal dynamic, you really can't work on a car when it's operating improperly. And you certainly can't build one. And so, you get into a good car, one that's running properly, you know how to handle that, but you really don't know how to build one, or certainly even how to fix one. One, I'd like to talk about what the internal spiritual dynamic that makes a church biblically normal is. Because I'm hoping, by this teaching, not just to teach you what to believe, but to make you wise. There's a big difference between knowing something and being wise about it, understanding it, being able to make discernment, being able to look at a church, to look at our church and tell, is it moving? Is it, is it developing? Is it, is it, uh, is it firing on all cylinders? So often, you get into a church and you know there's something wrong, but you don't know what it is, right? Just like you can get, like me, it used to be, and it still is to a degree. If I ask me to fix it. Don't ask me to explain what it is. Something's wrong, you see. Most of us can tell there's something wrong or something right about a church, but we don't know what it is, and so we really aren't able to take part in the building and the development of it. I'd like to talk more about that internal dynamic. I started last week. We're looking at it this week. Let me take a look at your handout, and you remember, those of you who were here last week, remember I didn't get very far. So I'm going to have to at least, the nice thing about it is though, I'm just going to go, I'm just going to go until the time's up and we've got ourselves at least 20 minutes or so for questions. If I don't get there, then I'll just pick up the following week. Remember last week, when we looked at Acts 4, it was very, very, very easy to see what we have outlined here in the second paragraph called Examples of Revival. There's a pattern we saw in Acts 4, it happens in Acts 2, it happens several times in the book of Acts, and it happens constantly throughout the history of the church too. That pattern is this. The church faces some major obstacle or problem. Maybe the church is facing tremendous decay, maybe the church is facing great persecution or opposition, but there's a crisis, a great crisis. In some cases, the church has just gotten to the place where, in many cases, where revivals have broken out, the ministry, the clergy, us professional Christian types have gotten to the place where our ability to minister is so abysmal that the revival breaks out when a group of lay people somewhere say, we have got to do something because we're not even a church anymore. We're doing sacred sociology here. We're a community center where we're not a church anymore. And very often a group of lay people have to come together. That's the one kind of crisis, but it could be, as we saw last week, the Korean Pentecost broke out in the face of Japanese oppression of the country. We saw that in Acts 4, the great revival broke out when the apostles were faced with the religious leaders of the day who said, we will kill you if you preach this again. There's a crisis. And then the response to the crisis is what? Some kind of concerted effort, an extraordinary seeking after God, extraordinary seeking for God, usually in the form of some kind of extremely profound seeking after God in prayer. And then thirdly, the response to this in this pattern is there's a visitation. And we used the word last week, and we spent a lot of time defining it. A visitation simply means that God's royal presence comes down. It doesn't mean that we don't believe God is everywhere. Of course we believe God is everywhere. But the old teachers used to talk about God's felt presence. That means when you're dealing with him personally, when you're communicating with him, and he's communicating with you. We use the illustration of how, you know, you're all in my presence right now, but none of you are in a very good position to have a real good communication with me. If you really want to talk to me in any kind of very personal way, you need to come on up. And yet, you know, there's a sense in which, though you're in my presence now, this is a heightened, intensified presence for personal dealing if you come and we look eye to eye. The felt presence of God that visits people when they're seeking for it, so that God's reality is so thick you can cut it with a knife, and his truth begins to be not just a bunch of doctrines, but it begins to shine in your heart and in your life. That's what we call a visitation. You see it all the time. Whenever I read George Whitefield's journals, that great preacher of the 1740s who preached on Wall Street and places like that, he would write, tonight I was preaching and for a half an hour I struggled, but then, he says, God came down on us. I remember the first time I was reading through those journals, I said, what? What's this? You know, God came down on us. Wasn't, isn't God everywhere? What is the, what is the matter with this guy? But I came to understand from reading the scripture and studying the history of the church, that's, he knew exactly what he was talking about. There's a visitation of God's presence. And then, the result of that is what? A transformed community. The people of God are restored to New Testament normalcy. And we've got a blueprint of it, which we're going to look at later on. A tremendous balance of, you might, intellectual depth of understanding of God's Word and intimate fellowship and anointed worship and aggressive evangelism and compassionate social concern all together. The community becomes like no other community anyone has ever seen. other kind of factors. No other human community can achieve the kind of beauty that a Christian church, which is glorified by a visitation of God's presence, can achieve. A lot of times people think, and we'll mention this in a minute, that revival is where you go on out and get a lot of people to come on in. Not necessarily. The revivals that I have seen, what few I have seen, is that the power of God comes down on the people of God and beautifies them so that they're coming out. I used to, down in Virginia, down in Virginia there was always a radio station whenever some of the local churches were holding what they called revivals, and what they meant by that was that the poor people in the church were being browbeaten by the preacher to go out and bring in lots of visitors. And so the radio station used to have commercials for the revival at this church or that church in the town of Virginia. And they used to say, come on out, we're having a great Holy Ghost revival, come on out and there'll be great singing, there'll be great music. In the history of the church and in the scripture itself, whenever there is a real Holy Ghost revival, you don't need to get on the radio to tell people about it. Because, you see, the lives of the Christians that you live with attract you like moths are attracted to a flame. Even if you don't like their beliefs, even if you're appalled by many of the doctrines, there's a compulsion. We'll get back to that. The people of God have become radiant, they're transformed, and as a result, there's a deep spiritual and social impact on the community. There's a tremendous number of conversions, and beyond that, the conversions actually result, as we'll see, in real change in society. Real change in the way things get done. In the social systems, in the political systems, the public morals, as you might say, of the community are changed. And I was saying last week, this thing happens in the Bible and it has happened throughout history. Therefore, and we talked about this too, if you want to understand the dynamic we're talking about, you have to understand that the dynamic I'm giving you really does set a church apart. Now, I'm not saying we're the only church like this, but it tends to set a church apart from other kinds of churches. Now, I'm going to do something dangerous here, but I sure hope you'll listen to me qualify what I say. When I first came to New York, I began to talk to people about the church you wanted to start. Very often they say, why? What would be so special about it? And at one point I came up with a little way of talking that as soon as I said it, a little bit of danger because it could be misunderstood, but as long as the person, they always did, let me explain myself, it was very effective. I said, we're going to be a Protestant church, but we're not going to be a liberal church, we're not going to be a fundamentalist church, and we're not going to be a charismatic church. And the person would look at me and say, what else is there? I mean, what else is left? Are you kidding? What other kinds of Protestant churches are there? And I said, listen, now, there's really three views of revival that I think are distorted. And the three views go like this. Number one, there's a view I put down here that I called the negative view of revival. And that is the kind of churches that say, I don't know what you're talking about, but I don't like it. We don't need revival. We don't need a visitation of God's presence. We're okay. It sounds fanatical to talk about that sort of thing. It sounds emotional. And my great-grandfather belonged to a church that was like that. They were always rolling in the aisle. So please, just stay away and don't talk like this. So that's one view of revival. And that is, we hate the idea. That's one view. Last week, I talked about, I called it a mainline church view of revival. I said, what are you talking about? You know, we don't need that. You know, everybody's trying to find Jesus in their own way, and it sounds like a pretty narrow-minded approach. The second view of revival, I called the fundamentalist view or a methodological view. And it's the one that I met in Virginia. And in Virginia, every single church in town, there were 53 churches in a town of 20,000 people. Just want you to know. And every church had revivals every year. And what they meant by revivals, and it was very backwards as far as the Bible was concerned, what they meant by revivals is we're going to go out and do a terrific amount of evangelism. We're going to bring people on in. And if we have the right kind of music and if we do the proper advertisement, we do everything just right, we're going to have a lot of people. Now, there's nothing wrong with that. My word, that's fine. And very often, many people came to Christ and the church was helped by that. But you shouldn't call it a revival because revivals aren't things that you can hold. They're not things that you can hold at all. They're only things that God can hold. You can ask for a visitation of God's presence, but you don't get it by methods and programming. All right. it tends to be very methodological. We fill the pew night, we get the right things in, we do all of our methods, and everything will be fine. The charismatic view of revival, and again, like I said, this can be very misunderstood. If you call yourself a fundamentalist, you may not like what I just said. And I'll show you why that you might be right, because I'm using the word in a certain way. If you consider yourself a charismatic, you might not like what I'm about to say, and you might be right because I'm using the word in a certain way. But there's a tendency in charismatic circles to say revival means miracles and signs and wonders. If you're having a real revival, that means you're having miraculous, extraordinary activity. A history of revivals shows that sometimes there's signs and wonders when whole countries are turning to Christ. I told you last week that there were some revivals in which it wasn't unusual to have a quarter or a third of an entire population of people, all of whom are not going to church at all, come thundering into the church, and massive social programs and changes happen as a result. We talked about this last week. Sometimes those kinds of awakenings, as they're often called and hit by historians, those awakenings were accompanied by signs and wonders and miracles, and sometimes they weren't. And as a result, you cannot go ahead and do that and say the extraordinary actions of the Holy Spirit is the sign of revival. Rather, it's the ordinary ones. The ordinary thing that the Holy Spirit does is he makes you first see your sin, and then he makes you secondly see the beauty, the surpassing worth of Jesus, so you want to give yourself to him. And it's when those activities are heightened and intensified that you really have a revival. So what I used to say to people, now listen carefully, I hope you understand this. I said, when I say I'm not fundamentalist, liberal, or charismatic as far as the church, it doesn't mean, by the way, like the charismatics, we are going to be as excited and as hopeful and as believing God that he can make an impact on the city, but we're not going to force people and hype people's emotions. Like fundamentalists, we have a high view of authority of the scripture, but we're not going to be legalistic, nor are we going to be trying to get people to withdraw from the world and withdraw from engagement with society. And like the mainline liberal church, we are going to be saying, we want to be socially aware, we want to be socially concerned, we want to be involved and engaged with the world, but unlike them, we believe in the high authority of the scripture and the supernatural regeneration of the heart with a rebirth of the Holy Spirit, otherwise nobody can be saved. So we're none, and we're all. And you see, they all come from a different view of revival. I'm going kind of fast, but I'm not going to stop. If you have a question, ask me later. All right? Now, having said that, having said that revival is an outpouring of the Spirit so that God becomes real to people, as a result of that, as a result of that God consciousness, and as a result of the assurance of his love, that's really what revival is. Revival is when you experience the unction or the anointing. Isn't unction a great word? Unction. Right up here through the nose, see? The unction is an old word that means the anointing. It means it's one thing to know God loves you. It's another thing to be enveloped with a sense of it. It changes everything about you. You don't care what people think anymore. You stop worrying about yourself. You begin to reach out and serve people, and as a result of that assurance of his love, a high, high assurance of his love, your ability to serve people and the attractiveness of your life has a remarkable impact on the people around you. When God's Spirit is pointed out, and there's an unction on whole congregations or whole fellowships of churches in a city, the impact it has on the world is remarkable. Now, we've talked about that. Let's go one step further. The step further is to say, well, how does this sort of thing actually come about? Now, and the first way we can talk about it is negatively. There is a certain sense in which, with the view of revival I'm talking about, makes, the view of revival I'm talking about says you cannot program this. You cannot just say, we're going to have a revival on October 26th at 8 o'clock. We're getting ready. We're going to have it. You can't do that. It's the height of arrogance to do that. On the other hand, the view of revival I'm giving you is not one of passivity. As far as I understand the Scripture, the main way in which you get ready and the main way in which you invite and seek a visitation of God's presence is by getting rid of obstacles. It's a... I know it sounds kind of negative. It's the main way in which you do it. You get rid of obstacles. I know it's the main way in which you do it. I know it's the main way in which you do it. I know it's the main way in which you do it. I know it's the main way in which you do it. The manifestation of God's presence is by getting rid of obstacles. I know it sounds kind of negative, but it's the main way in which you do it. You get rid of obstacles. You can't say, God, on October 26th I'm going to do this, but you're going to do this, or we're going to do this, but you can get rid of obstacles. And the obstacles are four kinds of deficient, four kinds of deficient ministry. And the four kinds I've given stupid names to, but I got them from a church history professor some years ago and I haven't made up better names yet. And unfortunately, my little chart, which is completely inexplicable yet, but I'm going to explain it, is wrong because I typed it up wrong. You'll see that there's basically one, two, three, four, five little boxes. On the left side is the word heterodoxy. In the middle is the word live orthodoxy. On the right side where it says emotionalism, you should cross that out and put in something else. You should put in dead orthodoxy. You hear that? Dead orthodoxy. Dead orthodoxy. Over on the right-hand corner, right-hand side where it says emotionalism, cross it out and say dead orthodoxy. And then the other two are okay. Okay. Let me say it quickly and then let me go back over it and you need more details. You can tell me about it later. Number one. One of the main reasons that the Holy Spirit does not come down in a particular church or a particular group of people is if they do not hold on and support and uphold the basic cardinal doctrines of the Bible. Heterodoxy is a big word. The word doxy, of course, means what you, it means what you believe. Okay. Hetero, in this case, versus orthodoxy. Ortho means straight doctrine. It, you know, like a straight-edged ruler without any jags or anything like that. That orthodoxy means straight doctrine. Heterodoxy means eclecticism, picking and choosing whatever you want. Okay. Heterodoxy is one of the main problems. Now, you've got to be very careful about this. One of the things that we see from history is that God is not, he's not biased about who he sends his awakenings on. You know, Protestants like to say, you know, the Presbyterians like to say something about the Baptists, the Baptists like to say something about the Lutherans, Lutherans like to say something about Episcopalians. We all have things that we don't like about the other ones. Unfortunately, if you study history and you like to think, well, because we have our doctrine really more straight than anybody else, surely God should have come down and visited us and used us more mightily in the lives of more people and in the history of more nations than any other group. And you know what? It ain't so. In my own theory about this is this. You know, here's the Presbyterians, here's the Baptists, here's the Lutherans, here's the Episcopalians, and one of the reasons they're different is they differ on a lot of things. They differ on secondary and tertiary items, not cardinal items. They differ on how you baptize people, how the church government operates, on how you worship, and that sort of thing. There's a lot of things that are different. But they can't all be right. Somebody is probably righter than the rest. But the sin in the lives of those of us with righter theology makes us worse than our theology should make us. And the grace in the lives of those of us with worser theology makes us better than our theology should make us. So the differences in the way we actually practice holiness and ministry is relatively negligible. Did you get that? Some of you are going, what? Look, the point is that God has tended to pour out his visitation on all kinds of Protestant groups, and there really isn't one that you can say, hey. You know, Presbyterians have been the main way through which God has poured out his spirit in Korea. But in East Africa, in the last 20 years, there's been a tremendous, been tremendous church growth. You know, Africa in 1900 was 10% Christian. And by the year 2000, it will be over 50% Christian. You know, people are getting scared. A lot of the folks who always thought that the more modern the world got, the more religion and Christianity would die out and people would get more scientific, don't know what to do with Africa. In the East Africa, there's a terrific revival. Does anybody know what the main church is through which that revival's been coming, through which the conversion's been coming? It's the Anglican church. It's the Episcopalian church. In Latin America, where is the revival mainly coming? The charismatic church. You see, as soon as you start to say, well, you know, now here's a group that believes in tongues, here's a group that thinks tongues are awful. Here's a group that believes in baptizing babies, here's a group that thinks that's awful to do. Here's a group that believes in predestination, here's a group that says no, predestination. the right church all the revivals? You know, I mean, the same church should be getting honored in Africa and Latin American Korea, right? He doesn't do that. But, you don't find, no offense, you don't find him pouring out a spirit on the Unitarian Church. You know why? They don't even want a revival. You know? Why not? You see, when it comes to the cardinal doctrines, and what are the cardinal doctrines? The authority of the Bible. The Bible is true. The sovereignty of God, that God is personal and he's infinite and he's holy, and he demands a righteous behavior on our part, and his law shows us that we fall short of that. Jesus Christ, who's not just some low angel, but rather is the Son of God, the second person of the Trinity himself, who came to earth, became a real human being, lived a perfect life, died on the cross, so that by his death he pays for our sins, and by his perfect life there's a righteous record ready for us. The Holy Spirit, who's a person, the third person of the Trinity, whose job it is to come and apply the work of Christ to our life. So the work of Christ, why do you think? For some of you, you believe that Jesus Christ was God and he died for you on the cross for 20 or 30 or 40 years, and one day it came home to you and said, I never really understood that. At that point, the Holy Spirit, he, a person, finally applied. The Father plans, the Son executes, and the Holy Spirit applies the work. And his job is to come on in and radically regenerate and recreate us as we should have been if we'd never sinned or fallen away from God. And then you have faith itself, which is a very important doctrine, and that is that a person can receive from the Spirit and from the Father and from the Son all these great provisions. We can have Jesus Christ as our Savior, and we can be completely pardoned and completely treated as righteous in his sight when we put our faith in Jesus Christ and not in our own works and not in our own performance, see? That's what we call being regenerated or born again through faith in Jesus Christ alone. What are those things? Now, a lot of you have heard that called the Gospel. Well, it is the Gospel. What it really is is the cardinal doctrines that, you know, as much fighting as all those different denominations have done over the years, they have not managed to disagree about those things, at least not until they finally decided to get rid of one of them. You see, if you get rid of the cardinal doctrine of the authority of the Bible, then we start disagreeing on everything else. But all the Protestant denominations in the beginning began with a commitment to the fundamental cardinal doctrines that I just enumerated. Every Protestant denomination, all right? You hear that? Heterodoxy is the main way that most churches in this country are avoiding revival without knowing it. Okay, then secondly, dead orthodoxy is another thing that has to be removed. Dead orthodoxy means that you have the cardinal doctrines, but you're dead. Now, how does that happen? How can you have all these cardinal doctrines but be dead? Well, I already hinted at it. I hinted at it. I said the fact is that the Father plans salvation and the Son executes and carries out salvation, but the Holy Spirit applies it. And dead orthodoxy, I think I might have mentioned it right here, dead orthodoxy really has to do with people who, though they believe the gospel, the cardinal doctrines I just mentioned, and they have given their lives to Christ in a fairly general way, and let's just say these are real Christians from what I can tell, and yet they have not got any real grasp on how they can live the gospel. Now, I put a little quote here that I probably mentioned before in the past. My church's professor, Dr. Richard Loveless, says, much that we have interpreted as a defect of sanctification in church people is really an outgrowth of their loss of bearing with respect to justification. I'll explain this. Christians who are no longer sure that God loves and accepts them in Christ apart from their present spiritual achievements are subconsciously radically insecure people. Now, listen. Big words. Justification means that the day that you believe and make Jesus Christ your Savior, you are made just. You are made righteous. You are legally treated as a perfect person. That means your sins are pardoned. They're blotted out. You're no longer liable to them. They're blotted out. Sanctification is the greatest. give to God as you seek to live like Him. You try to obey Him, you try to love Him, you try to love your neighbor as yourself, you try to be a better person. Listen, what Dr. Loveless is saying, dead orthodoxy results when you base your sanctification on your justification or your justification on your sanctification. It's the latter. This is multiple choice. Letter B. Dead orthodoxy results. I mean, this is one of the main things I've learned in the last 15 years, in a nutshell, all right? For what it's worth to you, it's changed everything for me. Dead orthodoxy results when I basically, psychologically, day-to-day, base my justification on my sanctification. Vitality, power, freedom comes when I base my sanctification on my justification. Not my justification on my sanctification. What I mean is, just what he says. When you believe you're just, when you believe you're acceptable, when you believe God hears your prayers, when you believe God loves you and accepts you, because of your sanctification, because of your present spiritual achievements, because I'm trying and I'm doing a good job and I'm coming to church, when that is the basis for your standing with God, you are a radically insecure person. You may look moral, you may look religious, you may come to church, but you do not have that assurance of God's love because you never can be good enough. You are very sensitive to criticism, and therefore, dead orthodox churches are full of people, radically insecure, and they're full of gossip, and they're full of back fighting, and they're full of fighting. People who cannot be told that they're wrong. Because if they're wrong or they failed or they sinned, that brings into question their whole standing with God. You see this? And therefore, Christians who are basing their justification on their sanctification are what we call dead orthodox people. These are people who tend to be one of three categories. Jack Miller, my pastor back in Philadelphia, used to say that dead orthodoxy turns a church into a religious cushion, he calls it. Now, a religious cushion means you gather people together weekly who are religious, but who desperately need reassurance that they're all right with God. They're very, very insecure, they do not feel they're all right with God, and they desperately need to have somebody tell them that they're okay. He says there's three kinds. One, he calls it the legalistic brand. You find this in very, very conservative churches. And these are people who desperately need to come together and be told, you are right doctrinally and everybody else is wrong. You're in the true church, everybody else is in a bad church. You are doing everything just right. They tend to be very legalistic, they tend to be very conservative, and the people are very pharisaical, and they need, they need to be told they're accurate, they're right, and they're better than other people. The second brand is what he calls the sacerdotal form. And that's where guilt-ridden people come into a beautiful service with tremendous high liturgy and all kinds of trappings and gorgeous, if possible, gorgeous surroundings and incredible music. By the way, I'm not against any of those things, but when they become the way in which people, through a kind of, it's a combination of sentimentality and nostalgia because very often it reminds you of your childhood and the beauty of the service and all that tranquilizes your conscience, even though you're still guilt-ridden, even though you still radically cannot believe God accepts you or loves you for what you are. And thirdly, he calls the presumptive variety. And the presumptive variety is usually found in churches where every single week somebody tells you, look, none of you are really sinners, you are wonderful people, God loves you just the way you are, everything is just fine no matter how you live, and especially since you do good things for the needy people, and God would never send nice people like you to hell. God doesn't send anybody to hell. You see, there's three kinds of dead orthodoxy, very different. Conservative, liturgical, presumptive, but dead orthodoxy will kill you spiritually. And, here's something else very, very important. Every time there's ever been an awakening, every time there's ever been a revival, somebody, maybe the preacher, maybe some lay people, the doctrine of justification by faith alone has dawned on them in a new way, and they say, oh my word, all of my life I'd heard that I was saved by faith alone, but I never really believed it. Always, even though I intellectually said, I believe I'm saved by grace, basically underneath everything else, I acted as if, as if psychologically, I was really saved by my good deeds and my spiritual achievements. I mean, I, and I try as much as I possibly can, every so often, if I get the insight, to show you how this works righteousness, this flesh, clings to everybody, clings to me. And I might have shared with you one time, there was a period in my life, and I still need to do this, but I haven't been doing it lately, in which every time I got up to preach, I realized how desperately I needed to have people like me. And I had to look out there, and I had to say, remember this? You are not my peace. I did it under my breath, because people would say, what? No, silently, I did it under my breath. I'd look out and say, you are not my peace, you are not my righteousness, you are not my life. If I base my justification with God on whether or not you like me, I'm dead meat. I am spiritually into dead orthodoxy. I will be high if you like me, I'll be low if you don't like me, I won't be able to take criticism, I'm going to be a nervous pharisaical person. I don't need your approval, I'd have to say, underneath there. And I have to do that constantly, otherwise that flesh just grows right on back up like moss, like ivy, like poison ivy, is really more like what it is. Now, defective orthodoxy is a third basic kind of area. And in defective orthodoxy, what you really have is forms of heterodoxy and dead orthodoxy, but they're not real serious. And I won't have to go into it. There's some churches that are pretty much there, and you know, this is always a Presbyterian problem, by the way. But that is, they do an awful lot of studying, an awful lot of reading, an awful lot of discussing of truth. And they're pretty good, and they're fairly balanced, but there's just a tendency to be too much in talking about the gospel and not doing much about it. Another area is a lock of doctrinal balance. That means you can get into a church that really takes, maybe a true doctrine, something about the end times, or something about the spiritual gifts, or something about this or that, or something about Christian political involvement, and just presses it and presses it and presses it. Not that it's wrong, but that it's out of kilter and out of balance. And that very often will squash the Spirit's work. A third area is an over-concern with mechanics, organization, and machinery. That is, there's some churches that are so incredibly well-oiled. They're, you know, programmed to the hilt that there's really very little opportunity to ever sit down and say, what does God want? Do I, you know, I've done my market research, yes, and I've done my feasibility study, yes, and I've, we see that we have money in the budget, and we've staffed it, but did anybody find out, you know, maybe, should we do it? You see, there's a possibility to be so concerned about mechanics and organization. Now, there's just as much of a problem on the other side, as I'll show you, in emotionalism, where you're afraid to make any kinds of plans at all. But that's one. And the fourth one, unmortified sin. That's an awful-sounding phrase, isn't it? Unmortified sin. What is unmortified sin? You remember, some of you probably were here this morning, when Jonah was sinning, and he was in the boat, and God's wrath came ready to sink the boat. One man's sin can sink the whole boat. When Achan, one soldier in Israel, was told by Joshua, by God through Joshua, all the Israelite soldiers were told, when you're in battle, and when we sack a city as we're trying to conquer Canaan, you cannot take any of the booty or the plunder for your own personal gain. But Achan buried it underneath the ground. And one Achan, one sin meant that God withdrew his presence from the people of Israel, and they started losing all of their battles, and they were getting slaughtered by the enemy. Achan in the camp, Jonah in the ship. What is that? Unmortified sin means an ongoing pattern of sinful behavior on the part of significant people in the church that is hidden. Nobody sees what's going on. Do you understand the social consequences of your sin? Do you see that one Joan in the ship can flood the whole ship? Do you see that? I mean, occasionally, you've seen it, I've seen it, occasionally, you'll see something's wrong in this church, something's wrong in this church, and then the pastor runs away with a choir director, and you realize that they've been having an affair for a year, and they say, well, that's what was happening in the church. The sermons were going on, everything was going fine, but where was the spiritual vitality? Well, that's an obvious one. And we don't have a choir director. So what's our problem? You see, that's the thing, the question's always got to come up. of looking around, say, well, I wonder, there's some people here that I wonder about. No, no, no, no, no, no. You should be all doing exactly what every apostle did when Jesus Christ says there's a traitor out here. They didn't turn around and say, yeah, yeah, yeah. No, they all said, Lord, what'd they say? Okay. Is it me? Is it I? Am I the one? Is it possible that I'm the hole in the bucket of this church that's keeping the grace from filling up, but it's just flooding out the back? Am I the hole in the bucket? Is it my own anger? Is it my own secret sin? Is it the things that I'm doing that's keeping my family? That's keeping my group? That's keeping my friends? That's keeping my church? Let's keep it, you know, from the blessing of God's visitation, there's social consequences to sin. I don't see why I have to dwell on this any further, because the solemnity of the subject should be obvious. Lastly, the last thing, you see, preparing for the visitation of God is a matter of getting rid of obstacles, mainly. It's not something you program, but don't you see how much there is to do to get rid of the obstacles, to clear the, you know, to clear the ground so the helicopter can come down? It can't come down if it's just, you know, if it's nothing but brambles. You've got to clear away the ground. Lastly, the last, you might say, alternative, not heterodoxy, not dead orthodoxy, not defective orthodoxy, but something I call emotionalism. Now listen, I'm not talking about emotion. I do not mean at all that emotionalism means the level of emotional display. I don't not mean, if any of you say, yeah, my uncle so-and-so used to go to a church, he used to dance on top of the pews. I know what Tim's talking about. No, you don't. That has nothing to do, that may be an emotionalistic church, it may not. Because, my dear friends, if you study the history of revivals, I'm afraid when the spirit of God comes down, there's emotion. No doubt. No doubt about it. It doesn't matter whether it's a Pentecostal church, and it doesn't matter whether it's an Anglican church. There is tears. There is strong feelings, because when the heart is affected, the whole person's affected. So, let's not talk at all about emotional displays, right? I want you to know that, you know, there's a sense in which a Pentecostal church can be just as ritualistic as an Anglican church if you know every week there's something that's expected of you. And it's also true that strong emotion can be affected either by dancing on a pew or by being extremely quiet. My experience is that when the Spirit of God has come down quite a bit on a congregation, either they get much noisier or they get much quieter than before. Both of them are expressions of strong emotion. No. What I mean by emotionalism is this. Emotionalism is any church or any ministry in which the method of ministry aims directly at stirring up the emotions. That instead of trying to stir up the emotions through the truth, instead of that, you're told, you're, basically, something is used to stir you up. I mean, when I took, put it this way, when I took a course on communication, I had a teacher, I was teaching writing. Those of you who are writers might know about this already. They said good writing makes the difference and knows the difference between bathos and pathos. In bathos, you tell people how they've got to feel. In other words, a case of bad writing is where you would say it was an exciting waterfall. That's bad writing. Bathos is you're telling the reader how they have to feel. You're forcing them. You're saying describe the waterfall so that the people get the emotion. Describe it so they get excited. Don't tell them to be excited. There's a big difference in worship. When you say to people, here's God, and you talk about God, and the emotion builds, it's very different to say, don't you just feel it? Don't you just feel like this? Why don't you do this? Why don't you do that? You're getting really very, very dangerous to the difference between, you're getting into bathos instead of pathos. It's bad writing. It's bad worship. It's bad theology. It's bad ministry. Now, the reason I put this little diagram, and we're done actually, you say, what happened to Acts 2? I'll tell you. What happened to Acts 2 is Acts 2 is something that I'm going to try to spend the next five weeks on because the difference between live orthodoxy, the easy way to tell the difference between heterodoxy, live orthodoxy, emotionalism, defective orthodoxy, is there five things that the Acts 2 tells us were true of a vital, revived church. Theological death, anointed... and compassionate social concern. Now, without the Spirit of God, it's easy to get one or two of them, because, you see, your social concern can be there amongst the heterodox, just a matter of a function of altruism. And your fellowship and your worship can kind of be there amongst the emotionalists, because, hey, you know, usually you can really get up a good catharsis of emotion just with the flesh and not necessarily with the Spirit. And when it comes to teaching and doctrinal teaching, some of us have just got tidy little minds. And so we love churches with lots of good teaching. So if you're a church with just good teaching, or a church with just good worship, or a church with just good social concern, or a church with just aggressive evangelism, some churches are pretty good at that. Why? Not necessarily for spiritual reasons, because they love telling everybody else that they're wrong. That's why some people like evangelism. They love to do it, because they love to be superior. But when the five are together, it's a sign that the Spirit of God is working, because only those five can be together with the Spirit of God. Now, the diagram means simply this. Whenever you find live orthodoxy, that is the landing pad on which the visitation of the Spirit of God can come down on. And almost always what happens is that there are parties. Whenever, I think I might have mentioned it, but I don't think I did. Nah, I didn't after all. Whenever revival occurs, whenever the Spirit of God really begins to move in a place, you find that these elements polarize. The heterodox people begin to yell at the live orthodox people and call them emotionalists. The dead orthodox people start to yell at the live orthodox, and they call them emotionalists. The emotionalists call you dead orthodox or heterodox. And what ends up happening is there's a tremendous amount of pressure. And usually what happens is that you alienate the people who really feel like you've become fundamentalists. And you also spin off some people that get really carried away and very often are too immature and take the revival and become little cult leaders with it. You always have this fringe, and we call it, we used to call it the loony fringe. In other words, whenever you have a real revival, the loony fringe always develops around you. You will always have flack. You will never have a nice, neat...
