TITLE: Boasting in the Cross
SCRIPTURE: Galatians 6:11-18
TOPICS: Atonement Salvation Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: Galatians: New Freedom, New Family
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/boasting-in-the-cross/

============================================================

Galatians 6, 11-14 See with what large letters I use, see what large letters I use as I write to you with my own hand. Those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. The only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ. Not even those who are circumcised obey the law. Yet they want you to be circumcised that they may boast about your flesh. May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world. Okay? This is God's word. Now, this is a pretty interesting and very, very, very, very important passage. And, you know, I make jokes about this sometimes. I know there's a tendency for ministers in general, and for me in particular, to be saying, this is the greatest verse. This is the greatest passage week after week after week. You know, hundreds of weeks. This is so important. And, you know, the Bible isn't that big. It may look huge. When you first get into it, it seems to go on forever. We're going to talk about that a little bit tonight. There's really not that much in it. It's not that big. And it is all precious, but I've sobered myself up. I thought about this. I reflected. I decided to really make sure that I pondered and considered whether this was true, and I think it is true. This verse, especially verse 14, is one of the great places that explains the meaning and the power of the cross. May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world. This is the end of the book of Galatians, and at the end of the book, you always expect writers, at the end of the essay, at the end of the sermon, at the end of the letter, you expect a writer to summarize and to try to boil things down and to capsulate, and he does. He says, see with what large letters I use. It's possible that, you see, Paul has been dictating through an amanuensis, a secretary, and now at the end he writes in his own hand. And it could be the letters are big because, as we actually talked about, I think, many weeks ago, there's a lot of evidence that Paul had an eye problem, an eye disease, a condition of the eyes. But it's also a possibility, or they may both be true, that Paul is saying, I'm writing in bold letters the main thing I want you to know. And here's what it is. We have here, when Paul gets to the end and he says, there's one thing I want you to know, there's one thing I want you to see, there's one, if there's one thing I can leave you with, it's this. It's the cross. And here he tells us, or better yet, I'll draw out of here, we learn three things. First of all, we learn the central importance of understanding the cross. There is nothing more important in history, there's nothing more important in your life. Here we go, preachers, hyperbole, no, it's not. But the central importance of understanding the cross, that's the first thing we're going to see. The second thing we learn is how you can know that you do understand the cross. See, if understanding the cross is of central importance to Paul, which we'll see, then secondly, how do you know if you do? How do you know you understand it? There's a test here. So, first, the central importance of understanding the cross. Secondly, a test to see whether you do understand. And then thirdly, how to turn your understanding of the cross into a real power that changes your life. A living power. First. First thing we learn here, and it's just, well, it's stated so strongly that the main thing Paul says you have to understand is the cross of Jesus Christ. And, you know, this is one of those places where there's an untranslatable Greek construction that Paul uses at the beginning of verse 14. If you take, you know, in seminary or you take Greek, you come across it and it is sort of untranslatable. In the old King James, the old authorized version, it's usually translated, God forbid. Though the word God is not in there at all. Here, you notice, it just says, may I never. But that's too weak. It's a little Greek construction, may ganoito. And it probably literally means, it literally means, may it never be. See, it's an incredibly strong, intensively strong negative. It's not, it's not enough just to say, may I never. What he says is, I absolutely, under no circumstances, ever, ever, ever will do anything but this. See, may ganoito. May it never be. And so what Paul's getting across here is there's really only one thing that's necessary. Nothing else comes close. May I not think of anything else. There's a place where Paul actually says in the first Corinthians, he says, first came to you Corinthian Christians, when I came to Corinth, he said, I was determined to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. And that doesn't mean that Paul doesn't need, it doesn't mean that Paul doesn't say nothing else that Jesus Christ has said or did matters or that he doesn't really know. He's saying there's nothing close. Let me put it to you negatively. It is very, very common for people to say, and I know there's people here tonight who feel this way. In fact, the average New Yorker for sure believes this, and I think the average American does too. And that is this, that what really matters spiritually is not what you believe, but how you live. Not your doctrine, not your beliefs about God or about Christ or about the hypostatic union of the two natures of Jesus Christ or about the incarnation of the ascension or how many angels can dance on the head of a pin. That sort of thing doesn't matter. You believe this, I believe this. The important thing is whether we live like Jesus. The important thing is whether we love our neighbor as ourselves. The important thing is if we follow his teaching and if we turn the other cheek and if we are peacemakers. See, that's the important thing. Not what you believe, but how you live. Not what you believe about Jesus, but whether you live like Jesus. But Paul does not say, God forbid that I should boast except through the Sermon on the Mount. He doesn't say, God forbid that I should boast except in the Ten Commandments. He also doesn't say, God forbid that I should boast except Jesus walking on the water. However, what he's really trying to say is exactly the opposite. Exactly the opposite. Paul is saying what really matters is not the teaching of Jesus. What really matters is not so much what Jesus told us to do. What matters is what Jesus came to do. It doesn't matter hardly at all what he said we should do, but what he actually came and did. Now, evidence? Just a little bit. I mean, I don't want to take much time on this, but I'd like to drive it home. So let me give you just a couple of examples. Jesus Christ himself. This was the very center of his consciousness. When in Matthew 16, Jesus says to Peter, Who do you say that I am? Peter says, You are the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus says, Flesh and blood has not revealed this to thee. But my Father who is in heaven. In other words, Jesus says, This is right. And then, what do we read? Immediately, it says, From that moment, Jesus began to show to his disciples how he has to go to Jerusalem, suffer and be killed, and rise from the dead on the third day. But Peter began to rebuke him. And Jesus turned to Peter and said, Get thee behind me, Satan. Peter was quite all right with Jesus as long as he was a teacher, as long as he was telling us how to live, how to pray, how to approach God. You know, how to deal with our troubles, how to love each other, how to get along. But as soon as Jesus says, Well, you know, if you want to know what I'm really about, I'll tell you what I'm about. I'll tell you what I'm here to do. I'm here to die. Peter couldn't handle it. He flipped. And when Peter says, I don't believe that, Jesus didn't say, Well, you have your belief. I have my belief. Jesus said, Get thee behind me, Satan. Because you are in the grip of Satan if you do not see that the main thing that Jesus came to do was to die. That everything else is superfluous. God forbid that anything else would have the focus, would have the centrality in your head and your mind and your heart but this. Well, look at the apostles. Eventually, did they get it? Did they get it? One of the things, you're going to laugh a little bit at me on this. One of the things that's interesting about the Gospels is they're really terrible biographies. As biographies, they're terrible biographies. You know, if you ask somebody, I mean, let's just say you're a history professor and you ask, you know, students to write a biography of a person. You say, here's eight people and I want you to choose one. I want you to write a biographical essay. And what if they do what John did? And that is, chapters 1 to 11 is on the first 99.9% of Jesus' life and the last half of the book is about the last week. I mean, that's a pretty bad biography. He says, John almost says nothing about the birth. Actually, he hardly says anything. He just slips right over and he goes, you know, chapters 1 to 11 is about the rest of Jesus' life and then suddenly, chapter 12 to the end, chapter 12 to 21, virtually half the book is about what? His death. Why? All of them were like that. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Why is virtually the whole book about his death? Because they gloried in the cross. They boasted in the cross. They realized this is what it's about. It's not the Sermon on the Mount. It's not the Ten Commandments. It's not how you live. It's what you believe about the cross. That's everything. That's everything. In fact, and this is where you're going to laugh at me maybe, I remember one day having a conniption over the last verse of the book of John. and this is where you're going. and this is where you're going. to laugh at me maybe, I remember one day having a conniption over the last verse of the book of John. The book of John, at the very end, he says, well now there's many, many, many other things that Jesus said and did, and I could fill hundreds of books with them, but I'm not going to. Now you know, tonight I counted how many pages in my Bible the Gospel of John is, 25 pages. And here is the, listen, I am always, aren't you, I'm always struggling with, I have decisions to make, what would Jesus want me to do? I've got, I've got, there's forks in the road, there's decisions, there's moral dilemmas, there's all these things, and don't you always say, I wish I knew more. What does Jesus say about this? What does Jesus say about this? Here is a guy that has the audacity to come and say, I could have given you thousands of pages of teaching from the Son of God. Thousands, I only give you 25. And I look at him, I remember one day I had a bit of a condition, I said, I needed that, you idiot. You spent, you spent three years with Jesus, and then you spent 40 days, you know, between the resurrection and the ascension, 40 days, where Jesus is just going round the clock intensive, teaching him about everything. 40 days, oh my God, it was 25 pages. And there's all this stuff he could have said. I needed that, you idiot. And what is John saying? John is saying, no, you don't. You only need what I gave you. You need the cross. And I'm going to try to show you this before we're done. But what Paul is saying, what John is saying, what all the apostles are saying, if you have the cross, if you understand the cross, if you know how to use the cross in your life, you've got it. But, you don't need one verse more than what I gave you. They boasted in the cross, they gloried in the cross. I mean, I have heard, I have heard numbers, and you will too, if you read carefully and if you listen carefully. There are clergy all over New York City, all over this area. They'll be quoted in the papers, they'll be quoted, and what they'll say is this. Ah, we don't even know really what Jesus taught exactly. We don't know what he did. We don't know if he said this or that. We really don't know whether he died here or there. We don't know how he died. We don't know much about it. It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter what you believe about all these doctrines. It really doesn't matter. What really matters is whether we live like Jesus said to live. If we live these good lives, if we love our neighbors, that's the most important thing. And in those very churches, all the time, relentlessly, their services are built around what? The Lord's Supper. Why? Because Jesus said, there's one thing I want you to remember. One thing. I want you to do it over and over. I want you to reenact it. I want you to drill it in. What is it? My death. So here in the churches where they say, well, who knows? You know, what's really important is that we just live good lives. We can see that Jesus Christ did not want the Christian faith built around that. They wanted, he wants the whole Christian faith built around this. God forbid that I should boast except in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me and I to the world. So if it's really true, oh, wait, one more thing. Do we really just need another moral teacher? What if Jesus never came? If the teaching is the important thing, didn't we know already? The Old Testament said, love your neighbor as yourself. Buddha said, love your neighbor. Do we really need another moral teacher? Even if you grant he's the best. Even if you grant he has the most fine-tuned and wise and balanced set of teaching. Do we really need that? That's not what the world needs. The world knows it needs to love the neighbor as itself. The world needs a new heart. The world doesn't need a set of ethics. The world needs something to crucify, something to smash, something to destroy the things that bind us. We need a power. We need a new nature. So if Paul is really saying here at the very end, the one thing you need to know is the cross. There's only three kinds of people in this room. Some of you are not Christians. Then the only thing, the main thing that you need to know in order to become one is to understand the cross. That's the thing. Understand the cross. Number two, some of you are Christians. This must also mean that the main thing you need to know in order to grow up into one to be a Christian is the cross. Paul doesn't say, may you, people trying to come to faith in Christ, you know, boast in nothing. No, he says, may I. He's an apostle. May I not now, but never. May I never boast in anything. What he's saying is if you want to grow into being a Christian that you should be, this is the main thing you have to understand. So if you're not a Christian, this is the main way. This is what you have to understand to become one. If you are a Christian, this is what you mainly have to understand in order to grow into one. And if you don't know whether you're a Christian or not, this is the main thing you have to understand in order to figure out if you are one. Your understanding of the cross. Look at it. What does it mean? That's how you'll know whether you're a Christian or not. Okay, secondly. Now, the first thing we see is the central importance of understanding the cross. The second thing, we have a test here. Well, how do you know if you understand it? I mean, I got some of you nervous, right? I was like, gosh, do I? Well. right before where Paul starts talking about these false teachers that all through the book of Galatians he's been fighting with. In verse 12, it says, those who want to make a good impression outwardly are trying to compel you to be circumcised. The only reason they do this is to avoid being persecuted for the cross of Christ. Not even those who are circumcised obey the law, yet they want you to be circumcised so they may boast about your flesh. They don't want to be persecuted for the cross of Christ now. All right, now let's look at this. Remember, the false teachers said, and Paul said two different things to the Galatians. Paul said to the Galatians, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, number one, and you will be saved number two, and as a result, number three, you'll obey the law. And the false teachers came along and said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, number one, and obey the law of God, number two, and as a result, number three, you'll be saved. Got that? Paul said, believe and be saved, and as a result, you'll obey. And the false teacher said, believe and obey, and as a result, you'll be saved. Now, why the difference? Paul said, no, no, no, no. Paul said, I have this wonderful teaching that as soon as you believe, you're accepted. You don't have to clean yourself up. You're accepted, and you're saved, and you're welcomed by God, and you're adopted, and then you will obey. The false teacher said, no. Well, what did the false teacher say was the reason for their difference from Paul? And here's what they said. They basically said, because we love the law. Paul doesn't love the law. We love the law. We're like the psalmist who said, oh, how I love thy law, sweeter than a honeycomb to my mouth. But Paul says here, that's not it. He says, I love the law. It's sweeter than a honeycomb to my mouth. Now, here's what they're afraid of. They are stumbling at the offensiveness of the cross. It says here in verse 12, they don't want to be, pardon me, persecuted for the cross of Christ. Persecuted. Why? Why does the cross always bring persecution? Because if you go back, and you don't have to, I'll read it to you. In Galatians 5.12, this is what Paul says. He says, brothers, if I'm still preaching circumcision, why am I being persecuted? In that case, the offense of the cross has been abolished. Now, here's what Paul's saying. The only way that you'll ever get to the sweetness of the grace of God, and the sweetness of the cross, the only way you'll ever find the cross to be something that just fills you up with sweetness, because you say, oh my goodness, through the cross of Jesus Christ, I'm accepted, is first you have to go through the offensiveness of the cross. The cross is offensive. And these false teachers were afraid or were repulsed by it. And this is the test. Now, listen. The test is, how do you know if you understand the cross? And the test is, if you have wrestled with and felt the offensiveness of the cross. The cross is, by nature, offensive. People do not just say, ever, when they hear the teaching of the cross, when they hear the teaching of it, that you can only be saved through the death of Jesus Christ on the cross, and if you believe in what Jesus Christ did for you on the cross, then you're completely accepted. When people hear that, they don't just say, oh, that's too good to be true. Never. They don't say, oh, well, you have your view, I have my view. Never. Not if they've heard it. But if they've heard it, they will be offended by it. They will be repulsed by it. And the only way for you to get the sweetness of the cross, the sweetness of the cross is on the far side of the offense. If you've never been offended by it, you haven't understood it, and that's the reason why it hasn't changed your life. That's pretty amazing. You think I'm exaggerating? When Matthew 11, in Matthew 11, John the Baptist sends the messengers, he's in prison, so he can't go himself, and he says, through the messengers, he says to Jesus Christ, are you the one who is to come, or shall we seek another? Jesus gives an answer, and he explains. He says, and, you know, that's a great sermon right there, but we won't look into it. And he says, well, go back and tell John what you see, that the blind see, and the, you know, the lame walk, and the poor have good news preached to them. And then he says, one of the most weird beatitudes in the world, the weirdest beatitude of all, blessed is the one who takes no offense in me. Now, what could that mean? It cannot mean that everybody in the world who's never thought enough about Jesus Christ to be offended is blessed. So he can't mean just anybody, you know, who's not offended. What he must mean is, anybody who really comes to grips with what I have come to do will feel the offense. Blessed is the one who's dealt with it. Blessed is the one who's gone through it. Blessed is the one who's... cross. And that's it. You will never feel the sweetness of the cross, and you will never have really come to grips with it until you actually get offended, to at least feel the offense. I am not saying that you can't have believed in the cross when you're young, and all the way through, up until the rest of your life, you never stop believing in it. I'm not saying that a person has to have actually, you know, given up on the cross, or just gone into the dark night of despair, or the dark night of the soul over it. But I tell you, what Jesus is saying, what Paul is saying, anybody who understands the cross feels the offensiveness of it, the outrageousness of it. It's visceral. You know, I can give you all kinds of quotes of people who don't believe. I mean, here's one, here's a good, a leading philosopher of the English world, Alfred Jules Eyre. At one point, he says, the Christian doctrine of the atonement on the cross is, quote, intellectually contemptible and morally outrageous. And that's typical. Bertrand Russell says, anyone who is profoundly, no one who is profoundly human can really believe God would punish sin like that. And he called the cross the doctrine of cruelty. And my old friend R.C. Sproul remembers, you know, it's funny, it has happened to him in Pennsylvania. It's never happened to me in New York, so I don't get this. But he was talking about the cross one day and talking about either preaching or teaching. I think it was lecturing someplace. Some man got up near the back of the room and got up and he said, that's primitive and obscene. I can't believe that. I've been in New York for nine years and nobody's done that to me or anything like that. And that just goes to show, I got, well, maybe I'm not doing what I should be doing. But you see, you have not, you will never taste the sweetness until you taste the bitterness. The doctrine of the cross is like an incredibly bitter shell with an incredibly sweet inside. And that's what Paul's saying. Now, you know, I need to say something about that. Why is it offensive? And here's why. No matter where you are, no matter who you are, whether you're a conservative or a liberal, no matter whether you're an ancient person or a modern person, the cross offends. And I'll just, I'll just suggest three ways at least. And by the way, if you haven't thought of these, as I talk to you, if you start to say, yeah, I do hate that. Well, you see, you haven't thought about the cross. You don't understand it. Look, number one, first reason why the cross is so offensive, it is the greatest monument to our impotence and wickedness. The only, now here, I use this in the, I use this story that I learned this from Dr. Roger Nicole, my theology professor years ago. And I use this story in the question answer time all the time, but I probably get it out once a year, but it's just as well. Because it's very important to hear. Why did Jesus die for you? Now, if, why did Jesus die? Well, Dr. Nicole says, imagine that your house is burning down, but you've gotten all your best possessions out and you've gotten your children and your family out and you're standing there and you're watching your house burn down and you feel sad. Your neighbor comes up to you and says, hey, let me show you how much I love you. And he runs into the house, throws himself screaming into the funeral fiery pyre and dies. And do you look at him and say, oh, how wonderful, how he loved us? No, of course not. You look at him and say, what an idiot. But if on the other hand, while you're standing outside watching your house burn up, you have a child, one of your children is in there and nobody can get in. And the fire department says, it's hopeless. And your neighbor comes by and says, let me show you how much I love you. And he goes in and he rescues the child at the, at the, at the loss of his own life. And he dies. Then you say, now, Dr. Nicole simply was making this point. He was trying to say, do you believe that all good people everywhere, that all good people everywhere can find God? If they just seek him and pray for him, you don't have to be a Christian. Any good person anywhere can just come to Christ. I mean, come to God. You don't have to know about Christ or about the cross or any of those things. As long as you really seek God, if you're really a good person, you can find God. Doesn't that sound open-minded? Of course. And what that means is, if it is possible for a person, if you're not dying, if you are not impotent, if you're not lost, then when some, for Jesus Christ to come and die for you is not just nice. It's repugnant. It's stupid. It's crazy. You see where I'm going? Either you are hopelessly lost and Jesus Christ's death on the cross makes tremendous sense. You see? And there is no other way for anybody. Trying isn't possible. Trying to see God being good. There's no other way. This is the only way. To die voluntarily is repugnant unless there is no other way to save a life. You see that? Either there's no other way to God except through Christ. His death then makes sense. And if there's any other way, then his death is repugnant. But the one thing you can't say is... is... good people everywhere can find God. That's impossible. Have some guts, and suddenly you're beginning to feel the offense. Oh my goodness. You see, that gets liberal people upset. Liberal people say, I'm offended because it's intolerant, because it's too exclusive. I'm offended by this idea. But don't you see, it's grace, it's grace, it's grace. See, if salvation is completely by grace and not through trying hard, then it has to be through the cross. It has to be through Jesus only. And if you say, well, all good people everywhere, good and wise people everywhere can come to God, that sounds very, very open, but it's not. It's exclusive, because what you're saying is, what about us moral failures? You good and wise people get any moral failures are out. But the cross, though it is exclusive, you have to believe in the cross, it's an incredibly inclusive exclusivity, because as Jesus Christ exalted that day, and he looked to heaven and he said, I thank thee, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and the prudent and revealed them unto babes. What is Jesus saying? If salvation is by the cross alone, the wise in their own eyes, the cool, the strong, the proud are out, and the people who are like little babies who say, I have no hope except to hold on to the skirts of my mother's apron, to hold on and just say, save me by sheer grace, either the proud are out and the humble and weak and dependent are in, or else, you see, the bad are out, the moral failures are out, and the good and the wise are in. Which is it? The cross offends you, but if you think about it, it's a very inclusive exclusivity. Nevertheless, it offends people, it offends people, because it says, only through the cross. So it offends the liberal mind. On the other hand, it offends the conservative mind terribly. And here's the reason why. Think about what the cross means. Conservative people think this is very dangerous. This is what the cross means. The cross means those of you who have tried like crazy to be good parents or to be good children. You've been good to your parents, and you've been good to your children. You've worked very hard. You are in the very same spot as the persons who have been terrible, abandoned their parents, abandoned their children. You're in the same spot. You both need the cross. You're in the same spot. You're both lost. Only the cross will save you. Those of you who have disciplined your heart, and you've stayed utterly faithful to your spouse sexually for years. You're in the very same place as the person who has given in again and again to temptation. Those of you who have not made much money because you went into contracting and you didn't take kickbacks are in the very same place as the guy who's got this incredible mansion, you know, on the water. Because of all the kickbacks, you're both lost with the cross. You can be received completely and accepted. The cross means, what does the cross mean? Romans 3, the righteousness of God which comes by faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe, for there is no difference, Paul says, for all have sinned. The cross means there is no difference. Don't you see why conservatives say this is terribly dangerous? The Christianity comes out and tells people moral failures are in the very same place. We want more stigma. You see, we want to stigmatize people more. We want to shame people more. How are we going to get people to live good lives? This is dangerous. And the liberals say, this is dangerous. It's intolerant. It's a threat to pluralism. Everybody's offended by the cross. Everybody always has been. Totalitarian governments, democratic governments, traditional governments, modern governments, post-modern governments. Everybody hates the cross once you hear it, until you realize why. The cross is hated because it is against all schemes of self-salvation. Again, it is against all schemes of pride. It's pride that makes the conservatives say, it's dangerous to say moral failures are in the same boat as the good people. It's pride that makes the liberals say, you're telling me that I am so weak that the only way is through Jesus Christ? Yes. You see, because here's what the cross says. Martin Lloyd-Jones, years ago, remember I've told you this, when he wanted to figure out where a person's heart was, he used to say, are you a Christian? And if somebody says, I'm trying, he knew he had no idea what a Christian was. You can't be a Christian through trying. You can only be a Christian through dying. You can only be a Christian through Jesus dying for you, and then you dying to self-salvation and self-righteousness. Do you feel the offensiveness of the cross? Do you see that? Do you understand that? Oh my. You know, I guess it comes down to this. I like New York City because there's more people angry about Christianity. When I go out into middle America, almost nobody's upset and nobody's life's being changed either. I mean, if you're offended, at least you're halfway there. part. The nice people are out there having their tiny little lives. They say, oh, of course I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. I believe he died on the cross for my salvation. But the reason there's no sweetness and no transformation in their life is because they haven't even tasted the thing. They haven't put it in their mouth. Well, all good people believe Jesus died for their sins. They haven't thought it through. I'd rather be here. That's the teaching. The gospel of grace alone, the gospel of the cross, either, either. Once you accept it, it's the greatest thing in the world. It can make you cry anytime you even think about it. Cry for joy. Or it's the most repugnant thing in the world. But if you're in the middle and it's neither, it's neither transform your life nor is it repugnant, all I'm asking you to do is think. Go back to part one. You don't understand it yet. Now, lastly, we see here the central importance of the cross. And secondly, you have to understand it. Secondly, we see the test. You're offended. Then you understand it. But finally, once you understand it, how do you make it a power in your life? And this is what the most amazing thing. Jesus Christ, pardon me, Paul says right here, may I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ through whom the world has been crucified to me and I to the world. The world is crucified to me. Now look carefully. First of all, he's not saying that the world is killed by the cross. What it's saying is the world is killed to you. It's not that the world's dead. The world's dead to you. It's not so much even that you're dead, but you're dead to it. What does that mean? It means it's possible for the cross to come into your life in such a way that nothing in the world phases you at all. I think as Donald Guthrie in his commentary in Galatians says this, this is a brief quote, but it helps. He says, it means the natural, quote unquote, the natural world as such has ceased to have any claims on us. Now what it means is are you worried? Are you scared right now? Are you incredibly lonely? Are you depressed? Are you angry? Okay, now be careful. You might just be sleeping too much or sleeping too little or eating the wrong things, but having said all that, the world will not have this power if the cross has the place in your life that it should have. It can't faze you. It can't upset you. It means it can't worry you. It can't scare you. It can't embitter you. It can't. Well, how can that happen? This little word, this is not hyperbole. This is not a little poetic flourish. It all depends on what you boast in. May I never boast. Oh, you say boast. Yes, Paul, you know, he's a preacher. Flourish, boast. What does boast mean? Boast. This is what Paul is saying. If the world is throwing you today, if you're bitter and you can't get over your anger, if you're discouraged, if you're despondent, if you're scared, if you're afraid, if you're shy, if you're bored, in other words, if the world is controlling you in any way, it's because you're boasting in something besides the cross. What does boast mean? Well, what you boast in is the center of your personality. Martin Luther says, when you're attacked, when you fail, how do you defend yourself to yourself? When you fail, what do you say to yourself? Well, that's what you boast in. Or, I'll give you another example, maybe a little better example. The Righteous Brothers. What's the Righteous Brothers saying? They're saying, you're my soul and inspiration. You're all I got to get me by. Remember? You're my soul. And then he says, without you, baby, what good am I? Now, you are saying that to somebody. You are saying that to something. What is it? Something, look, verse 12, that they may boast about your flesh. What does it mean to boast in your flesh? The flesh means a created thing. There is something that you're boasting in, which means this is my glory. This is my joy. This is my honor. This is what I defend myself with. This is what, if I don't have, what good am I? I'm nothing. Here's what Jesus is trying to, this is what Paul is just trying to say. Paul is trying to say, hey, this isn't that hard to do. And yet it's hard, but this is fairly simple. If you're boasting in the cross, the world has no power over you. If the world has a power over you, you have to ask yourself, what am I boasting in besides the cross of Jesus Christ? What am I looking to, to save me besides Jesus Christ? If I'm boasting in the cross, I am utterly free. I have a big life. I stride through life. I'm living a big life. Nothing gets me down. Nothing pulls me down. You see that? How do you do it? Well, number one, you intellectually glory and boast in the cross. Intellectually glory and boast in the cross. Intellectually, what that means is you do have to try to understand it. You know, I remember, I remember one place I broke through on the cross was when I was reading, I think it's in J.I. Packer's book, Knowing God. There's a great chapter called The Heart of the Gospel, and it's about the whole idea of propitiation. And the word propitiation Jesus Christ as a propitiation. And the word propitiation means to turn away the wrath of God. And J.I. Packer says people have been so upset with that over the years. They say, oh my gosh, will you still believe in this? And they cite the place in the Iliad, I think it is, where Agamemnon, you know, is trying to go sail over to Troy and to storm the, you know, storm the great city and win. And what he does is he sacrifices his daughter, he kills his daughter, and offers up him as a sacrifice so that the gods will give him good wins and good favor. And you say, oh my gosh, the gods were angry at Agamemnon, so he, you know, he kills his daughter and he offers her up. And you want to turn the clock back? You want to have a God like that? You believe in a bloodthirsty God like that? And Packer says, no, listen, the God of the Bible is not like the wimpy modern gods who just wink at injustice. They say, oh yeah, injustice, oh well. But the God of the Bible is not like the ancient gods who were bloodthirsty who said, yes, I'm mad, give me blood. And then you have to come up with your child and offer him up. Oh no, Jesus Christ, see, it's God himself that put his son up. God does not ask you to put your son up. God is not bloodthirsty. But God does say the price must be paid. And therefore you have in Acts 20, where actually Paul says, shepherd the flock of God, which God bought and purchased with his own blood. God shed his blood. So, you know, you have to intellectually, you struggle and you wrestle with it until some days you suddenly look and you say, oh my word, the cross. To see the law by love fulfilled and hear his pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. You see, you know, you think about the cross and someday intellectually you have to think about it and you look it over and you say, wait a minute. And sometimes you see the beauty of it, the wisdom of it. That's the first thing. But then the second thing is you don't just intellectually glory, you have to personally glory in it. As I said, ask that question. Ask that question tonight. What am I boasting in besides the cross? Whatever I'm angry about, whatever I'm tempted, whatever it's getting me down, something I'm boasting in. And I'll look at that thing and say, that will never die for me. Never. That will never save me. That will never make me beautiful. Never. Count Nicholas von Zinzendorf was the leader of the Moravians. He was the founder of a great revival and a great missionary movement. He became a Christian because he was looking, I think, at an art gallery. He saw a picture of Jesus Christ on the cross and underneath somebody, the artist had written the words, I have done this for thee. What will thou do for me? And Zinzendorf suddenly realized anything. May I never boast except in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ through whom the world is crucified to me and I to the world. Let's pray. Father, we pray that you'd give us an understanding of the cross, help us to get through the bitterness of the cross and the sweetness of the cross. And then finally, let us learn how to boast in it so that it becomes a power in our lives. We thank you for the comprehensiveness of this little compendium, this little place where Paul puts oceans in a thimble. Help us to drink from it, help us to understand it. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
