TITLE: Born Into Community
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:8-17
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: The Radical Imperative; A New Birth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/born-into-community/

============================================================

We're told the new birth is not just a kind of Christianity, and the image, which is kind of graphic, but the more I thought about it, the more perfect it is. The image that comes to us is this. It's just as an egg needs to be fertilized with life from outside of it, if it's to burst into a whole new life, so our souls, our hearts, need the divine life, need the Holy Spirit, need the very lifeblood of God to come into us, and then we're revolutionized. We're changed from the root. Now, we've been looking at this each week, but this week we're going to look at one last theme that's actually been there every week. It's in the text we've looked at, and even though the term new birth doesn't show up in this particular passage, if you were here last week or the last couple weeks, you know that just before, just before it, in 1 Peter 1, verses 22, 23, and 24, right up there, it talks about being born again, and in fact, in verses 21, 22, 23, it says this, love one another deeply, for you've been born again. And the teaching is this, the theme tonight is this, it's best for a child to not just be born into the world in general, but be born into a family. Not just to be born into a world with a general relationship with all human beings, to be born into a family with a special relationship to some. And the Bible tells us that the new birth creates a family. Now, you know, I mean, the normal way the family works is you have this rather intimate relationship with all the other people who have the same parent, okay? And you live together, you know one another, you're born into a family. And the Bible tells us that you are not born again into just a kind of individual state of peace and inner calm and comfort. The new birth creates a new community. It puts you into a community with all other people who have been through the same experience. And you have to understand that. We have to know that. And we're going to look at that tonight. And before I go to it, there might, I'm sure there are, and this is New York, this is Redeemer, and I'm sure there's people here who say to themselves, A, I don't know if I'm a believer. I don't know if I've had the new birth. Or number two, you can say, I know I'm not a believer. I know I haven't had whatever you're talking about. And therefore, what do I need this for? What am I doing here? It's rainy night. I came out. I don't know why I'm here. And the answer is, if you think about it, if you're a person who says, I don't believe or I don't know if I believe, if you have little faith, no faith, lost faith, you know. By and large, if you're honest with yourself, you will say, it didn't happen because of Religion 101. It didn't really happen, really, for intellectual reasons. Generally speaking, most people I know who never developed faith in Jesus Christ or lost what little they had, generally, if they tell me why, it's because of this. What is it because of? Because they've been around churches, are they around Christian institutions or Christian organizations in which the relationships, the human relationships inside, looked exactly like everywhere else. The power relationships were as exploitive inside the Christian church organization as outside. And you said, forget it. And therefore, really, one of the main reasons that the average person, I think, at least in this country, doesn't believe is not they don't know anything about Christianity, but because of that. Now, what's interesting is Peter tells us, it's something that you would have to be true historically. Peter tells us it wasn't that way in the beginning, that in the beginning of the Christian church, the Christian churches had a radically different community created by the new birth that was very different from the relationships in society as a whole. And what I want you to see, no matter who you are tonight, is that it doesn't have to be the way it usually is in churches. This is what's possible. This is what can be. Now, there's three things we learned. Three things we're learning here. The intensity of Christian community, the intensity, secondly, the character of it. It's not just our relationships are intense, but they have a certain character to them. And lastly, the basis of it. The intensity of Christian community, the character of Christian community, the basis. In other words, how intense it is, what the relationships are really like, and how do we develop them? How do we grow in them? Number one, intensity. Now, look at the images here. There's actually quite a few. I didn't have Mindy read the entire passage because we're really looking at verses 4 to 10. But if you look through, you'll see there's at least three images, metaphors used for the Christian church. One of them is that we, Christians are members of God's nation. Now, we'll get back to that. But you see... nation. Verse 9 talks about us being a people. Not just people, by the way, of course we're people, you know, right? What else would we be? But a people means you're a society, a nation. Another image, though, is not just that we're members or citizens of God's nation, that's one metaphor for the church, but we're also children in God's family. Now, that happens more earlier in the chapter, but if you even look down at the bottom of the page, a verse that wasn't read tonight, show proper respect to everyone, love the brotherhood. Now, the trouble with this word brotherhood, it doesn't get much across in English, right away it makes you think of the lodge, or, you know, a bunch of guys in funny hats sitting around drinking, bowling, or whatever. But what you actually have is a word, of course, is your family. That we, when you're born again, you're brought into a family. We're children in God's family. But the most intriguing, and the metaphor I want to press for a second, is that we're not just, according to this text, it's not just that Christians are citizens in God's nation and children in God's family, but we're stones in God's temple. And this weird mixed metaphor, honestly, if you look at verse 4 and 5, it says, you, like living stones, are being built into a spiritual house, which literally means a house of the Spirit, a temple. Now, I want you to see the intensity of this image, because what God is, what Peter's doing, what, obviously, then, what God is doing, what Peter is doing is he's incredibly, in an incredible way, he's intertwining our relationship with God and our relationship with other Christians, our relationship with the community, in a way that's going to shock the average American. Doesn't want to believe this, but let me show you what I mean. Look how tightly intertwined. Why was a temple so important in ancient times? And why was Christianity so radical? I'm not going to get back to this tonight, but I'm hoping in my next series to talk about this at some point. But here's a major scholar, James Dunn, British scholar, a scholar about the Bible, about ancient history, and he says this, the earliest Christian groups would have stood out as strangely distinctive by the fact that they practiced no sacrificial ritual, named no one as priest, and looked to no temple like the one in Jerusalem. And what Dunn is saying, what was so radical, have you ever thought of this? We're so anachronistic. We always have a tendency to think, surely everybody back then would have thought just the way we do now. Christianity came along. It was the very first history in the religion of the world that said, you don't need a temple. You don't need an altar. You don't need a priest. You don't need any sacrifices. Every culture, every religion sensed that there was a gap between us and God. And if you were going to experience the divine, you needed a temple. You needed priests. You needed sacrifices. You needed rituals of some sort. Of course, there's, you know, as many different forms of religion as there are cultures in the world, but that was a kind of given. Christianity comes along, and here's what's so weird about it. Every other religion, every other faith, every other philosophy says, if you want to experience God, you need to pick up a trowel and lay brick upon brick. You need to build a building. We got to have a temple. You got to have a temple. How else are you going to relate to God? How are you going to relate to Apollos or Zeus? How are you going to relate to, how are you going to relate? So what you have to do is you have to lay brick upon brick. And Peter comes in with the most revolutionary message possible because Peter is saying, what, that there's no temple? Not exactly. He's saying there is a place where you can experience the spirit. There is a place where you can touch the divine. But here's how it's done. Not by laying brick upon brick, but by laying Christian upon Christian. What Peter is saying is, you find God through Christian community. The Christian community is the temple. And look at the image. First of all, he is not saying here, yes, when you become a Christian, you automatically have come to Christ and therefore you have, in some general way, become part of the church. All people who believe. Look at, it's a present tense. Look at verse 5, huh? It says, come to him. He's talking to Christians, but he says, as you come to him, you are being built. Now what, how do you build something? How do you build a building? Well, the fact is, you fit. You have to fit the stone so that there's stones above it that it's supporting, and stones below it, right? And a good builder puts the right stone in the right place, right? You don't want, you don't want to, there might be a beautiful stone which isn't made of the kind of stuff that can hold up the building. You don't want a stone like that down here, because then the building will collapse. You want the beautiful, but maybe, you know, a stone that gets one thing done, it shows the beauty of the building. everything up. You've got to put that stone in the right place. You've got to have them fitted together. And what do you have to do? And then you have to cement them together. And Peter says, that's how you experience God now. Now, you don't build, you don't put brick upon brick. You lay Christian upon Christian. Now, think about this. Think about this image. What does this mean? This means the depths of your relationships. In your Christian relationships, and the degree of depth of relationships, to the degree that you're being built into God and into one another, to that degree, God is inhabiting you. I'm not saying you have to belong to a church in order to be saved. We're not talking about that. These people are already, quote-unquote, saved. What they are is they're being built up, because God inhabits us together. This is astounding. Hey, let me apply this, because we have to move on. Do you see what this is saying? This is saying, if you're a typical American Christian, you want to have a personal relationship with him, and you want to go to the church or churches of your choice, and that's it. Can you square this image with just coming to church on Sunday? Can you square this image with even just coming to church every Sunday? Some of you are, I come to church every Sunday. But are you fitted? Are you built in? Look at the image. First of all, once you put a stone into the temple, into a wall, if it's going to be a good wall, they need to stay there. The stones need to stay there. You don't take the stones out. The stones don't leave. The stones stay there. There needs to be, you need to spend time, Christians need to spend time with each other. Secondly, you need to find your role in the Christian community, right? The stone has to be in the right spot. You have to have people above you, which means people that you are supporting, people that you are instructing, people that you are ministering to and serving, but people below you, which means, actually, what's interesting about this is it's very, very similar to the gospel. The people below you are the people stronger than you, the people serving you, because they're more mature than you. And at any given time, you have to be in these deep relationships where people are accountable to you and you're accountable to people. You are in relationships where you're knowing one another, knowing one another well enough that you pray together so that you really are experiencing God together, knowing one another well enough so that people catch you being who you really are so they can tell you about things that you wouldn't see otherwise. God is actually saying, look, if you're a typical individualistic American Christian and you would like a religion in which you like a God who works in your life without having to be deeply embedded in a particular Christian community with relationships of accountability, if you want a God who works in your life without that, go get your own God, because I don't work that way. That's what he's saying. So anyway, are your relationships intense enough? Do you just have a few Christian friends scattered all around? Are they intense enough? Are you really built into each other? Do you really have a role? And by the way, have you ever noticed, if you think about these things, all the things I'm talking about cannot really be squared with simply coming to a big meeting? These are things that happen in one-on-one relationships and especially in small groups. You have to be either in an informal small group of Christians or a formal small group of Christians in which these things are happening. So the first thing is we're told about is the intensity of our relationships, that our relationship with God now and our relationship with each other is completely intertwined. See, in religion, you go to the temple. In religion, you do the thing. Whatever it is, all the religions are different, but you have certain things that you do and you go to a building and you make your offerings and you do whatever you're supposed to do and then, you know, you have dookie points with God or something like that. And there's no relationship necessary with anybody else. But the Christian faith by definition is the temple is the community. The way to experience God is to lay Christian upon Christian, get them together, bring them into close contact with each other. I can spell out why it works, but we don't have time. This is an amazing passage. It tells too many things, so in some ways I have to fly over it. First, the intensity. Second thing we learn, though, is the character of our relationships. And what I mean by that is intensity, it's nice, but what do we spend time doing? You know, we're supposed to be together just to be talking. We're supposed to be praying. We find our roles. We're accountable. We're, you know, great. But for what? It's got to be more than socializing, even long periods of socializing. What are we doing? And the second thing we learn here is that you don't just have intense community. There's a certain character to the community. The purpose of Christian community is not just, you know, nice feelings, feelings of being around other people. It's to forge something. And here's what we see. We are here to forge a... verse 9 that has four very, very, very, very famous, and very important to me over the years, four famous, each one is two words, four famous two-word descriptions of the church. Chosen people, royal priesthood, holy nation, a people belonging to God. First of all, holy nation. We are to be a holy nation. We are built into a holy nation. Our relationships are to create a holy nation. What does that mean? Well, one thing that's very interesting about this word nation, this is the word ethne or ethnic. Peter is writing to multi-ethnic cities and to multi-ethnic churches. See, the Pax Romana was a condition created by the ascendancy of the political and military power of Rome because Rome was so powerful that all around the Mediterranean and southern half, and in most of Europe, nations and people groups that had never been able to get around, get along together, now were able to move around because Rome was in charge. Nobody was fighting anymore. Rome was in charge of everybody, you know. The Gauls didn't fight the Britons. I don't know if they did, by the way. Somebody out here, I'm sure, has a PhD in early European history is going to write me about it, but I mean, the Gauls don't fight the Britons anymore. Why? Because the Romans are in charge of both of them. You had something called the Pax Romana and you had easy travel, and therefore, for the first time, probably in the history of the world, you developed multi-ethnic cities because people could move about, and you could have seven, eight, nine ethnic groups in cities without the wars and without the other problems because of the peace of Rome. So what you have is that you have these multi-ethnic cities. Peter's writing, therefore, to churches filled with people who were both Greek and Roman and African and Jewish, all the different groups. You can see it when you read, say, Acts 13 and see the church in Antioch, all the different groups, and yet Peter has the audacity to say, you are a holy, which means distinct. The original word means distinct, separate, distinct, ethnic. What is he saying? Well, it's this. Years ago, my oldest son got into archery for a while, so I used to drive him out to an archery center in Queens where he used to rent a bow and arrow, and it was kind of interesting, but one of the things I realized, there was a little archery world out there. People who loved archery, they got together and they showed off their bows, and there was, it was like an archery world. I mean, it was like there was archery videos and archery, archery events and archery magazines, you know. I would just sit there and watch everybody, and I used to laugh about talking, I used to tell Kathy about the archery culture that there is, you know, hidden out there in New York City, but actually that's not true because it's really a club. Why? A club, in a club, everybody has one thing in common. The archery does not, they have archery in common. A club, okay? There's the archers and the non-archers, but is that really comparable to Nigerians versus Venezuelans versus Koreans versus Germans? What's the difference between a club and a culture? Well, a culture is a comprehensive way of doing everything. Your culture tells you everything. It tells you about business practices. It tells you how to eat your peas. It tells you how males and females relate. It talks about marriage. It talks about everything. Your culture is a comprehensive way of thinking and looking at everything, and when Peter says, you are a holy ethnic, he has the audacity to be saying this. Don't you dare think that the new birth has basically just given you inner peace so that you can just go about your normal life with a little more inspiration? Oh, no. Becoming a Christian is not like joining a club. It's like changing your culture. And what he is saying is that the gospel, and you don't understand the gospel until you realize the gospel actually affects and modifies and revises and changes virtually everything. And what it means to be, what are we doing in our intense relationships? What are we doing when we get together? We are actually supposed to be comprehensively rethinking every single part of our lives together. Asking what are the implications of the gospel for every area of my life, whether it's my business life, whether it's my sex life, whether it's my marriage, whether it's our civil life, our political life, our intellectual life, our aesthetic life, everything. But not just that. In other words, he's saying Christians are not supposed to just be together to feel good about having how we have all these friends. We're supposed to be forging a counterculture, a holy nation. That's what it means, a distinct ethne. But what is so distinct? And the answer is this. You're also a royal priesthood. And that means we are about creating a culture different than every other culture. Because every other culture in the world is basically based on power. And we are to create a culture. one. Royal priesthood is an oxymoron. If you don't understand that, it's because we need to go back a little bit. In every culture, but especially in Israel, but in almost every culture, priests and kings were two very different cretors. A priest stood with his back to you in a temple. Why? Not because he was cold, you know? No. Not because, oh, for the exact opposite reason. He was representing you before the divine. He was representing you before God. The priests were the ones you gave the alms to because they were the ones who worked for the poor. The lepers went to the priests when they were healed, right? Why did they go to the priests? Because the priests were the health officers. The priests worked with the sick. The priests worked with the poor. The job of the priest was to be, was a job of sympathy and service, to stand in your shoes, to be your advocate. The job of a king was utterly different. Priests were not kings, and kings were not priests. The king faces you with a sword in his hand and says, here's the law. Do it or else. And then comes Jesus. And Jesus Christ came and said, I am a king. But I'm a king different than any king you'd ever imagine. He says, I'm a king. For example, he comes riding into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday. But just to make sure we understand he's an utterly different king, he comes in on a little, the colt of a donkey. And here's why. Jesus says, I'm a priestly king. I'm a royal priest. My royalty is service. My royalty is my humility. My triumph is my defeat. And Jesus, think about this. Jesus Christ, the ragtag Messiah, comes in meekness, comes in humility, gets around him 12 illiterate people to be his disciples, and then is immediately executed. And as a result, changes the course of history and civilization. And the world says, what? That's not how it's supposed to be. And Jesus says, that's the way I like to do it. Because service is power in my kingdom. Now, what does it mean to build a culture that's utterly different than every other world culture? And here's what it means. It means Jesus Christ completely reverses the world's values. The point of money. What if you had a culture in which the point of money and making money and spending money was service and nothing to do with power and getting power and having power for people? What if sex was not for self-interest and self-indulgence and power? What if sex was only done in service, ever? What if our relationships were only relationships in which my job was to show, our job was to show service instead of power? We would be a royal priesthood. We would be a holy nation. We'd be a sign of the coming kingdom, of what a new humanity would be like under the lordship of Christ. And Jesus says that, Peter here is saying, that's what you're about. You're never going to have those kind of relations. You're never going to be able to develop this counterculture unless you have intense relationships. Do you think getting together with a few Christian friends every so often, even coming to church and listening to the sermons and being inspired, hopefully, is going to create this? This is work. We're to be an alternate city in New York City. We're supposed to be an alternate nation in the United States. We're supposed to be an alternate people. We're supposed to be saying, let me show you what happens if your identity is so changed that all of our relationships are no longer relationships in which I'm accruing power, power, but I'm actually giving service. In other words, we're supposed to be a culture in which power, love, money, sex, gender, politics, family, everything is redone, remade. Everything is used in non-destructive ways. And we're supposed to show the world what it's like. And that's nothing less than that is what we're called to. Well, third point. How do we do that? I mean, really, does this mean get to work? Just follow the blueprint? No. And the answer that we see here is this. The secret to forming this kind of culture and this kind of community is going to be a change in identity. Now, here, let me talk about identity. And that's the, this is the last point. There's a change in identity, because that's what we said all along. Love one another deeply, for you have been born again. That's what it says up a little earlier in the chapter, though we didn't print it out here. The new birth makes you a new person, and the new person makes it possible. The new identity makes it possible to have this kind of joyful service at the root of all of our relationships, and therefore to form a different culture. In January 1st, year 2000, January 1st, 2000, New York Times Magazine put out of something. a very interesting article in there by Edward Rothstein, extremely interesting article as a matter of fact, and in it, the name of it was Identity, and it was very provocative, even though basically I think he was just sort of rehashing what a number of French philosophers have been saying, like Foucault and people like that for the last 20 years, but here's what he said. He said, identity is our problem in the world, that our future depends on dealing with this issue of identity, and here's what he said. He says, everybody's got to have an identity factor, something you take pride in, something that makes you feel significant, something that makes you feel like, I know who I am and I know that I'm someone special, so everybody's got to have an identity factor, and yet he says, almost naturally, almost inevitably, unless we watch it, it's our identity factor which is the source of the problems in the world. First of all, it's a source of exclusion, and then oppression, and eventually maybe even violence. And here's what he means by that. He says, if what makes you, if your identity factor, if the main thing that makes you feel significant is your culture, your people, you're going to disdain people of other cultures, you're going to at least feel superior to them, you're going to exclude them, you're going to be able to justify perhaps exploiting them, maybe even abusing them, or worse. Well, what if you say, my identity factor, though, is my politics? I'm a conservative, I'm for traditional values, I'm a liberal, I'm for individual freedom, I'm for everybody being counted, see? I'm a liberal, I'm a conservative. He says, right away, if that's what makes you feel significant, if that's your source of identity, that you are working for this noble cause, you will start to exclude the people who don't have your identity factor. You may actually exploit them, you may feel like you can abuse them, you feel like they're the problem with this society. It could even lead to violence. He says, what if your identity factor is a more individual one? It's my job, it's the money I make, it's my family, it's a particular person in my life, a man, a woman in my life, he says, same thing, if anybody gets between you and your identity factor, if anything gets between you, hmm, anger, despondency, lashing out. And to illustrate it, he points this out, he wrote this, it probably isn't true anymore, he says in January 2000, he said, in Florence, Colorado, which is the most secure federal prison, there's three men in the most secure part of the most secure federal prison who are allowed to meet one hour a day, just to say they have somebody to talk to, and they're brought in their cages, and they speak to each other through their cages, and evidently they get along fairly well. You know who those three people are or were? Timothy McVeigh, Ted Kaczynski, and Ramzi Ahmed Youssef. McVeigh was the right-wing bomber of Oklahoma City, Ted Kaczynski was the left-wing Unabomber who, through mail bombs, killed high-tech and corporate people, and Ramzi Ahmed Youssef was an Islamic fundamentalist mastermind of the World Trade Center bombing. And here's what, here's, this is what Rostein's saying. He says, they seem rather different, don't you think? A right-wing, a left-wing, a Muslim. But he says, you know, actually they have something quite a bit in common, they get along fairly well, and that's this. Their identity factor led them all the way down to violence. And he says, we all have a tendency to say, if you're a conservative, you say, yeah, the liberals, they're the nuts. And if you're a liberal, the conservatives, they're the nuts. And the atheists say, ah, you know, it's those fundamentalists. And of course, the fundamentalists say, Stalin, you know, it's the atheists, they're the ones that have no morals. And here's what he's trying to say, no, it's not ideology. It's not your politics. He says, he says there's something about the very factor of identity that naturally seems to move toward first exclusion, then oppression, and then maybe possibly even to violence. Any identity, anyone, any politic, anything. And he's right. And therefore, the question is, how can you create a community in which instead of power, service is at the heart of it? And the answer is, you need a whole new identity. And here's what Christianity gives you. Two planks of this new identity. Go back to verse 9. First of all, you're a chosen people. What does that mean? Some people say, oh, that sounds terrible. You're the chosen people. That sounds very exclusive. But you're not listening. You're not listening to the word. It says you're the, we are, Christians are chosen people, not choice people. Do you see the difference between chosen and choice? See, the whole point, chosen people are people who are saying the only reason, the only reason I'm a Christian today, the only reason, is not because of what I have done, not because I chose to be good, I chose moral attainments, okay? I chose to go to church, I chose to be a moral person. Oh, no. Here's what the gospel says. The only reason you're a Christian today is, first of all, son to suffer and die. And when you were not after it, God sent his Holy Spirit to knock on the door of your heart. And if you're a Christian today, because you responded, all you did was, you didn't even come up with the idea of repentance. God came after you. And therefore, you are, if you're a Christian today, you're a Christian only by grace, surely by grace, completely by grace. Now, this is the first plank in this new identity, and it radically changes relationships, and here's why. One of the things that Kathy and I have had to do over the years is deprogram people who have moved to New York from places in this country where they were living in strong Christian enclaves, Christian homes, Christian churches, and they moved to New York, and people have a crisis. And here's what they say. They say, I'm meeting atheists and agnostics and Buddhists and Jews and Hindus and Muslims, many, many, many people who are kinder than the Christians I know, wiser than the Christians I know, more, more decent, more respectful, more, you see, more better people than the Christians I know. I'm having a crisis. And here's what we have to say. Now, we don't say it nearly this nasty, but I have to be quick. We say, listen, you know, maybe you got an A on your Christian doctrine test, especially when you got, maybe you got the right, you checked the right box when the question is, are you saved by grace alone or by your good works? You may have gotten your doctrine right, but you're a moralist and you're a Pharisee, functionally. Because if you come here and you say, wait a minute, I'm a Christian, there's all these people around who are at least as good, if not better than I am. And that creates the crisis of faith. Don't you understand that the first plank in the Christian identity is that you're chosen? Which means we alone, of all the religions in the world and all the philosophies in the world, every religion, every philosophy, every basis for identity says what makes you right with the universe, what makes you right with God is things that you have done. And Christianity says, no, no, no, no, the things that makes you right with God is something that he has done. And what that means is you expect to find people who aren't Christians, who believe very different things, who are better than you, who are wiser than you, who are gentler than you, who are more generous than you. And if you're shocked by that, what that shows is you really thought that the reason you were right with God was because you were kinder and gentler and wiser and more mature. And you had an identity that did not understand the doctrine of grace. And you had an identity, therefore, that was ripe for power and ripe for exclusion. See, every so often, people will come to me and say, I can't stand Christians or anybody who thinks they have the truth, because that's what leads to a non-inclusive society. People who think they have the truth, that's what leads to a non-inclusive society. And I usually say, let me ask you a question. Do you have a lot of friends who believe they have the absolute truth? Are you warm to them? Are you kind to them? Oh, no. Listen, there's only three ways to go. Listen carefully. You can be an overt absolutist and therefore exclude and feel superior to people who don't have what you consider the truth. Or you can be a covert absolutist who says there is no truth, and then you exclude and feel superior to people who think they have it. Or you can be a gospel absolutist who says, I've got the truth, but the truth is, a crucified God, a servant king, a God who saves me by grace, and therefore, I expect, expect to find people who are much, much better than me, who aren't Christians. And you see, if you're a religious person, if you say, the reason I know I've got a relationship with God is because I'm kind, I'm generous, I'm doing the right thing. When you meet people who are not believers, when you meet people without your identity factor, you're not going to be able to admit their value, you're not going to be able to admit their virtue, or else you're going to have a crisis of faith. That's the reason my Kathy likes to say, all Christians ought to move to New York City and meet all these people, because what it'll do, it'll force you to either understand Christianity finally, or give it up. So the first plank is, we're chosen. Unless you have that kind of humility, you cannot live lives of service to other people. You're always going to, you're going to exclude them, you're going to feel superior to them, no matter what, whether you're right-wing or left-wing, whether you're an atheist, or whether you're a fundamentalist, or whether you have anything, any kind of identity factor other than this one. But that's the first plank, chosen by sheer grace, but then there's the second plank, the last plank, only one more. And that's the fourth thing it says. It says you're a chosen people, royal priesthood, holy nation, and last of all, a people belonging to God. Unfortunately, translation doesn't do its justice. It says a people purchased by God, but better than that is a people treasured. The other side of Christian identity is this. You're not only saved by grace alone. You're not only a sinner saved by grace alone, so there's no superiority. you get for the man who has everything? God. He has the mountains, he has the seas, he's got the stars, he's got all the planets. And yet there's something that makes him feel rich. There's something that he treasures. It's us. Or he wouldn't have sent his son. Now you have to have that plank. You know why? If you don't have that plank, let me tell you what's going to happen to you. You may think you're serving. If you only have humility, I'm just a sinner. I'm just a sinner. I'm just chosen. If you only have humility, you may think you're serving people, but you're not. If you are going out there to help the poor in order to make yourself feel valuable, you're using the poor. If you're the kind of person who can't say no, are you the kind of person who can't say no to people? Are you the kind of person who has no boundaries? Are you the kind of person who feels like you have to please everybody and you have to do everything for everybody and you're always sinking? And you know what? As you're sinking, as you're burning out year after year after year after year, what you console yourself by saying is, but I'm a loving, helpful person. No, you're not. Because if you overhelp, it's because you're actually using those people to feel good about yourself. If you don't already feel treasured, you're not serving anybody. Let's just say, I work so hard for the business. I work so hard at my music. I work so hard at my art. I work so hard at my job. I love my writing. If you overwork, and you probably do, because you live in New York, it's not about the art. You think it is. It's about you. It's about you getting yourself a sense that I'm really worth something. Unless you're already treasured. Unless you know you're treasured. Don't you see? You need this amazing humility, which comes from knowing I'm chosen. And that finally destroys the exclusionary, oppressive tendency of all other identities. But on the other hand, you're treasured. Absolutely treasured. And as a result, you actually move out in service, and everything becomes service. I don't need to get married to know I'm all right. See, if you need to get married in order to know you're all right, you fall in love, and you're going to be either too afraid to commit, or you're going to do anything he or she says because you're just desperate not to have them lose you, you need a whole different approach. Don't you see the gospel is going to completely change that? It's going to change your understanding of sex. It's going to change your understanding of money. It's going to change your understanding of everything. Where do you get that identity from? Come to him, verse 4 says. Wait a minute. Aren't these Christians? What do you mean come to him? As you come to him, verse 4, to the living stone, you become a living stone. Don't you see? Do you know the reason why Christians are the temple? Because he's the temple. He's the cornerstone. In other words, the reason that Christians don't have a temple and don't have a literal altar is because he was the sacrifice. He was the priest. He is the temple. He has done all this. That's how I know I'm treasured, or God wouldn't have given him up. That's how I know I'm chosen. I'm so bad that nothing less than the death of the Son of God can save me. If you bring that into your life, it's going to change you. So, intensity, you need something besides just coming to this church. Service. You need to be involved. You need to be active. You need to be in a small group. Okay? Character. Father, you need to be rethinking absolutely every part of your life with the gospel. And the basis? Come to him. To the living stone. And then you will become living stones built together into a house of the Spirit. Let's pray. We thank you, Father, that you've given us what we need to create a community that the world will be astounded by. And we ask that you would help us to just affect this in our lives, and especially in Redeemer, or wherever we are part of our church. Help us become living stones, not just an institution. And we pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
