TITLE: Born of God
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 5:18-21
TOPICS: Idolatry
SERIES: The Radical Imperative; A New Birth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/born-of-god/

============================================================

Anyone born of God does not continue to sing. The one who was born of God keeps him safe, and the evil one cannot harm him. We know that we are children of God, and that the whole world is under the control of the evil one. We know also that the Son of God has come and has given us understanding, so that we may know him who is true. And we are in him who is true, even in his Son, Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life. Dear children, keep yourselves from idols. This is the word of the Lord. Now, the passage you just heard has a phrase in it that's pretty well known in our society now. It says, notice here in verse 18, born of God, born again. Sociologists are always doing studies about what Americans think about this question. What does it mean to be born again? What is a born-again Christian? You know, that term is pretty common now in our society. And a sociologist will tell you that the average American understands born-again Christianity as having these two qualities. First of all, most people say born-again Christians are people that have had a more emotional, intense, cathartic kind of religious experience. It's fine. You know, people say that's fine. Some people, that's their temperament. That's their psychology. And so born-again people are people that need a, you know, kind of more of an intense emotional experience, perhaps. Secondly, people also say, well, born-again Christianity seems to be very intense, and it's people who seem to need a lot of moral structure and religious structure. And therefore, to be born-again, a lot of people would say, born-again people tend to be people who've, you know, really fallen apart. You know, they've gone to prison. They've gotten into drugs or something, and they need moral structure, and they need to go to churches where there's a lot of authoritative teaching. And so being a born-again is considered a kind of person who that's what they do, or a kind of Christianity. You know, there's Christians, but then there's also born-again Christians. I want to look for several weeks, not a long time, but five or six weeks, at this whole subject. And we're going to look at three letters near the end of the New Testament, written by John, by Paul. We're going to look at the letter of Titus. And by 1 Peter. And at the end of the book of, at the end of the New Testament, these letters talk about the new birth, what it means to be born again. What's intriguing about these three guys, these three writers, John, Paul, and Peter, is that if you look into the Gospels, like Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, or the book of Acts, you actually can see their conversion experiences and see them encountering people who went through conversion experiences. So if you put their reflections on being born again, together with their experiences, you get a very rich round of teaching about what this is. And I think, as we're going to show over the next four or five weeks, is what the Bible has to say about what it means to be born again is something very different than what the average person thinks. Now, this particular text that we read, or that Michelle just read to you, is the very end of the first letter of John. It's the last four verses. And in it, we're going to learn three things. In some ways, I chose this because this particular text gives us an overview of our subject, and though I'll be a little frustrated because I can only just touch on all the different themes, over the next few weeks, we can get back to them and explore them in more depth. But what we have here is three things that we're going to learn about what it means to be born again. First of all, we learn why we must be. Secondly, how we know if we have been. And thirdly, how we can be. Why we must be born again. How we know if we have been born again. And how we can be born again. There's some people up there squirming already. But listen, it's much more complex, nuanced, and wonderful than what you might think. First of all, but actually not the first point. The first point will keep you squirming. Listen. The text teaches us why we must be born again. There's three statements. Verse 18, verse 19, verse 20. And each time it talks about a group of people. The first group is people who are born of God. That's verse 18. In the second statement, verse 19, it talks about people who are called children of God. And in verse 20, it talks about people who have... little bit of logical and grammatical analysis shows you we're not talking about three different kinds of groups. We're not talking about three different groups of people. It's obvious we're talking about the same group of people, and those descriptions are just three ways of describing them. But do you realize what the implication of that is? The implication is that if you are a child of God at all, or if you have eternal life at all, it means you have to be born again. Because those who are children of God and who have eternal life are born again. Which means the new birth experience is not for just some Christians, and it's not for just certain kinds of people. Everybody, the text is telling us, must be born again. Now, the illustrative background to this, in other words, if you want to understand why John says this and what he means by this, you have to go back into the Gospel of John and look at the very famous interview between Jesus Christ and Nicodemus in the Gospel of John, chapter 3. And there we have a great religious leader, Nicodemus, a leader of the Pharisees, a great religious leader, a civic leader, a wealthy, accomplished man. And he comes to Jesus, and he says, I want you to teach me. I want to get to know you. You know, you're a remarkable person. I want to learn from you. I want to get to know you. And Jesus right away goes, boom, you must be born again. Very abrupt. And it tells us a tremendous amount. Nicodemus is highly educated. He's a teacher in Israel, highly successful, highly wealthy. That completely routes the popular idea that to be born again is for people who are more emotional, you know, people who are more uneducated, perhaps. People whose lives have fallen apart. But here's Nicodemus, completely pulled together, very educated, very cognitive, and Jesus says, you must be born again. Secondly, we also see that Nicodemus comes, and he's very religious. And Jesus says, you must be born again. Now that routes the popular idea that what it means to be born again is you get really religious. You start going to church, you start praying, you start reading the Bible. Isn't that what you think it means to become born again? But here's a man whose life is filled with religious structure, filled with moral structure, filled with reading the Bible. And Jesus looks at him and says, you've got to be born again. Amen. Which proves that whatever the new birth is, it cannot mean get really moral, get really religious, read the Bible. It's got to mean something else. Whatever it is, it cannot just be for emotional people. It cannot just be for people who just need a lot of religion. It can't be. But not only that, when Nicodemus says to Jesus, I really want to get to know you, and Jesus says, you must be born again, what does he mean? Here's what he means. If you want to have any relationship with me at all, if you want to learn anything from me at all, Jesus says, you must be born again. Now, that's the first point. And it's amazing with what fervor John makes this. Because if you go to the beginning of the book of John, you'll see in John chapter 3 and 4, in the beginning of the book of John, John gives us two major interviews with two individuals that Jesus has. Nicodemus and the woman at the well of Samaria. And they are a complete contrast. Man, woman. Successful, unsuccessful. Religious and moral, very irreligious and very immoral. Well put together, broken life. And yet Jesus says to Nicodemus, you must be born again. He doesn't actually use that term with the woman. Why does Jesus do that? Why does John bring that up? And I'll tell you why. And this really works for us Manhattanites. You know, Manhattan people, they are so proud that they are not guilty of sexism, racism, and classism. But let me ask you a question. Do you see what John's doing to us? Are you a man? And you say, well, yeah, I know some women who are really into Christianity and they say they've been born again. Well, that's okay for them. Oh. You mean because they're women? Because they're more emotional? That's sexism keeping you from the new birth. Or are you a pulled together Manhattan person? Pretty professional? But you know that out there in the inner city, out there amongst the poor, there's all these churches where the people talk about being born again and they raise their hands and they shout hallelujah. And you say, that's fine for them. I have no problem with that. That's fine for them, but not for me. Why not? Is that classism? Is that racism? It's okay for them to be born again, but not for me. Jesus tells you, John tells you, no matter who you are, no matter what your class, no matter what your race, no matter what your gender, no matter what condition your life is lying about. For me, I might be nominating for you. I might beissioned by my heart, no matter what John tells you, no matter who you are, no matter what your class, no matter what your race, no matter what your gender, no matter what condition your life is in, you must be born again. That's the reason he goes after Nicodemus, just to make sure you don't do that, just to make sure you don't wiggle out. We must be born again, all of us, everyone. That's normal Christianity. If you have ever heard of a kind of Christianity, if you've read a book, listened to a preacher, gone to a church, talked to a friend, and they presented Christianity to you, and the new birth was not in the center of it, they were passing you counterfeit money. You must be born again. That's the first thing we learn. Secondly, how do we know if we have been? Now, these three verses, 18, 19, 20, are amazingly comprehensive. To be born again means not that you just turn over a new leaf, or you just changed in one area of your life. It means every part of your life becomes new. It means a revolution in every part of your life. That's what it must mean. The image is so sweeping. To be born again means you become a whole new person in every area. And these three areas are mentioned here. You are new, verse 20, in your mind. You are new, verse 19, in your heart. And you are new, verse 18, in your behavior. You're going to be changed in all three areas. Will, pardon me, mind, heart, and will. If you're changed in only one, you're not really born again. You've got to be changed in all three. They all interlock. And so let's take a look at these three things, because not only does it show you something about what the new birth is, but it also gives you a way of judging whether it's happened to you. Look, number one, verse 20. To be born again means your mind is not just convinced, but your mind experiences a new spiritual awareness. Verse 20, the Son of God has given us understanding so that we may know Him. Understanding. See, a lot of people think, when you're born again, that means I didn't believe in God, and now I do. Well, I mean, if you don't believe in God, or you don't believe at all, yeah, I suppose if you're going to ever meet God, you're going to have to, at some point, be intellectually convinced. But that's not the essence of being the new birth, because the word understanding here, that we may know Him, is talking not about just simply believing something, but experiencing something. Now, for example, if somebody says to you, I've heard this incredible singer. I want you to go hear her, too. She's an incredible singer. And your friend describes her to you. And you say, okay, and you believe it. You believe everything. You know, your friend says, she has this, and she does this, and she does this. And you say, great. But then you go and hear her. And you're just swept up, and you're weeping, and you're soaring because you've never heard anything like this. Are you getting new information? No. Here's what's happening. You heard about her voice, but now you've heard her voice. And this verse 20 says, to move into the new birth means you may have known about God, but now you know God. See that? It said, he has given us understanding that we may know him. What this means is not that I believed he was good, and now, I mean, I didn't believe in God, but now I believe in God. Or I didn't believe he was loving, but now I believe he's loving. You may have believed he was loving. You may believe the Apostles' Creed. You may believe for years, all your life, all kinds of things. But now they become spiritually real to you. In other words, religion extends the knowledge you already have. To become religious means to say, I know I should be honest. I know I should go to church. I know I should pray. I know I should do these things, and now I'm going to do it. So to get religious means you take the knowledge you already have, and you just act on it. But to be born again means you get a whole new spiritual awareness that wasn't there before. The language of a heart that's born again, the language of a mind that's experienced a new spiritual awareness goes like this. You say, I'd heard this, I'd believe this, I'd read this, but it never hit me, it never struck me, it never thrilled me, it never changed me, I'd never really understood it. I never, how could I have missed this? How could I have missed this all these years? That's the language of the new birth. So first of all, there's a radical change in the mind, a new spiritual awareness. Secondly, there's a radical change in the heart. There's a radical change in the heart. And that is in verse 19. And you know, this takes a little bit of interpretation. Verse 19 says, we know that we're children of God, and that the whole world is under the control of the evil one. Now when you first read that, a lot of you will probably wrinkle up your nose, and I understand why. Because here's what it looks like on the surface. It looks like it's saying, we're children of God, and all the rest of you are evil. There's Christians, and then there's everybody else who's evil. But that's not what it's saying. In fact, what it's saying... who aren't children of God are evil. It says they're under the control of the evil one. That's a very big difference. But look at what the contrast is. The first statement is a statement of identity. We are children of God. We know we are children of God. Now, that is what a Christian is. A Christian is someone who's had a change of identity. You say, what do you mean change of identity? Well, one of the things you have to remember is in those days, in those times, who you were had to do with your family. Identity wasn't as malleable, by the way, as it is now in our individualistic society. Who you were was your family. Who your mother, who your father was, that's who you were. That's where your identity came from. And therefore, this is a statement of identity. This is saying that when you become a Christian, what actually happens is your identity is such that not your race, not your culture, not your family, not your job, not your performance, not your achievement, none of these things are foundational to your identity. What makes you know who you are and know you're a person of worth and know you're a person of value and know you're a person of value and know that you're somebody. The root of your identity is the fact that you have a relationship with God, who's now your father, who's now committed to you, who now loves you. Okay, fine. But now look at that. Look at the contrast. It took me a while to see what was going on. It says, we are children of God. That means we have this identity in God. And if you don't have your identity in God, if you have your identity in anything else, whether you know it or not, you're under, you're out of control. You're under some other control. You see that? If you don't have your identity in God, you're under control. But here's what's interesting. If you have your identity in anything but God, even that thing might be good in itself, but it becomes demonic in your life. If you're a child of God, you're free. If your identity is not in him, if it's in anything else, the thing that it's in, though it may be good in itself, becomes demonic. It has a devastating demonic influence in your life. I'll give you an example of this. I probably, well, I guess, I'll give it to you. I gave it to everybody else today, so why shouldn't you? I kept thinking, well, okay. I mean, there was, I knew, by the way, I talked to a woman. I was in counseling with her. I don't want you to think that I helped her. I learned from her. An awful lot of the deep engagement I've had with people in which I've learned about how the human heart works, that usually was when I was still, didn't really know what to do about it. I mean, you know, you learn about sin and brokenness long before you learn what to do about it. And I got to know this woman. She was in a mental institution. She was deeply depressed and deeply guilt-ridden, and it was about something interesting. She was a violinist, and she knew that the thing her parents wanted more than anything else was for her to be a great concert violinist, and she hadn't made it. She hadn't made it at all. And she felt just so devastated about it. Now, here's what was interesting. Her parents were not this kind of, her parents forgave her. Her parents loved her. Her parents said, that's all right, honey. You know, that's all right. You don't have to do this. You can do something else if you want. This isn't the important. They did not make, and yet, she would say to people, she would say, I know God has forgiven me, because people would say, go pray. And she, okay, I know God has forgiven me. And I know my parents have forgiven me, but I can't forgive myself. Now, the thing I realized as I reflect back on it was this. What she had done is she'd taken a very good thing. She wanted to give her parents pleasure. It wasn't even that she needed their approval, because I believe that their parents were neat people, nice people, and they were loving her. They were loving her. They weren't saying, how, why? No, they were loving her. But she had decided, what will make me a successful person is if she loved her parents so much that they were more important to her, their pleasure was more important, not their approval, because she had their approval and their love. Their pleasure was more important than anything else in the world to her. Now, isn't that okay? Isn't it? Doesn't it? You know, wouldn't you, if you're a parent, wouldn't you like to have your child say, Dad, to make you happy is more important than anything in the world to me? You know, if any of my kids said that now, my first reaction would be, oh. And now my second reaction would be, oh. Because here's what happened. When she said, I can't forgive myself, that's not exactly right. She said, God's forgiven me. My parents have forgiven me. You've forgiven me. Everybody's forgiven me. I can't forgive myself. What it means is, what it means is, of her parents, the most important thing in her life. In other words, it had become a God. And as a result, that God could not forgive her because a good thing, a finite thing, put as the fundamental identity, the most important thing to you, the meaning of your life, a good thing turned into the ultimate thing always turns destructive. Why? Because it can't be a God. Isaiah and Jeremiah are filled with these diatribes against the idols. And there's a place where Jeremiah says, you know, a man takes a block of wood and cuts it in half, and with half of the wood, he makes a fire and makes himself some soup, and with the other half, he makes himself a God. And they laugh at that. And they say, what kind of God is that? That's a no God. And yet, Jeremiah turns right around and says, and yet, if you worship it, it will have a demonic, devastating power in your life. Now, how can it be a no God and yet be a demonic power? That doesn't make any sense. Yes, it does. Because something which is not really a God, a good thing, a piece of wood is a good thing. It's created by God. The pleasure of your parents is a good thing. But if you make it the ultimate thing, if you make a no God into a God, it will become a demonic power because it can't forgive you. If you fail it, it won't be able to forgive you. You'll never get out from under it. If something threatens it, you won't be able to deal with the fear. If something blocks it, you won't be able to deal with the anger. If you fail it, you won't be able to deal with the guilt. If you lose it, you won't be able to live with the depression. If you have anger or fear or guilt in your life, everybody gets that. And then you get past it. But if you can't get past it, it's because something has the ultimate allegiance of your heart. Something besides God is your identity. And as long as anything but God is the most important thing in your life, the most important identity that you have, if you're a child of anything but God, ultimately, if anything but God is your identity, you are in the spiritual force field of the world. That good thing becomes demonic in your life. We know we are children of God. And until you become a child of God, you are under the control of the devil, of the evil one, of demonic forces. You say, do you see what I just did? I tried to show you how verse 19 on the surface looks kind of weird, is unbelievably profound, unbelievably wise. And what it means to have a new birth is just this. See, verse 20, you get this new spiritual awareness. Things that you knew about God in the abstract become real to you. You knew he was loving and you begin to sense it. And because you begin to sense it, he becomes your ultimate wealth. He becomes your ultimate approval. He becomes the thing you most want. And when your heart actually changes its affection so he becomes your identity, your fundamental allegiance, that gives you your life back. That frees you. And so, first of all, mind has changed radically. Secondly, the heart has changed radically. And then thirdly, the behavior has changed. And you see, verse 18, you see, we have to go backwards. You have to go from 20 to 19 to 18. And in verse 18, it says, We know that anyone born of God does not continue to sin. All right? That's the third test. A new spiritual awareness, not just an extension of the old awareness. A fundamental change in your identity, not just simply, you know, warm, inspiring feelings. And then, the one who's born of God does not continue to sin. Now, some of you say, I think I'm failing this test. But that's because it's easy to misread this. What do you think it means? It looks like it means anyone born of God doesn't sin anymore, right? It's really not talking about it doesn't continue to sin. It's talking about it doesn't continue to sin. It's a present progressive verb. You can't pit this against 1 John 1.8, where John says, If anyone says they're without sin, they're deceiving themselves, and the truth is not in them. Now, how could he say that in this? Well, that's because he's not saying that when you're born again, you stop sinning. What he's saying is when you're born again, you don't continue in sin the same way. You don't continue to go on sinning the same way. Here's what he means. You have a problem with anger. You have a problem with jealousy. You have a problem with shyness. You have a problem with anxiety. You have a problem with these things. If you really have your mind changed, and there's a new spiritual awareness, and you really have your heart changed, and your fundamental allegiance and identities changed, then there will be a change. If you go on, you say, I've been born again, and yet weeks, months go by, years go by, no change in the anger, no change in the jealousy, no change in the irritability, no change in all these things, you're not born again. If you just go on the same way, if you just continue, and you don't change, you haven't been changed to the foundation, because your behavior comes from the heart. You that's because something is more important to you than Jesus at that point. Something besides Jesus is functioning as your God. That's the reason why verse 21 can actually say, dear children, as a summary verse to everything he's been saying, keep yourself from idols. How can that be the summary verse? Because that's what he's been talking about, see? He's not changing the subject when he gets to 21. If the idols are changed, if you have given up your idols, it will affect your behavior and you won't continue on the way you were. And therefore, mind, heart, behavior. Anyone who's in Christ is a new creation. Anyone who's in Christ is a radically new person. Now, lastly, see, that was fast. And I will do a question and answer time afterwards, but I want you to know, I'm hoping that if you find this all a little bit much, keep coming because over the next four or five weeks, we're going to look at other, we're going to look at these themes in a little more depth when we look at other passages in these letters. But lastly, what does this tell us about how we can be born again? And every week, I'm going to have to tell you this somehow, only with a slightly different twist to it. There is a paradox when it comes to this. When people say, okay, how do I get this? How can I be born again? There's a paradox. And the paradox you can see in it, it's deliberate, I'm sure, on the part of John, because in verse 21, it says, dear children, keep yourselves from idols. Do something I want you to do? And yet verse 18 says, we know that anyone born of God does not continue to sin, but the one who was born of God keeps him safe. Wait a minute. Verse 18 says, the reason why you're going to be able to live the life you ought to live is because someone is keeping you. And yet down in verse 21, it says, and yet you need to keep yourself from idols. Now, which is it? Am I going to keep myself or is he going to keep me? The answer is a paradox here. If you want to be born again, on the one hand, there is something you need to do, but then you have to realize that your doing doesn't cost it at all. His doing costs it. That's the paradox. If you're totally passive, you'll never, you'll never be born again. If you wait back for a brick to hit you or something. If you don't get down deep and say, dear children, keep yourself from idols. In other words, if you want to be born again, don't just say, I'm going to be religious. I'm going to go to church. I'm going to start praying. I already showed you that that's not what this is. The new birth happens when you look underneath and say, what have I really been trusting in? I was religious for a while, then I was not very religious. Now I'm coming back to church. But see, what was your heart really trusting in? Look down under there and turn from those things. Identify those things. That's a wrestling. That's a struggling. There is something for you to do. And yet, do not believe that anything you do can cause this or merit this. This is a free gift. And what's so intriguing is, in verse 18, this is the only place I know in the whole Bible I think this does this. It says, those who are born of God have this changed life. And then it says, why? Because the one who was born of God keeps him safe and the evil one cannot harm him. Now who's the one born of God? Aren't all Christians born of God? Yes. But actually, the Greek, the two words for born are different in the Greek. It's a deliberate way of describing us and him. And his rebirth, Jesus' rebirth, because that's who's being referred to, is the basis for our rebirth. You say, how could that be? Here's what's so interesting. He was born again, too. He existed. See, to be born again means you were existing, and then you become a whole new person. You're born into a new realm, right? Jesus Christ existed and was born again into the world, into the manger. He was born into the world. And his rebirth is the basis for our rebirth. And it says, because of his, what he did, he keeps you safe. And literally, it says, the evil one cannot harm him. But literally, it says, the evil one cannot hold on. The evil one cannot fasten on to him. Have you read the Harry Potter books yet? Or is that, are you just, you think that's beneath you? Huh? Have you read the Harry Potter? Are you going to wait till you have children and then you have to read them because you don't know whether? The Harry Potter books are children's books, but they're fun. They're real fun. And at the very, very end, very interesting, especially in light of verse 18, at the end of the, actually the first two, I've only read the first two, but at the very end, you know, in every fairy tale, there's a spot at which everything looks dark and then suddenly there's a rescue. And it's intriguing what happens at the denouement of the first book. this. There's this evil wizard named Lord Voldemort who's ready to come back into the world and take it over. And he's possessed the body of a guy named Quirrell. He's in the body, and he's about to break out and take the world over. And Harry Potter, 11-year-old Harry Potter, is standing to stop it. Well, they're going to kill him, right? I mean, he's an 11-year-old kid. And this is what happens, though, as they try to kill him. It says, Voldemort screamed, seized him, and Harry felt Quirrell's hand close on his wrist. But then, to Harry's surprise, Quirrell let go with a cry and was bunched over in pain, looking at his fingers. They were blistering before his eyes. Kill him, he yelled again. And Quirrell lunged again and pinned Harry to the floor, but then jumped back with his face boiling and blistering, his hands, his body filled with huge, red, raw, shining wounds. I can't master my hands. At that point, Harry realized that Quirrell couldn't touch him without beginning to go into incredible agony. So what eventually happens is he grabs onto Quirrell, and eventually, you know, the good guys come. And after it's all over, Harry sits down with a great professor, and he says to the professor, I don't get something. He says, why couldn't he touch me? Why couldn't he touch me? Why couldn't he kill me? And the good professor sits down and says this, well, many years ago, Lord Voldemort tried to kill you when you were just an infant, but your mother gave her life to save you. A love as powerful as your mother's, for you, leaves its own mark. Not a scar, no visible sign, but to have been loved so deeply will give us some protection forever. Being so full of hatred, greed, and ambition, he could not touch you without agony. The professor now became very interested in a bird out on the windowsill, which gave Harry just time to dry his eyes on the sheet. Now, here's what's so interesting. It's exactly a perfect illustration of verse 18, and you can make it true in your own life. Harry was loved sacrificially by his mother, and it made it impossible for the evil one to touch him. He was kept safe by the sacrificial love of his mother. That's magic in a magic world. It was intriguing to me that a writer cannot find a better narrative, deep narrative structure than the one that's at the heart of the gospel. Because verse 18 says, Jesus' rebirth, look at Jesus' rebirth. His rebirth was away from the Father. He was born into a manger. He was born, he left his Father's throne above. So free, so infinite, his grace. He was existing, and then he was reborn away from the Father, so he would die. He left the glory. He was born away from the glory, away from the safety, away from the light, so that we could be born into the kingdom of God, into the bosom of God, into the glory, into the light. He was reborn into the darkness and died there, so we could be reborn into the light. Does that move you? Does that begin to affect you? Do you think of him dying for you so that now there's a permanent mark on you? When you find your heart melted by the knowledge of what he did, at that moment, what's going on? Your heart is being moved, and he's becoming your identity, and the evil one can't touch you. You're becoming safe. And that's what, in other words, it comes true for you. You do have to wrestle. You do have to struggle. You do have to deal with idols. But don't think that you're struggling is the basis for the new birth. For the new birth is a free gift. His birth into the darkness is the basis for my birth into the light. And the way you walk in newness of life, an increasing newness of life, is to do what verse 21 says. This was written to Christians, not non-Christians, wasn't it? This was written to Christians, not to non-Christians. Well, they're already born again, right? Well, you may be born again, but you're never walking in the newness of life to the degree you ought to be, because there's always some idols left. And as the hymn writer says, Jesus, make thyself, to me, a living, bright reality, more present to faith's vision keen than any outward object seen. The dearest idol I have known, whate'er that idol be, help me to tear it from thy throne, and worship only thee. Now, we're going to go to the Lord's table right now. And that is the place where you get a new, deeper awareness of him, so that you can find your heart brought more into. Jesus is the source of your identity, so that you can have this newness of life. Now, turn your page over. Okay? Hey, musicians. Okay. Musicians. Thank you. Now turn your page over, okay? Musicians?
