TITLE: Born of the Spirit
SCRIPTURE: Titus 3:1-7; 2:11-15
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit
SERIES: The Radical Imperative; A New Birth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/born-of-the-spirit/

============================================================

Let me read you the passage on which the teaching is based this morning. The scripture reading is found in Paul's letter to Titus, and I'm going to read actually from both chapter 3 and chapter 2. I'm going to actually read the chapter 3 part, and I'll treat the chapter 3 part first, and then the chapter 2 part second. I'm going to read it that way. So we're going to read Titus 3, 1 to 7, and Titus 2, 11 to 15. 13, 14. He saved us, not because of righteous things we had done, but because of his mercy. He saved us through the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit, whom he poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior, so that having been justified by his grace, we might become heirs, having the hope of eternal life. For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men. It teaches us to say no to ungodliness and worldly passions, and to live self-controlled, upright, and godly lives in this present age, while we wait for the blessed hope, the glorious appearing of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us to redeem us from all wickedness and to purify for himself a people that are his very own, eager to do what is good. These, then, are the things you should teach. Encourage and rebuke with all authority to not let anyone despise you. This is God's word. This is the only book of the Bible. This is the only place you have a letter to a church planter, an individual church planter. Paul left Titus behind on the island of Crete, and it was Titus' job to organize new believers into churches and appoint officers. Letters, and even though we also have letters, two letters from Paul to Timothy, Timothy was actually working amongst churches that were long established and that were having some sort of problems. Titus is really the only letter where you actually have a letter to a church planter, someone starting new churches, and in the letter, there's these two passages that I've read, I've pulled out, that almost all scholars believe, and I think they're very convincing as they explain, these are two, scholars believe that these two passages in the center, you can't see it because they're broken out in the English translation, are two very, very long sentences. Very long, very intricate sentences in Greek. They're not necessarily the way a person would ordinarily speak or write, and most people believe that what we actually have here are two summaries of the Christian faith that were used in following up new believers. That's one of the reasons why they're so unbelievably comprehensive, and the only way to really unpack, I've found out this last couple of weeks as I was looking at them, the only way to really expand and unpack them is to actually tell you everything's in the whole Bible. And I thought maybe I would not do that today, but it's incredibly comprehensive because what Paul is doing is he's reminding Titus of these basic core things that he needs to do in order to establish the new churches. Now, in the very center of these passages, like in the very, very center, chapter 3, verse 5, we've got two interesting words there. He saved us through rebirth. Now, look at those two terms. Saved. Rebirth. Born again. In every city, the closer a church gets to the venues of power, the closer a church gets to the people who run the newspapers or who run the corporations, the government, the universities, the closer a church gets to the people with power, the more there will be pressure on that church to mute discussion of that sort of thing. You don't want a church that talks about being saved. You don't want a church that talks about being born again. We don't want that. Marginal people, poor people, let them have that. But we don't want any kind of religion or religiosity that talks about that. And the reason that's true is because Christianity, the essence of Christianity, we see it in the heart of these summaries for training new believers. This is the essence of Christianity. The essence of, in the heart of Christianity is, what does it mean to be saved? You have to be saved. heart of what Paul said, the heart of what Jesus said, the heart of what John said, James. We're looking at all these, and we're having a brief series on what does it mean to be saved, or especially what does it mean to be born again. The closer you get to people that have power and respectability, the more people are going to be turned off. Bring up these terms in any little group of people in New York, any group of people that think of themselves as cultured and enlightened and educated. Bring up these terms, save born again, and they will, what? They'll blush, they'll laugh, they'll snicker, they'll change the subject, or maybe they'll walk away. Because real Christianity has always been deeply subversive of power and respectability. Deeply subversive of power and respectability. Always has been. And that is what we're going to, we're going to look at this most, the term born again and the term, and to be saved, to be born again, has never been and always will be very unrespectable. And so let's take a look at that. What we're doing for several weeks is looking at this, what does it mean to be saved? What does it mean to be born again? We started last week, we're going to have a brief series of several weeks on that subject. At the very heart of Christianity, real Christianity, though the world hates it, is the question, have you been born again? Have you been saved? Now what does it mean? Now last week, we first looked at, in an introductory way, the necessity of this, which I just recapped for you. And we looked at the importance of it, and the necessity of it, and the reality of it. But today, we look at the power for it. The new birth, this radical change, has a power. It comes from the outside. I mean, just think of the whole conception of birth. Conception and birth. Conception and birth, something comes from the outside with DNA into the egg, and all the potentialities of the egg erupt, and now a new life is born. Something has to come from the outside. Can't do it without something from the outside. And therefore, this experience means a power coming from the outside into the roots of your life. What is that power? It's told us right here in the very center of it, through the Holy Spirit. God's Spirit. Supernatural power. But, you know, you've heard that, probably. And the question is, what is that power, and how does it really operate? What is that power? We're going to just ask two questions of the text, because there's actually so many things you can get out of here. Two questions of the text. What is the nature of that power? The answer is cosmic. Second question, how does it really work? How do I really have it? How do I really, how does it really work in my life? What are the basis of its operations? And that's a very practical issue. What is the nature of it? Very cosmic question. How does it actually operate? Very practical question. Number one, I only have two points today, huh? See? Get home, get ready for the bowl. All right. Okay. Number one. Actually, for me, it was either two points or 30, so I thought you'd rather have two. I was looking at this, I said, this is an unbelievable passage. You may have never, ever heard a sermon on Titus. Now I know why. It's very hard to preach on. Now, number one, what is the nature of it? Now, we're going to actually look at several Greek words. There's some fascinating key Greek words with all sorts of freight in them. And the first one is this. It's in verse five where it says, he saved us through the washing of rebirth. Now, that word rebirth is not the same word that's used almost anywhere else in the New Testament. Whenever you see some other place where you see the word reborn or born again, it's a different word. This is a unique, almost a unique word. It's only used twice in the, in the, in the New Testament. Here's what's so interesting about it. It's the word palingenesis, a regenesis. That's why some translations almost transliterate this and will say, the Holy Spirit saved us through the washing of regeneration. Some translations say regeneration. It literally is the word regenesis, palingenesia, a re, a new genesis. But this word had a technical term in Greek philosophy. This word is loaded with freight. The Stoic philosophers did not believe that history was going anywhere. The Stoic philosophers believed that, that history was cyclical, that there was no climax, there was no end point. But that every so often, the universe would just get so old and get just sort of so decrepit that occasionally there was what they called a palingenesia, which was a conflagration in which everything burned up and the universe, down to the, down to the basic elements, and the universe and history. They believed in continual regenerations of the universe where things were made new again and sort of fresh again and purged as it were. And then on it went. Jesus Christ in Matthew 19, 28 picks up this Stoic word that had a very, very technical term. It meant the renewal of the whole universe through fire. The purging and renewal of the whole universe through fire, which they believed happened all the time. And Jesus comes up and says this, at the palogenesia, and it's translated in Matthew 19, 28, at the renewal of all things, when the son of man sits on his glorious throne. Everyone who has left homes or brothers or sisters or mothers or fathers or children or feels for my sake will receive a hundred times as much and inherit eternal life. And many who are first will be last and last first. Now what's so astounding about what Jesus does there is he takes a term and he gives new meaning to it. First of all, he says at the, not a, at the regeneration of the universe. At the regeneration. So he's saying there is a climax. There's a point to which all of history is going. The place where the universe is regenerated. Now this is so cosmic. I was thinking about this. How do you get a handle on this? And there's one little place in one of my favorite books where one of the characters has just been rescued, you know, beyond hope. And he wakes up and he looks at somebody else, sees them there. He thought it was dead. And this is what he says. I thought you were dead, but I thought we were all dead. And then he says, is everything sad going to come untrue? Is everything sad going to come untrue? Now what Jesus is saying is there is a day of regeneration. That's, this is, this is the most successful way I can possibly put it, in which everything sad is going to come untrue. And yet be even more glorious somehow for having once been sad. Everything sad is going to come untrue. And in some ways it's even going to be greater than if there had been no cross, no suffering, no struggle, no cross. Is everything sad going to come untrue? Yes, Jesus says. Someday everything sad is going to come untrue. There is going to be a purging. All brokenness will be mended. All potentialities realized. All hopes will be satisfied. Everything will be regenerated. And when is that going to happen? Jesus says, when I come to my throne. What is the fire that is so strong? You know, it takes a strong fire to purge metal, to refine metal. It takes a very strong fire. You're not going to take, you know, I'm not going to take my gold ring and stick it in my toaster and think, ah, this will purify it. No. It needs, it needs strong. But what, what kind of fire could purge the universe of sin and decay and death? What kind of fire would that be? And Jesus Christ says, it's the presence of the true king when he returns. The hands of the king are healing hands. Jesus says, when I get on my throne in the world, everything will blossom. Everything will blossom. All potentialities will express themselves fully. Everything will dance. Everything will sing. Everything will, everything will be all it's supposed to be. It's the presence of the king that is the fire that purges the universe of everything sad, everything broken. Now, that's amazing that Jesus says, there's not going to be a series of these things. There's going to be one, one final thing of the regeneration of the universe, the regeneration of the universe. And it will happen when I, when I, the true king, come back and take the world again. And it's my very presence, essentially. My presence is the fire that will bring off the palace, the palingenesia. That's the only other place it's used in the New Testament. And now, Paul has the audacity to do what he does with it here. Now, this is one of these places, I know, you're not going to get this from reading it in the English. 99% of the time, read a text in the English, you get anything. I've been to many sermons where somebody says, well, the Greek says, and the Greek says exactly what the English says. And, you know, you didn't know, need to know the Greek. This is one of these few places, and I'll give you another one in a minute. Paul has the audacity to take this term that's used in Stoic philosophy, and the audacity to take a term that Jesus used that Paul certainly would have known, certainly would have known that Jesus said, when I come back, when you're in the presence of the true king, in all of his glorious, when he sits on his glorious throne, everything will be put right. The first who have trodden on the last will be put last. The last have been trodden on the last. everything will get more than you ever got, more than you ever lost. See that? He says, when I come back, the fire of my presence will purge everything. Everything sad will become untrue. And then Paul has the audacity to say, but when you believe in Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit pours out the regenesis of the universe on us now. He says, the Holy Spirit pours that out on us now. That's what comes into our life. The new birth, look at that. Wait a minute, that's the future. And here's what Paul is saying. We love stories about time travel, don't we? Don't we love stories about, you know, we have this great, you know, movie trilogy, it's so much fun, Back to the Future. They go into the future, and then they come on back, and then they go back to the future. Isn't that? Paul is promising nothing less than time travel, except we don't go there. It comes to us. Paul is saying that the royal presence of the king, the healing power of the king, God's perfect future, in which the universe will be completely purged, a down payment of that comes into us. Paul uses the term down payment of the Holy Spirit three times, and he uses elsewhere in his writings, and he uses the term first fruits for the Holy Spirit three times. Imagine you're absolutely broke, totally broke, and you win ten million dollars to be paid in ten annual payments of one million dollars. Where's the big change in your life? When you get that first check for a million dollars, there's a lot more coming, a whole lot more coming, ten times more coming. And yet, the minute you get that first check is when your life changes. And Paul is saying, I want you to know that there is coming into your life, the minute you believe, the new birth is not just inner peace. It's not just, you know, a feeling, oh, I'm forgiven. It's nothing less than the incursion of God's healing kingdom power into your life now. It's the presence of the future. It's God's future present in your life right now. It's the healing presence of the kingship of Jesus Christ come into your life to such a degree that even now, some of that healing begins. Psychologically, socially, culturally, every way. Nothing less than that. Now, do you see that? Do you see what he's talking about? Do you see what the nature of this power is? It's not just strength. Let me give you a couple implications, because I want to go on to the second point and say, okay, well, now, how does that come in, and how does it grow in me? But I wanted to give you a nosebleed here. I did, I'm trying, as much as I can, to take you to the top of the mountain to see what Paul is saying. It is an amazing statement. It was amazing when Jesus said it, but it's actually, in some ways, even more amazing when Paul says, by the power of the Spirit, in a real experience, when you believe nothing less than an intrusion of the future comes into your present now. Now, let me give you a couple implications of this. Number one, if you're thinking of becoming a Christian, or if you've just become a Christian, I want you, boy, not to underestimate the thorough newness of what's coming into your life. I have never seen anybody, I don't know how you can avoid this, so please don't feel like you're being scolded. I don't know how you can avoid this. When you first come to Christianity, you can't help but think, I've got an agenda, and I've got a life, and I know what's important, and I'm trying to get somewhere, and I just need help to get there. I need Jesus because I'm sad. I need Jesus because I'm guilty. I need Jesus because I'm trying to get someplace, and I can't get there. So what you do is you go to Jesus, you look to God, and you say, somehow, maybe He can help me. I have a sagging identity. He can give me a stronger identity. I don't have the power to get to my goals. He'll help me get to my goals. You don't understand what you are monkeying with. You have no idea. What's coming into your life is the power of the King that will renew absolutely everything. The mountains will be different. The seas will be different. Everything's going to be different, and that means if it comes into your life, everything's going to be different. Your goals are going to change. You're not going to get help for a sagging identity. You're going to get a whole new basis for an identity. We talked about that last week, a whole new identity. You're not going to get help to get towards your agenda. You're going to get a whole new agenda, and you can't tell before you get in, before it comes into you, you cannot tell what the universe is going to look like when that's inside you, and that means, since this is a lordship thing, since what comes into your life is not just some kind of supernatural help in order to get to your goals, but it's the presence of the King. you. Every part of your life is going to be changed. What does that mean? It means if you want to become a Christian, if you want to be born again, you've got to at least say this, no conditions. You have to look at Jesus Christ and you have to say, anything you put your finger on, anything I am persuaded, I have no idea what they're going to be, anything I am persuaded is your will, I'm going to do it. You must not look and say, well, I'd like to become a Christian as long as he doesn't make me do this, this, and this. If I have to become a Christian, am I going to have to stop that? Look, I won't take your head off if you ask me that. I won't take your head off because that's how I went at it too. But don't you understand how silly it is to say such a thing? You have no idea what he's going to ask you for. This is the king coming. You just drop your conditions. You have no idea. Your goals are going to be different. The things you perceive are going to be different. The things that you're passionate for is going to be different. Don't you ever say, well, now, if I become a Christian, I don't want anybody to touch this, this, or this, or tell me I have to stop this and this and this. It's not a matter of telling you. From the inside, everything's going to change. So drop your conditions. Don't underestimate the thorough newness of what's going to come in. Let me give you a couple other implications quick, real quick. Don't underestimate the power of it. I don't care what your habit is. I don't care what your guilt is. I don't care what your fear is. I don't care what's wrong with you. This can move it. This can remove it. This can overcome it. Peter was too soft. Paul was too hard. They were no, Peter and Paul, they were no better raw material. They were no more promising raw material than you. And yet they became history changes and world changes. Who knows what he can do with you. Don't underestimate the power of it. Get rid of your pessimism. Don't underestimate the newness of it. Get rid of your conditions. And here's one more thing, but I'll only say something brief because we're going to have a whole sermon on it near the end of the series. If you look carefully, you notice in verse, let me just show you the second passage down in verse 14 of chapter 2. It says, He gave himself for us to redeem us from wickedness and to purify for himself a people. You know what that word purify is? You don't have to be Greek experts to understand this word. That is the Greek word catharsis. And the word people here, it's not a good word because you say, oh yeah, a people. Sure, people. No, no. A people. A people. It's a Greek word that means a nation, a community, a nation. And here's what he's saying. He died and his Holy Spirit comes in to purify, to give a catharsis, to have this enormous purging of your life, but he's purging you into a community. He's purging you into a group of people who are going to show the world what the kingdom of God is going to look like. And therefore, it is impossible for you to really see this new life come into your life grow if you do as an individual. You're born again into, as Jesus says to Nicodemus, you're born again into the kingdom of God. And here it says you're born again, you're purified, you're purged, you see, you're regenerated into a new community, not just into, you know, a happier you, not just into more power to reach your agenda. It's not just that you're going to be, your future and your agenda is going to be transformed, but you have to be brought into a community community in which the way that community deals with sex, the way that community deals with money, and the way that community deals with power, at least, are so utterly different than the way the world does it, that it's a sign of the kingdom, it's a sign for the rest of the world. This is what, this is what, under the Lordship of Christ, human beings can be like. So we are, so don't underestimate the newness, don't underestimate the power, don't underestimate the corporate and communal nature of the new birth. Drop your conditions, drop your pessimism, and drop your individualism. And all that comes from this idea that what is the new birth, what is the Holy Spirit? It's the future present in your life now, the future kingdom of God coming now. Okay, second. How does it really operate? I mean, in other words, somebody says, you know, all right, you give me a nosebleed, this is kind of, this is amazing, it's wow, okay. I mean, in a way, I wanted you to just sort of be, you know, bow in awe before what the promise is. If there's anybody in this room who doesn't believe the promise, I want you to say, I want you to know you have the right to do that. In fact, I can even, I'm very sympathetic. But I want you to see why, if you don't believe the gospel, the only valid, intellectually valid reason to disbelieve the gospel, it's too good to be true. If you don't believe the gospel, realize it's because you're too pessimistic for the gospel. The gospel is unbelievable. practical. How does it get into my life? And the answer is this. First point, what is the nature of this power? It's the kingdom power of God from the future now. How does this power work? It argues grace from the past. It's power from the future, but the way it works is by arguing grace into your life from the past. Because look at chapter 2, verse 11. It says, the grace of God has appeared and it teaches you to say no to all ungodliness. The grace of God, and the word teach there is astounding word to be used. There's no other place in the New Testament where this little Greek word is, it's paideia, okay, from which we get our word pedagogy, but that doesn't really get it across. It's never, almost never translated teach. It's almost always translated discipline, chasten, discipline. It's a word that's used with children. You don't just teach children. You've got to have rules. You've got to have limits. You've got to have rewards. You've got to have punishments. And that's what it all means. And what this is saying is, the grace of God, the radical freeness of the grace of God, is the way the Holy Spirit not only enters your life, but the way it changes your life. It argues grace till you get it. And here's what I mean. Let me show you, first of all, how the Holy Spirit comes in, how this power comes in, and secondly, how it grows in. You know, how it comes in, how it grows. You heard of John and Charles Wesley. Let me, let me, let me give a case study. Let me give you a case study that explains what's in here. John and Charles Wesley were the founders of the Methodist church. But you've got to realize what, what really happened. I mean, this is, in the 1730s, these two young men were Anglicans, and they, they were, they just desperately religious people. They got their name because when they were students in Oxford University, they were called Methodists because they were so rigidly methodical in the way they prayed several times a day, read the Bible several times a day, visited the prisons, gave money to the destitute. They were incredibly religious. They got ordained as Anglican clergy. John, actually, in the late 1730s, went to Georgia when it was a really wild and woolly place, and came back as he was a missionary. He was a chaplain for, for the people there. And they both realized, both John and Charles realized by early 1738, that their relationship with God was completely, completely disconnected. It was a generic, it was general, it was external, it was mechanical. There was nothing on the inside. They came to realize that. They slowly came to realize, you know, we are good, we are religious, we know the Bible, we know the doctrine, and yet there's, the things that the Bible talks about, about the power that should be in my life, it's not there. My changes are mechanical. My prayer life is mechanical. I don't have a sense of really knowing God. I don't have a sense of his reality in my life. I don't have a sense of any kind of internal organic transformation and change. Nothing. And they, he came back, John Wesley came back from 1738, a missionary, in January of 38, he came back from Georgia. A missionary, an ordained Anglican clergyman, methodically religious, he and his brother Charles, and they knew they weren't born again. And here's what, here's what John Wesley says about what happened. When he came back in January of 1738, he says this in his journal. He's looking back though. He says, I was strongly convinced that the cause of my uneasiness was unbelief, and that the gaining of a true living faith was the one thing I needed. Okay, right. But I had not fixed this faith on its proper object. I only thought I had not got enough of it. Now, what Wesley was saying is, I figured I just needed more of the same. I figure I needed more faith in God. If I had more faith in God, then I'd know he loved me. Then I would know he was with me. Then I, you know, I need more faith in God. And he said, I didn't realize at the time, I had a saving faith, but it wasn't fixed on the right object. Now, one of Charles Wesley's friends, now Charles, by the way, was a songwriter, and he had an artistic side. John Wesley did not at all. John Wesley was a very calculating kind of organizational developer, and not at all very kind of emotional or artistic in any way. Charles was, and he had a friend who was a painter, by the way, named William Holland. And William Holland, along with Charles and John Wesley, were trying to grow somehow in faith. And he came upon, William Holland came upon Martin Luther's commentary on the Galatians. And on May 17, 1738, he brought it over to Charles Wesley, and they took turns reading it to each other. Now, Charles says in his journal this, today I first saw Luther and I was just in my own way, but I was in the middle of this conversation. And there's one later. And I was about to wake up to all about the year. Let's see. 17th, 1738, he brought it over to Charles Wesley and they took turns reading it to each other. Now Charles says in his journal this, Today I first saw Luther on the Galatians, a book which Mr. Holland accidentally lit upon. We were reading it together to one another, but my friend in hearing him, meaning Luther, at one point was so affected as to breathe out sighs and groans. Here's what William Holland said about that night. Mr. Charles Wesley was reading the preface aloud, and at the words of Luther, What? Have we then nothing to do? No, nothing, but only except of him, who of God has been made for us, our wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. And there came such a power over me as I cannot well describe. My great burden fell off in an instant. My heart was so filled with peace and love that I burst into tears. My friend, seeing me so affected, stopped the reading and knelt down beside me. After words, when I went into the street, I could scarcely feel the ground I trod upon. What happened? He felt an outpouring. He felt something come in that night. Charles Wesley still didn't get it. He did. When Luther said, Have we nothing to do? No, nothing. But except of him, who, Jesus Christ, who was made for us our wisdom, our righteousness, our sanctification and redemption. Look at verse 5, 4 and 5. When the kindness and love of God our Savior appeared, he saved us. Not, Wesley's had never seen the not. Not because of righteous things we have done. Holland got it. Changed him completely. Now, what did he do? What would you do? He took his little book, and every night he went to somebody's house and said, Let's read this. As the week went on, by the way, one night Charles Wesley did get it. I didn't bring you that part. It was interesting to read his quote. But here's what's interesting. This little group of friends were all talking about this, and they saw the change in Holland. They saw the change in Charles Wesley. And the day before John Wesley's big day, this is what Wesley put down in his book. He was right on the lip. He was right on the lip between moving from a generic, general sense of who God is into regeneration. And this is what he said the day before. He says, I resolved I need to seek this faith, number one, this is typical Wesley, number one, by absolutely renouncing all dependence on my own works or righteousness on which I really have grounded my hope of salvation from my youth up. Number two, by using all the means of grace and prayer for a full reliance and trust in him as my Christ. Now, listen, you couldn't put it in a better nutshell than this. He realized, just the day before, he said, I suddenly, he came to realize that I had really grounded all my hope of salvation from my youth up on what I was doing. I'd always called God my Savior. All my life I talked about Jesus as Savior. I suddenly came to realize that it's not that I needed more faith in God. All my saving faith was in me. All my saving faith was in the relationships I was building, the achievements I was performing, the works I was doing. All my saving faith was already there, but it wasn't on God at all. I didn't need more saving faith in God. I didn't have any there. I had a general faith. I had a generic faith. And he realized, Holland realized, Charles Wesley realized, and finally John realized that I had been trying to be my own Savior. And the very next day, the very next day, while someone was reading Luther, we don't know, it was probably William Holland, but somebody was reading Luther, and this is May 24th, 1738, John Wesley meeting in the Aldersgate Street. Someone was reading Luther, and he said, and see, not very emotional, John Wesley, everybody's different. Not Holland, a painter. Not Charles Wesley, a musician. Here's what he said. I was listening to someone read Luther, and I felt my heart strangely warmed. I felt I did trust in Christ. Christ alone for my salvation, and an assurance was given me that he had taken away my sins. Now, by the way, no Wesleys, no Great Awakening, no Great Awakening in this country. Most historians now will say there never would have been an American Revolution. The Great Awakening, spreading this message is that don't be generally religious, but see, not by deeds of righteousness. Get this message. Get this message. This will change your life. This will make God go from being something general into an inner power in your life. That was the message that caused the Great Awakening, under which a quarter to a fifth of all American citizens at the time were converted, that took a lot of disparate ethnic groups, historians say, in the middle of the 18th century, and turned it into a kind of more unified American culture, without which there probably wouldn't have been a war for American independence. And that changed the history of the world, yes. All because Charles Wesley and John Wesley and William Holland got this. And what did they get? Just this. Listen. Why did they suddenly say, oh my gosh, oh my gosh? Here's what. Here's what. for their sins. Everybody should repent for their sins. They repented for their sins. That's fine. You should do it too. Let's all do it. Fine. But the minute they realized, I also needed to repent of my righteousness. Now, let me be more clear. Let me be more clear. They had to see that the reason they'd been doing good deeds was the same reason why sometimes they did bad deeds. And that is to avoid Jesus Christ as Savior. That you can avoid Jesus Christ as Savior as much by being good as by being bad. You can make Him your example, your helper, someone who will reward you because you're doing a good job, but you are your own Savior. The minute they realized that their good deeds were actually, in many ways, every bit as much avoiding Jesus as Savior as bad deeds, not only did that get rid of all of their spiritual pride, all of that religiosity that the world hates, all that sense of, oh my goodness, you know, these people, I'm a Christian and you people are not. That's all gone. But they suddenly realized, it changed their whole identity. They realized, wait a minute, and here's the kingdom. Justified. What does that word justified mean? It means the verdict from the future, the last day. All religious people are hoping, if I really live a good life, on the last day, God will look down at me and say, well done, good and faithful servant. With you I am well pleased. And here is the miracle of the presence of the future. When you see, not by righteous deeds, not by what I have done, but by what He has done. When you see that the sin you ought to be repenting of is not so much your behavioral sins, as the sin of trying to be your own Savior. When you come to see that religious people are really as much running away from Jesus as Savior as irreligious people. When that hits, that's what changes you. And at the moment you believe in Jesus as Savior and you transfer your saving faith from yourself and whatever else your faith is in to Jesus, that future verdict comes into the present. Do you see that? What's amazing is that you're still an unrighteous person in yourself, you're justified now. The verdict of the future comes into the present and you live a life knowing you're accepted. And then, in other words, how does this power come in? Do you just say, oh Lord, give me the power, give me the power, give me the power, regeneration, I want regeneration, please, please. Do you just do everything you can to be as good as possible? That might be getting you further from it. That's what John was doing. That's what Charles was doing. That's what William Holland was doing. No. You have to see, you have to get grace. You have to understand, not by righteous deeds. That my good deeds, done hoping to earn and merit my salvation, are every bit as specious, as spiritually alienating from God, as bad deeds. Do you see that? If you've never gotten it before, the kingdom of God is at hand. Do you see? Because the minute you get that, the kingdom of God is right at hand. John, the minute he got it, he was a day from crossing over, and the regeneration coming into his life. And if you get it, and you say, I'd never thought of that, I'd never seen that, I'd never seen the big difference, then who knows? Maybe this is your day. But now, lastly, you say, well, I'm a Christian, and I know I'm saved by grace, and I know that therefore I'm accepted no matter what I do, but I need to know, where do I get the motivation to obey God? And I continually have people say to me, well, you know what, grace, grace, grace, yes. God accepts me completely, yes. But we have to obey, too. There's no but we have to obey. Chapter 2, look, verse 11, what does it say? The grace of God has appeared, and it teaches us to say no. How many people say, well, if I believed I was saved completely by grace, there'd be no reason to live a good life. And yet this text says, if you understand what it means that you're saved completely by grace, you will live a good life. And here, here's what it's saying, I'll put it another way. Remember, years ago, I think Nancy Reagan was the sort of chairwoman for this, the advertising campaign, I think it was on drugs or something, but anyway, the campaign went like this, just say no, remember that? Just say no. Now, I want you to realize that nobody just says no. Everybody is saying no because. Now, listen carefully. Paul is saying, be good, sure. Look at the list. Be good, be honest, you know, be upstanding, be pure, be godly. Okay, yeah, yeah, he says be. Why? What are you telling your heart when you say no? If you say no heart because then I'll know I'm a good person, that'll fill you with pride and superiority and you'll become a Pharisee. You'll become worse than you were before. Yeah. I mean, Not that I believe smoking and drinking necessarily bad. You got the point. In other words, you can become a Pharisee when you say, when you say, no, and then I know I'm a good person. If that's what you're telling your heart, you'll become a Pharisee. And you'll get away from some things and you'll fall into worse sin, which is, of course, pride and superiority. Or do you say, no, heart, because then otherwise God will kill me. God will get me. Don't do these things because God will get me. In that case, what you've got is a inner fear-based religion, unworthy of God. If you say, no, because then people will like me. People will think that I'm a good person. If that's your motive, don't you see? See, every motivation you use to say no to your heart, unless you say, he died for me. He gave himself for me to purify me, to make me into a sign of the future kingdom of God. He gave himself. He died so I wouldn't do this. He loved me so completely that he wants me to be free from this. If you say no to your heart for any other purpose than the grace of God, you won't be permanently changed. You'll be externally and mechanically changed. And therefore, it's how? How does the power of the Holy Spirit come into your life when you get grace? How does the power of the Spirit proceed in your life to change you and to purify you? As you let grace argue with you, saying, you are utterly accepted. How dare you do this? You have been died for. How dare you do this? Not, I better stop or else people aren't going to like me. I will, you know, I have bad self-esteem. You know, people will, God will punish me. None of those things. Don't just say no. Nobody's just saying no. Say no because of grace. Some years ago, a woman I was talking to said, you know, this whole idea about God's grace, being saved by sheer grace alone, she says it's very threatening. And I was amazed when she said that because I've always heard people say it was too easy. I've heard people say to me over and over, I said, if I believe I was saved by grace alone, it's too easy. I just accept it. What, you know, what's my incentive for being good then? And she says it's very threatening. And I said, oh, well, how is it very threatening? She says, well, if I was saved by my good works, if I was saved because I was a good person, then there's a limit to what God could ask me to do. There's a limit. I mean, I'm a taxpayer. I'm doing my deeds. I'm doing things. I have my rights. He can't just ask me anything. But if he saved me by sheer grace, by giving himself to me, if he accepts me completely, if he justifies me now, and I don't have to wait till the last day, if it's completely by grace, he says, then there is nothing he cannot ask of me. She understood that the grace of God is more of an incentive for living a good life than any other motive. And she also understood, as I'm trying to tell you, is that the grace of God is the only motivation that won't destroy you, that won't make you superior, that won't make you scared, that won't make you self-hating. I mean, ironically, unless you know God accepts me no matter how I obey, you're not really obeying him. Because if you say, I better obey so God will take me to heaven, you're not really obeying. It's just self-interest. You're not doing it just for his sake. You're doing it for your sake. Only the grace of God will really lead you to obedience that changes you forever. What is the nature of this power? It's the kingdom power from the future. How does this power operate? It argues with you about his incredible grace in the past. John Stott put it this way. Grace not only saves, but undertakes our training. How? Grace bases her teaching upon the great facts in which her first grand revelation of herself was made and finds all her teaching power in those mighty memories. Look at what you've been given. See how it operates. Let's pray. Our Father, there's two kinds of people here. Well, there's three. There's people who know that they do not have this regeneration in their life. They know it. I pray that as we told in the story of the Wesleys, as they look at that verse not by our righteous deeds, I pray that some of them will today or very soon enter in and they will sense themselves washed and purified by the regenerating power of the kingdom of your son, of the presence of our true prince, our true high king. And Father, there's a whole lot of us that though we're Christians, we're not changing. We're not seeing ourselves change. We're still filled with fear and bad habits and anger and boredom. And we're telling ourselves no, but we're not using grace. We're not telling ourselves a story and melting our hearts into the likeness of our... We don't feel valued by him through the grace of God, but we're just beating ourselves up through pride and fear and changing ourselves in mechanical ways. I pray there'll be some people here that change that too. Give us your Holy Spirit more and more through your grace. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
