TITLE: Built Together: Redeemer’s Organization Service
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:14-22
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) The Bible
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/built-together-redeemer-s-organization-service-2/

============================================================

in his flesh, the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace, and in this one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility. He came and preached peace to you who were far away, and peace to those who were near, for through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit. Consequently, you also are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household, built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord, and in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit. This is God's Word. Last night we did things like install officers and have an election, so the pastors now work for the church and are called by the church, and all that is very official and very satisfying. And yet, what really is happening when a church is established is something far more cosmic than that. We mentioned it at the top of the service when we were just beginning. In Hebrews 12, it says, you haven't come to a mountain that can be touched, but to Mount Zion, to the joyful assembly of angels and the spirits of just men made perfect. And then it says, you are receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken. You know what that means? What it means to be the church is something far more cosmic than than budgets or programs or attendance figures or membership or anything like that. It means, for example, that there is a power. When the Hebrews writer says, when the Hebrews writer says that you haven't come to a mountain that can be touched, but you've come to Mount Zion, the city of the living God and the joyful assembly, what he's saying there is, you don't see this with the naked eye, but out of the, from the throne of God is flowing into the world, a power, which is his kingdom. And that power is going to heal the world of its viciousness and its pain. And you, if you're a Christian, and if you join together with other Christians to worship God on any particular day, when you worship together, you actually have become part of the power that's flowing out from the throne of God into the world, which is inevitably going to engulf all of the evil and misery and put it out. And you're part of that. Not only that, but there's enough kingdom authority and power present today flowing from the throne to those who are willing to submit themselves to the lordship and the throne. There's enough, there's enough flowing out now to set all of New York City laughing with repentant joy. Enough repentant joy to put out all the oppression and the selfishness, the cruelty and the viciousness, the perversity and the brokenness of this place. That's what happens when you unite to be a church. Now, Paul gives us an idea of this when he says the real thing that happens when a church is established is that God is building you together and we're rising into a holy temple. Did you see that? Did you hear that? There in verse 21. In him, the whole building is built together and rises to become a holy temple to the Lord. I just would like to briefly, especially I'll show you how we can tie this into approaching the table, how we can use this to examine ourselves as we come and really meet him this morning. I'd like to show you what Paul is saying here. He is saying that the church is a group of people who are built together. And I would like to first explore why we are built together, why we're built together into a holy temple, and how we get built together into a holy temple. Just those two things. And if you, no matter who you are, you need to know this. Because if, for example, you're one of the folks who really is invested in this church, you are someone who has been coming, that you've invested your time, your effort, you've committed yourself to it, you need to know what Paul says it means to be built together into a holy temple. But if you're not, if you're here and you don't even know what your relationship to Christ is, I dare say the reason that you're not sure, the reason that you're not sure where you stand or what you think about him, I dare say that in most of your cases, the reason you're not sure is because of the church. It's because the church is so disillusioned you or so disappointed you or so confused you or so hurt you. You need to know what the Bible says the church is, too, if you're ever going to get something. who god is and who you are to him look first why do we have to be built together and the answer is because the bible tells us that we are we are building blocks we are living we are stones uh i'll read you this in a moment but in peter the in the first epistle of peter he says you are living stones being built together into a holy temple we are individual building blocks an individual building block is not supposed to stand on its own a building block is a piece of a hole a building block is a piece of a puzzle and the bible says the reason we need the church is that human beings weren't weren't built to stand on their own any more than a building block was built to stand on its own that we need to be part of a greater whole now that the spiritual psychological ramifications of this teaching are extremely important if you know yourself you will know that you have a desperate need to be part of something bigger than your own individual self that you feel incomplete and yet the culture and unfortunately even many much of the social sciences of our culture are trying to make you uh think that that's pathological there's a there's a movement in the culture that i'll call right you know radical individualism that says you feel incomplete you don't feel that living for yourself is enough you feel like you need to be part of a bigger whole a bigger cause that's wrong that's bad that's pathological i say to you that it's natural it's normal it's inevitable listen all human beings need to have a cause bigger than their own personal happiness accomplishment achievement and success everybody needs to live for a cause that is bigger than their own success success you if and if you don't live for something bigger than you if the bottom line for you is what fulfills me then you are shriveling into something very small and you're incapable of greatness let me ask you how many things are on this list how many things are you willing to die for to lose your freedom for to go to prison for to be tortured for how many causes how many commitments do you have that you're willing to die for that's what i'd like to know today you see to be willing to die or even to go to prison for something means there are some things that i believe in that i i fit into see that i'm a part of that are bigger than me it's not fulfilling to go to prison it doesn't satisfy your uh your need for self-actualization to be tortured and therefore what is it that's more important to you than your own personal fulfillment is there anything is there anything on there if there isn't you are incapable of courage you're incapable of sacrifice you're incapable of just human greatness everybody needs a bigger cause let me give you another example every human being i think also this is an implication of what the bible tells us every human being also needs a higher authority we need to fit into a higher authority if the only person making decisions for you about what is right and what is wrong is you the highest authority is your own perceptions your own feelings then you see instead of being a building block in a greater whole you're trying to be the whole building and again i tell you the bible says that if you decide that that i am my highest authority i make up my own moral values i decide what is right and wrong if that's what happens to you you will live a life of confusion and guilt and a nagging sense of guilt that you're not doing it right because you're built to be part of something bigger you're not built to stand on your own you're not built to be a freestanding building you are a building block a part of the whole i'll give you another example every human being needs to be validated from the outside every human being needs someone from the outside to say you're okay you're approved you're a worthwhile person you're acceptable we need somebody from the outside and there are there have been people who have achieved complete independence they're not part of a bigger whole they stand by themselves they're their own building when it comes to self-image and self-validation there are people who have said i don't care what anyone else thinks who cares what this rabble thinks who cares what society thinks i know that i am a great person i know that i'm a worthwhile person adolf hitler for example is a result of that kind of process else is more important than you. You've become your own God, you see. Listen, my friends, we need to be part of the bigger whole. And before moving on here, I just want you to know that you live in a culture, and I hope you recognize this, you live in a culture that is saying, oh no, you'll lose yourself if you fit into somebody else's moral values. You'll lose yourself if you fit into some higher cause. You'll lose yourself. You have to be your own person. You know, Robert Bella's book, Habits of the Heart, very important book to read. Robert Bella says the reason that there's no community left. The reason that community is decaying, he says, is simply because community is based on causes that are higher than us. There's a place where he says, community is a gathering of people around shared aspirations, commitments to higher causes, and these ideals cannot be created by government. You see, unless you've got causes and commitments that are more important than your fulfillment and your happiness, there can be no community. You know the place in Le Miserable, where Marius, you know, is one of the guys that was going to lead the revolution, and he's falling in love. And one of the leaders comes to him and says, Marius, you're no longer a child. I know you mean it well, but now there is a higher call. Who cares about your lonely soul? We strive to reach a higher goal. Your little life, our little lives don't count at all. I don't know if there's anybody in New York that can talk like that. But what Robert Bell is saying, what the Bible is saying, is that if you have nothing higher than your lonely soul, you are going to be lonely. Americans are the loneliest people on the face of the earth. All the pollsters will tell you, four out of ten Americans admit that they regularly go through periods of intense loneliness. That's the highest percentage of any body, of any group of people anywhere in the world. Why? We have nothing. Here's what's the irony of it. We have nothing more important than our lonely soul. We have nothing to die for. We have no higher commitments because we've been told, live for yourself. How ironic. We're the loneliest people on earth because there's nothing more important than our lonely soul and fulfillment and happiness. We are building blocks. We were built to fit in. Oh, listen, I know some of you are worried here because there have been people over the years that have oppressed folks by saying, know your place. Know your place. Oh, yes. And we know how people have used that. But I would submit to you that it's a fiction that you can be your own person, that you don't have a higher cause to fit into. It's a fiction. People in New York like to think we're individuals. People here can decide what they want to be and do it. And that's not true. You've all got your uniforms. Some of you are wearing Wall Street uniforms. Some of you are wearing East Village uniforms. I was at the Strand yesterday and I got down a book on the village. And I opened it up and every page, it had a section on the East Village. And at the end it said, how to look like you live in the East Village. And it was a place in Soho, you know, about Soho. And it said, how to look like you live in Soho. There's uniforms. You've got to fit in. You've got to get your validation from somebody. You've got to have a group of people that say, you're one of us. There's got to be a higher cause. And God says here, if you're part of my cause, if you fit into my building, you'll be free from all the other fitting in pressures because every other kind of pressure enslaves you. But if you fit into my building, it's the one that you were built for. You'll be free because everybody else is saying, fit into me, fit into this group, fit into this, fit into this. But I'm the one place that if you're built into me, you'll be free from all the other enslaving, fit in here ideologies. That's why we've got to be built together. Now, how do we get built together? Here we go. Paul lays out here what it means. If you have decided, and I hope you have, that it's a fiction to imagine I can be a freestanding stone. A big reason that I am lonely is because I won't submit myself to a higher cause and a greater whole, and I'm trying to be my own building, and I can't be. If you accept that, how could you be built into God's building? Well, it's fairly simple in a way. For a building block to be put into a building, it has to relate to the depth dimension, the height dimension, and the breadth dimension. Too many THs in there. There's a depth, a height, and a breadth dimension, and you've got to be related to each. The depth dimension is this. A building block's got to be related to the foundation. If you want to be built into God's building. dimension means that, you see, every building is different. There are museums, there are office buildings, and there are single-family residences. And they all look different because they have different purposes. The architecture will be different. You're not going to probably build a museum that's 70 stories high. And therefore, you have to relate to the blueprint. The shape of the building is determined by the purpose of the building. And therefore, you have to relate to the blueprint of the building, the purpose of the building, to be a holy temple. And then thirdly, you have to relate to the other building blocks. There can't be gaps in the masonry. You have to relate to the foundation, you have to relate to the blueprint, the purpose of the building, and you have to relate to the other blocks. And let me just briefly explain what those three things are so we can use this to examine ourselves as a church and examine ourselves as individuals. First of all, the depth. Paul says in this passage, what is the church built on? The foundation of what? The apostles and the prophets. These were the ones who brought the Word of God. These were the ones who weren't just preachers like me, but who actually came right from God's presence and said, these are God's words. If you reject them, you must get out of the church. You know, here's Paul who says, I'm the chief of sinners, a humble man. And yet when he writes a letter, he says, if you don't receive this, and if there's anybody who will not take the truth of this thing, he must be out of the church. Why? Because the revelation of the apostles was the foundation of the church. If you're not built on that, you're not in the church. That's the scripture. That's the truth of God. The prophets and the apostles. Let me explain why this is so, so, so important. You have to be willing to fit. You have to be willing to submit. The word of God is the truth. And in order to be in the church, you've got to have something that's solid. A foundation can't shift, can it? A foundation is something that has to be changeless. It has to be, it never shifts. It's got to be something that's absolutely solid. And if it's not, if there's no foundation like that, then the house eventually will crack. Now, what if you have this view of the Bible? Your view of the Bible is, hey, there's a lot of good stuff in here, but frankly, we really can't believe everything in it. Fifty years ago, we believed this, and the Bible taught that. But today, we're modern people, and we can't accept that anymore. Now, you certainly have a right to believe that, and you're in the majority of people, certainly. I want you to realize what you just did. You have rejected the idea, you have rejected the very concept of the building block on a foundation. You have decided you will be your own foundation. Why? Because who is it making up, who is it that's going to make up your mind which of the things in the Bible is inspired and wonderful and true, and which of this stuff isn't? It's you. It's your mind. It's your perceptions. It's your heart. And so what you've just done is you have just, you have bought out. You have bugged out of God's image of what the church is. You have said, I refuse to simply be a building block in the church. I am going to be the foundation. My own mind and my own heart is going to be the foundation. Now, I want you to realize what you've done. You certainly have a right to do it, but I want you to realize what you've done. There is no unshifting, changeless foundation anymore. How are you going to decide what's right and wrong? Science. Well, any scientist will tell you we can't tell you that. Any scientist will tell you. Any scientist will say, it's not our job to tell you what's right and wrong. We can only tell you what is, not what ought to be. Well, you say, we'll go to the, we'll go to culture, we'll go to the society and see what, what, what the people vote on as morality. Hey, a hundred years ago, there were things that were generally understood by the entire society as being good that today we think are despicable. How do you know you're not despicable today? How do you know right today that you have a belief that just a few years from now everybody will say, how could anybody have believed that? You're going to get your understanding of right and wrong from society? Well, you say, I'll look in my own heart. Ten years ago you were playing the fool. How do you know you're not playing the fool now? My friends, somebody says, listen, I hate this idea of being built on a changeless truth. It seems so intellectually confining. It seems so simplistic. Not a bit. Not a bit. Went to a play not too long ago, a very good play called Our Country's Good on Broadway. And what it's about, the fact that the first men and women that settled Australia see you. just come rolling out of the bowels of the worst parts of the ghettos of English cities. They were taken to Australia, and they were treated by the soldiers and the prison wardens as animals, and they acted like animals. And one guy came up with this idea, and it's very much out of Rousseau, and the idea is everybody in England thinks these people are animals because it's just, that's the kind of people they are, it's genetic, it's in them, that's their nature. But I think that they just have been mistreated, and I want them to put on a play because if I expose them to good art, that will humanize them. And so the whole play is about, why are these people the way they are? One group says they're born that way, and the other group says, no, they've been treated poorly. What does a Christian say? What does the Bible say? The Bible says, what's interesting about the play is there you have the liberal approach. Why are these people shooting each other? Why are these people so awful? They've been mistreated. All they need is to have a humane environment, and everything will be fine. And you have the conservative approach. Ah, they're just bad types of people. Let's just lock them up. Let's throw away the key. What does the Bible say? What's interesting is, the biblical answer is always more complex than any of the ideologies that say you've got to fit in. Because the biblical answer is, sure, people are criminals because they're sinners. But the people who are not criminals are also sinners, and they have been mistreating them. These people are sinners. These people are criminals because of their own sin and because they've been sinned against. And, of course, art is going to humanize them. The poor need beauty as well as bread because the poor are made in the image of God, and God was a creator. And when you put a poor person in the position of doing art and being a creator, you're going to humanize that person, get him back somewhat, getting her back somewhat in touch with who that person is in the image of God. But that person needs all kinds of things. That person needs internal renewal by the Spirit. That person needs art and beauty. That person needs changing in social structures. That person needs to be treated as a person made, dignified, and in the image of God. The biblical answer is always more nuanced, always more subtle, and always less, is always more complicated than the answer of the people who reject the foundation of God's Word. Always. You know, I have people always come to me and say, the trouble with you Christians is, you know, there really aren't any pat answers. But that is a pat answer, and that's a more simplistic answer than the one the Christian can come up with. The Christian says there's very simple answers. They're just hard to apply. If we become a church, build on the foundation of the apostles and prophets. The world, because it always reduces things to a particular ideology, always looks at things simplistically, will never be able to figure us out. Sometimes they'll think we're Democrats, sometimes they'll think we're Republicans. Sometimes they'll think we're feminists, sometimes they'll think we're chauvinists. Sometimes they'll think we're homophiles, sometimes they'll think we're homophobes. Sometimes they'll think we're progressive, sometimes they'll think we're regressive. They won't be able to figure us out, because the Word of God is our foundation. and they're trying to be their own foundation and it's hard for a single building block to be its own foundation. If you want to be in a church, you've got to be willing to submit to the authority of God's word. Secondly, if you want to be in the church, you've got to relate also to the height dimension. That means, what was this church built to be? It's rising to be what? A skyscraper, an office building? We don't need any more office space in New York City. What is it rising for? It's rising to be a holy temple. And that means the purpose of the church, yes, we're here to take care of the poor and the broken, but yes, we're here to teach the Bible, but yes, we're here to have fellowship and to create community, but the main purpose of the church is to unite people with the presence and power of God. The church is the community of people who have the spirit of God dwelling in them personally. A Christian is not just somebody who acts in a certain way and believes a certain thing. A Christian is somebody who actually has the spirit of God living in. That's what makes you a temple. Now, what this means is, to be in the church, you have got to be converted and with having access by one spirit to the Father. It says that in verse 18. Let me just explain that. Somebody here says, well, what do you mean you have to be converted? Of course you have to be converted, but no, it's not obvious. Some of you here don't know if you're converted. Some of you here are unhappy that I even talk about being converted, and most of you here are converted, and yet you're not living daily out of the joy, out of the realization of the glory. you are. To be in the temple, to be in the church means you get converted. That means you come into the presence of God. That's what it means to be in a temple. For a building block to become part of a building, it has to be cut out of the ground. It's conversion that cuts you out of the ground, out of the world, and makes you fit for the building of God. And conversion always has two sides to it. First of all, there is conviction of sin. Somebody says, what's conviction of sin? I'll tell you what conviction of sin is. Conviction of sin is not what you think. You come into the temple, you come into the church, when you are convicted that you're just a building block. What's the first step in the 12 steps, huh? What's the first step in all the 12-step programs? That is conviction of sin. What? We are powerless over our problems. When you say that, what you're actually saying is, I'm just a building block. I'm not my own savior. I'm not my own foundation. I need a higher power. I need something bigger than me to get me out of this trouble. That is what the Bible is talking about. Conviction of sin is not just beating yourself. Conviction of sin is not just saying, oh, I'm an awful person. That isn't actually, you haven't come to the end of yourself yet, if you're still beating yourself up. You haven't really come to see I'm just a building block. See, a person, you're sitting there beating yourself saying, I am so awful. Why have I done this? Because what you're saying is, I can't yet accept the fact that I'm a sinner. You know the place where Jesus says, you're all going to betray me, and Peter says, everyone else will betray you, but I will not. And what does Jesus say? Peter, Peter, Satan wanted to have you and sift you like wheat, but I've prayed for you. And when you return, strengthen the brethren. You know what he's saying? Peter, you're a sinner. You haven't accepted that yet. Yet, most of us go for a long time accepting our sin, but not accepting the fact we're sinners. In other words, we live with the sin. We do it. But the thing we can't stand is we keep hitting ourselves and say, I should be perfect. I should be right. I shouldn't need a Savior. I shouldn't need God's forgiveness. Conviction of sin means that you realize that you're a sinner. You finally accept it. You stop accepting the sin and start accepting that you're a sinner. Before that, you accept the sin and don't accept that you're a sinner. What it means to become a Christian, what it means to be cut out of the earth, is to finally accept that you need a foundation. You need a bigger hole, that you're just one block, that you can't be your own Savior, that you can't do it, that you can't earn God's acceptance through your own moral efforts. And then the second experience, the second half of conversion that cuts you out of the ground and makes you a building block for the church, not only are you convicted of you being a sinner, but you see Jesus Christ as precious and as your cornerstone. You see that he is the one you have to build your life on. You don't just now believe in him in a general way for being lived and died for you. What you see him as is the pearl of great price. You see him as food for your starvation. You see him as riches for your bankruptcy. And you say, he's the cornerstone. He is the one I'm going to build my life on. He's not just somebody who's going to get me through my hard times. Are you converted? When you are convicted of your sin, that you're a sinner, when you receive Christ as Savior and you build your life on him, the Spirit of God comes into your life, which means you're part of the temple. You're part of the dwelling place of God's Spirit. But it tells us in verse 18, and friends, those of you who know you're converted and you're coming to the table, look at yourself here. That means, if you are really in the church, that you should be regularly experiencing access to God. Do you know what that is? Is he real to you, or is he just an idea? Ephesians 1 says, Paul prays for the Ephesians that the eyes of their heart might be enlightened to know the height and the width and the breadth and the depth. What Paul is saying is, there's a difference between just believing in God in a general way and knowing him personally and experiencing his love and having the truth stop being just truth, but having the eyes of your heart enlightened. That's access. Are you experiencing access? Look, are you feeling rejected? Have you been depressed about it? Well, you know God loves you, but it's not helping you to know God loves you? Then you're not experiencing access. Access means the eyes of your heart are enlightened. So the truth of God's love is no longer just a concept, but such a reality that it becomes more real to you than the rejection. Are some of you scared about the fear? all things, but it's not helping you, you're just worried? Then you're not experiencing access. The eyes of your heart have to be enlightened, so God's wisdom becomes so real to you, it's more real than any threat. Are you experiencing access? We need to be on the inside. Have you ever walked down Park Avenue and you look in these incredible rooms with these chandeliers and you say, what must it be like to be on the inside? Some of you desperately want to break into the inner circles in your professional areas. Some of you just want, we want to be on the inside. Why do you think so many teenagers experiment in such crazy way with drugs and with all sorts of sexuality? They want to be on the inside. You know what that means? It is a drive in all of our hearts and lives to fit in, to be on the inside. We were built for access to God, though. And that need to be on the inside will drive you and distort your life until you satisfy it by getting regular access into God. It says, Psalm 27, the secret of the Lord are with them that fear Him. God says, draw near to me and I'll tell you my secrets. Now that's inside. Who needs a Park Avenue party? I'll let you on the inside. I'll shed my love abroad. I'll tell you my secrets through your word. The secret of the Lord is to those that fear Him. That's the height dimension. Well, the breadth dimension, you know that, I hope. The breadth dimension is, to be in the church, you have to submit to the word of God. You have to receive His Spirit in your life to be a temple, to be converted and to continually experience access. And then lastly, you have to be related to the other building blocks. Now, I'm just, this is a 30-second point. But this means that you cannot simply come and get what you want out of this church and be so, and be so affected by the New York culture that you're just going to come, but you don't, you look around and you say, look, I hope nobody here asks me to do anything. I've got my agenda. I've got to keep my options open. I'm not sure that all the people here are really my kind of people. You're not in the church yet, my friends, at least not mentally, because the building blocks cannot, they've got, the masonry, there can be no gaps. They have to be built into each other. The Bible says, exhort one another daily, lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Bear one another's burdens. Confess your sins to one another. Pray for one another. Stir each other up to love and good works. Welcome one another. Are you doing that? And are you continually widening your circle of people that you have that kind of relationship with in this church? There we are. Think. I'm going to pray. We're going to go to the table. Number one. How are you doing when it comes to living under the authority of the word of God? That's the depth dimension. Number two. How are you coming in your access to him? Are you spending the time? Are you seeking his face? Are you experiencing the access? Or actually, are you not really living out of the resources of that? Are you running scared in life? Are you worried? Thirdly, are your relationships with other Christians what they ought to be? Are you reconciling with them? Are you reaching out to them? Are you exhorting them? Are you bearing their burdens? Are you ready to come to the table? Let's pray. Father, we realize now that you're the one who has to establish the church. We want to be built in. We'll be built in now. More firmly and more perfectly than before. If as we partake and take the bread and take the cup, if we first of all admit where we're not submitting to the authority of your word, where we're disobeying you. Secondly, if we admit how little we know you and just reach out and ask that you would flood our lives with your reality. And thirdly, we'll be built in if we're willing to put in the hard work of creating relationships that work within your body. Father, we ask now that you would move every one of us to give ourselves to you in the ways that will enable us to rise into a holy temple. And now we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
