TITLE: Building People (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:25-32
TOPICS: Christian Living and Obedience Forgiveness
SERIES: Christian Lifestyle
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/building-people-part-1/

============================================================

Please turn to Ephesians 4, guess what verses? Verses 25 to 32, and take your hand out, which you ought to have, and let's get to it. Listen to these words. I know you hear them every week now, but they are your life. Let's get to it. Let the talk come out of your mouths, but only what is needful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen, and do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God with whom you are sealed from the day of redemption. Get rid of all bitterness, rage, and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice. Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in Christ God forgave you. This is God's Word. Now, I'm going to say this here in the beginning. I guess this is being taped, and one of the dangers of doing a consecutive series like we're doing is very often, I think, I thought we were going to really be getting into the next subject or topic, which is communication. And we would just finish up on bitterness, but the more I thought about the subject we had gotten into last week, bitterness, resentment, forgiveness, the more I realized there was really too much to say. So anyone listening to this tape, even though the title of the tape might be Building People Through Communication, the actual subject, this is actually Anger Part 3. This is actually the last time we're going to be looking at this particular passage that I have printed at the top. Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice. Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, as in Christ God forgave you. Last week we did say this about bitterness. Let's review it, but then let's talk about what to do about it. We talked about it in general. I could tell from the responses I got after the service. I could tell by talking to people during the week that there's just a lot of things that needed still to be said, so let's say them. Bitterness, look at the top, bitterness is an inward condition of holding someone liable for a sin. To hold someone liable means, I cannot treat you as if you hadn't sinned. Our behavior, our relationship, something has changed. When the electric company holds somebody liable for a bill, it cuts off the electricity, right? To hold someone liable means, we can't relate as we did before because of what you have done to me. But another way to put it is, I put down here, the mark of bitterness is the replaying of our grievances. And we have to make some very important distinctions, as I'm going to show you. You not only can be justifiably angry with someone, you can maintain that anger. In fact, I can even say that it would be wrong in many situations not to be angry. We talked about this for two weeks. I can't reiterate all that. But the Bible says, be angry. However, though you're angry, you must forgive. And in many cases, it would be wrong to be angry and bitter or to be non-angry and forgiving. In many situations, the only right and just and holy stance towards someone is to be angry and forgive. Now, that's not easy. Therefore, what is bitterness? Bitterness does not just mean being angry. We'll get to that in a minute. You can be angry. You must be angry. As we said before, God is angry constantly and yet bears us no ill will. You've got these statements in the Bible that says God is angry with the wicked all day. His anger is revealed from heaven constantly. And we also have all these statements that says God does not desire the death of a sinner. That God hates the idea of people perishing. Well, you say, how could that be? Because he's holy and we're not. That's why we can't figure it out. Because he can be angry because he's righteous. And anger, as we said before, is to be roused at the sight of evil. And to see evil, to see something... harmful and wicked, and not be angry shows a lack of righteousness and holiness on your part. So therefore, God has to be angry. On the other hand, he bears you no ill will. He does not desire your death. He does not want to see anyone harmed. There is no glee when he judges anyone. He does not desire the death of a sinner. Ezekiel, I'll never forget a particular, I was sharing this in the new member seminar, I'll never forget when I was given the job by a group of elders to write a letter of admonition to a man who had left his spouse and who was abusing his family and who had run up debts because he was a crack addict. And it took time for us to figure out what happened. And he'd run off into the blue at one point. We knew where he was. And it was my job to draft a letter for that man from the elders as a form of church discipline, of admonition. And I found a passage in Ezekiel 18 that's just so poignant. It's a place where God actually says, O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Why will you die? Why will you sin and die? Wouldn't it be better to turn and to live? I don't desire to see you die. Why do you choose this? Sin is a suicidal act of the will upon itself. I mean, that's the language of God in Ezekiel 18. I remember writing that. I just quoted it and I said, John, I said, why will you die? And it was very interesting. The letter had a great impact on him. I don't think because I wrote it, but because of the words from Ezekiel and also because I think it had the prayer authority of the elders, he came back. He was smitten by the letter. That's God. He's angry. He doesn't say, well, you know, I don't want to see you perish, so well, let's let bygones be bygones. Boys will be boys. Girls will be girls. Humans will be humans. And, you know, in other words, God doesn't know anything of this. We know be angry and be bitter or be forgiving and just don't let it bother you. Don't be angry. In other words, we can be we can be forgiving and unangry, forgiving and indifferent. We're angry and bitter, but we cannot be angry and forgiving. Scripture not only tells us that God is like that constantly, but in this passage we're told be angry and put away bitterness. Hey, like that. All right. In that case, what? Whoa. The reason we can't do that is we're not holy, but you see, it's the only thing that works. At least, I hope that anybody with a semblance of understanding at this point would say, yes, of course, that's the way we should be, but how do we get there? Well, that's what we're looking at. First of all, we look at God because that's where it comes from. He's the only one that can be like that. Don't you see how Christianity is so unique? Don't you see how nuanced and subtle it is? Don't you see how it goes beyond even? It's more psychologically healthy than psychology? Look, what happens here is God, therefore, is telling us, put away bitterness. So bitterness cannot simply be anger. A lot of people think, well, if I'm angry, I must be bitter. No, no, no, no. What is bitterness? It's the replaying of your grievances. It's the constantly bringing them up again, and there's usually three little stages on which we continually replay the tape. It's like getting that videotape out again and again and again. And you put it on three, you basically play the video out on three stages. One is, if the person's available, especially if this is a person that you're living with, a person who you're in the same family with or someone like that, you bring it up to the person all the time, okay? So the next time, you know, the person does something, you say, yeah, it's just like that time that you did this to me. You're bringing it up. You're replaying your grievances. Another stage is you're bringing it up to other people. You slander the person. You sit down and say, well, by way of prayer request, let me tell you what that louse did to me. I just thought, so you could just pray for him and pray for me. Let me just, let me, let me, let me just give you a 40-minute soliloquy of all the things that he's done. You know, you play it out to people. The other place, though, and the main place that a bitter person replays the grievances, of course, is you don't just bring it up to him or her. You don't just bring it up to others, but you bring it up to yourself continually. Another way to put it is this. The Bible calls this judging. Now, this is a very important term, and we have to understand this because there's a place where the Bible says the spiritual person judges all things. And yet, we're also told, judge not, lest ye be judged. And you say, well, that's pretty confusing, but not really, because obviously the word judge can be used, it's being used equivocally, not univocally, it's being used equivocally. In one case, it means to evaluate. Spiritual person discerns, makes evaluation. That's the reason why there's a certain sense in which the situation. and you shouldn't stop being angry, because if you're spiritual, you're going to discern evil and recognize injustice for what it is. But on the other hand, when Jesus says, Judge not lest you be judged, he means don't act as a judge. That means don't pass sentence. When you pass sentence, you've written the person off. Or I'll put it this way. A lot of folks say, I'll forgive him, but I'll never forget. Now, biblically, that is actually an impossibility. That's a contradiction. Because to say, I'll forgive, but I won't forget, is impossible. When God says, I forgive you, he says, I remember your sins no more. Now, this is a great example. Because I've heard people say, what do you mean forgive and forget? I can never forget what he did. Well, of course, when God remembers your sins no more, it's impossible. For God, the all-knowing and omniscient God, who knows the end from the beginning, would be very obviously impossible for that to mean that he's erased his memory tapes. It doesn't mean we've hit C drive, you see, and we've erased the file. And God says, what was it that they did on June 30th, 1960? I can't remember anymore. God doesn't do that. The word remember in the Bible means to act. When the Bible says, I remembered his promises, he remembered his promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And he fulfilled his promises. It doesn't mean that after 400 years, he suddenly remembered. It means he acts on the basis of it. And when he says, I remember your sins no more, what he's saying is, I don't act toward you as if that happened. Of course I remember it. But I don't act toward you as if that happened. Here's another way to put it. When somebody says, I've forgiven, but I haven't forgotten, what they mean is, I'm judging them, but I won't be the executioner. See, a judge passes sentence. It says, the judge says, the judge wills the punishment. He wills, the judge wills the punishment or the infliction of pain or penalty on the person. And then the executioner carries out the sentence of the judge. Now, in many cases, we act as judge and executioner. We actively will the person's hurt. We replay the grievances to ourselves constantly, and we actively will that person's hurt. But then, in many cases, we go out and we try to hurt them. We may yell at them. We may scream at them. We may try to make them lose their job. And most Christians at least realize, I'm not allowed to do that. Most Christians realize that if you're angry and bitter towards someone, you can't play the executioner. So you say, and you retreat, and you try to think that you've done your duty. You say, well, I forgive him, but I won't forget. And what that means is, I won't be executioner, but I'm still the judge. I am willing their penalty. I am willing their pain. I want to see them brought down. I want to see them brought short. I want to see them... And in other words, you're sitting there actively willing it, passing sentence in your heart every day, and hoping somebody will pick it up and inflict the penalty on them. You're hoping that somebody will come along and be the executioner. So you've forgotten being the executioner, but you will not forgo being the judge. So you're actively willing it. You're probably not actually trying to punish them, though in many cases you are, at least in mild ways, because you withdraw warmth. And though you're not actively trying to harm them, you are, in a sense, holding them liable for what they've done. That means you're holding back and you're refusing to give them the same kind of courtesy and the same kind of thoughtfulness and the same kind of consideration that you'd give somebody else. What's it mean to be bitter? It means to be a judge. It means to actively will someone's harm. You can see it in the movies. In the early part of the movie, the good movie maker teaches you to hate the villain. So that in the end, when the Joker falls off of this incredible tower and falls to the ground and is completely demolished, everybody's happy. You're excited. You're glad. Because, you see, you've been judging him all the way through the movie. He's a movie character, and so you can't execute him. But you're willing. You can't wait to see him splattered because he's so mean. And so what's happening is you've been judging him all along, and when he is splattered, you're happy. You're relieved because you have been actively willing his hurt. Okay, that's what bitterness is. Now, what do you do with that? See, it's one thing to be angry. It's another thing to just want to see the person splattered. God is angry with you if you're a sinner. God is angry with you if you are rebelling against him. His anger is revealed against you all the time, and yet he doesn't desire the death of a sinner. He has no ill will. He recoils at the thought. to get you off the hook, the Scripture says. He has his son die, and then he sends his spirit into your heart, and so forth. He stays angry all the way up to the moment that you believe. And yet, all the time that he's angry at you, right? He's been angry at you up until the moment you believe. The Bible says you're under his wrath, and when you believe, you're no longer under his wrath. You move out because Jesus has died for you, and Jesus has taken his punishment, your punishment upon himself. So up to the moment that you believe, you're under his anger, right? And yet, all that time, you know what he's doing, don't you? Ever since you've been little, he's been calling you. He's been softening you up. He's been sending you messengers. A lot of them you've beaten up, just like the Israelites killed the prophets that came, and finally when the sun came, he killed them too. But the point is, all along, while he's angry at you, he has done nothing but will your good. All right? So, how do we get rid of bitterness? How do we do that? How can we possibly do that? It doesn't come naturally. It's awful. In fact, some of you may be feeling, and rightly so, that this is impossible. In fact, some of you may think it's sickening. It's not just impossible. You may think it's not even really something that's good. I've had people tell me that the idea of forgiving people who've done horrible wrong is just appalling. I've had people say, well, you know, that's easier for you to say. How would you feel if you were a Pole or a Jew and you had to be forgiven, and somebody was telling you to forgive the Gestapo? And they look at me as if I'm supposed to say, well, of course, under those circumstances. And, of course, I wasn't. I'm not a Pole, and I'm not a Jew, and I didn't have that particular kind of injustice inflicted upon me or my people. But I also know what the Scripture says, and that is you must overcome evil with good. And we'll get to that in a second. But the word overcome, it's in Romans 12. It's not here, but it's implicit. In Romans 12, verse 21, it says, Do not overcome evil with evil. Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good. You know what the word overcome means? It's an aggressive word. It's a military word. It means to defeat and demolish in battle. It does not say, well, Christian, you know, if somebody harms you, you've got to forgive. And that means just sort of biting your tongue and holding on by the skin of your teeth, just trying your very best to refrain from clobbering that person, and therefore being passive and being wimpy. And the Scripture says, no, your proper Christian response to evil is to overcome evil with good. And the word overcome means to defeat it. It means to demolish it with good. And what's very clear is, if you respond in bitterness, you have lost. It doesn't matter if you smashed his head. He smashed your soul. Now let's talk about this a little bit. How do you get rid of bitterness? There's an external and there's an internal side. Some of this was in your handout last week, but I didn't really get a chance to explain it, so I'm doing it now. There's one mistake here, by the way. This little parenthesis where it says, we discussed this last week. Use Matthew 18. My computer blipped and put it in there. It shouldn't be there. You ought to cross it out. It goes down further. So don't be misled by that. First, forgiveness is granted before it's felt. Forgiving each other is a command. This does not mean, I'm just going to read this and then explain it. This does not mean that great anger may not be justified. It may be wrong not to be angry. It means, first of all, you determine to absorb the debt, not to hope for or seek repayment. Now, this is a matter of the will. This doesn't mean that you have to overcome your anger at this point or even your desire to see the person hurt. In the beginning, you have this desire to see the person hurt. That's what bitterness is. God doesn't have it when he's angry. He's angry at the evil. He's not angry in such a way that it makes him want to see us demolished. Last week, we said that Martin Luther King says that one of the principles of nonviolence is nonviolence is aggressive toward problems, not persons. Remember that? And that is very clearly the kind of anger that God has. God says, I see what's happening. This horrible evil, which is sin, in the heart of this person who has done this awful thing, has not just ravaged my life, but it's ravaging this person's life, too. And what I would like, for the sake of that person, is to see that sin demolished. See, that's holy anger. That's what the Bible calls perfect hatred. And we don't know much about it, but we've got to be operating and we've got to be reaching for it. though I still want to see that person hurt, I am going to refrain from actively willing it. Now, to some degree, that means, as I put down here, it means it's a commitment not to bring the thing up constantly. The nature of bitterness is to constantly replay the video on these certain screens. You know, bringing it up to the person, bringing it up to other people, and bringing it up to yourself. I want you to know that this is a matter of the will. You can control this. You can't control your feelings, but you can control your thoughts. You see, it's the same thing with any kind of temptation. I mean, if you're struggling with sexual fantasies, you cannot, you cannot change the feeling that arises in you immediately when you see a particular kind of person who happens to be connected to the fantasy life that you so unwisely have gotten yourself addicted to. You see a certain kind of person, whether it's a photograph of that person or whether it's a person that fits the body type or something walking down the street. You can't deal. You can't immediately stop. You can't avoid the feeling from coming and the thought from occurring to you. But then what you do with the thoughts is completely under your control. You can turn your mind away from it. You can turn your mind to something else. Or you can let it go on for a few seconds and a few more seconds and a few more minutes. Same thing with anger. You cannot control so much the feelings, but you do not have to replay those tapes. You don't have to do it. You can make a decision not to do it. And that's one of the things you do when you say, I'm going to grant forgiveness even though I don't feel it. If you grant it, eventually you'll feel it. If you wait to feel it in order to grant it, you will never feel it. So you start to grant it. And it means you determine to absorb the debt, not to hope for a secret payment. You know, forgiveness is not an easy thing. We'll get to it in a second. It was certainly, it was the only obstacle, you might say, that God has ever dealt with that was hard for him. We'll get to that in a minute. But, and I have to say it reverently and I have to be careful as I say it because theologically I could be, I could be, you know, misstepping at that point. It really is hard, but it's hard for us too. And here's why. Forgiveness means holding someone liable for a debt, right? And, and, and, and just when you forgive a debt, the debt does not go into thin air. Debt's can only be transferred. The only way to forgive a debt is to transfer it. The only way to forgive a debt is to transfer it. So for example, if you're at my apartment and you knock over my lamp and destroy a lamp and I say, I forgive you, that, what that really means is I've transferred it to me. I'm absorbing the cost. It's going to cost me, you know, so many dollars to fix it. When I forgive you, that means I am absorbing the cost. That cost hasn't gone into thin air. You can't just, you can't, when you forgive a debt, it doesn't go into thin air. Somebody's got to absorb it. Debt's therefore can only be transferred. They cannot just go into thin air. Now it's easier when you're talking about money to understand how that goes, but what about personal relationships and wrongs? It's the same thing. What you decide when you forgive somebody is to say, instead of me making that person pay back, I'm going to just take it. I'm going to absorb the debt. I'm going to absorb the loss. And the way you do that is by making a promise not to bring these things up and up. It's hard to do, but it's doable. You do not remain a judge. You don't continue to will or inflict the punishment, or even to will the punishment. And you say, how can I stop doing that? Well, you can't stop the feeling, but you certainly can stop the behavior. And the behavior is the replaying. You can make that decision. Vengeance is mine, says the Lord, the Bible says, do not act as a judge. The reason for it is, first of all, look, you have no idea, really, what goes on in that person's life or heart. The only way to be a judge, the only way to really know what that person deserves, and when you see you're bitter, you think you know what that person deserves. If you've ever been mad at somebody, sometimes you don't realize you're mad at them at a certain level. There's a little scale in your heart as to just how liable you make people. There's some people you're mad at at this level, some people you're mad at at this level, some people you're really mad at. And if you've ever found a person you're mad at that suddenly finds, and you find that they are suffering far more than you ever wanted them to really suffer, you lose your ability to be mad at them anymore. You know, if somebody has done you dirty at work, and you say, you know, that person sort of kept me from getting a job, and I'm out so many hundred dollars because of that, well, what happens if you suddenly find that that person's lost the job, and this person's out on the street, and one day you see him out there... oh my word. What happened is the person is now in a certain level of pain far greater than what you really wanted. It's bad for you to try to be a judge. A judge needs to know exactly what a person deserves. And the only way to know that is to know what's going on in the heart, knowing what pressures that person is going through, knowing what kind of life they've gone through. You're in no condition to be a judge because you can't know all that. And then secondly, you're no condition to be a judge because you're not perfect. Because you're a criminal too. Because you deserve. Ex-convicts aren't judges. They can't be admitted to the bar and they certainly can't be admitted to the bench. And for all these reasons, the Bible says you have got to reason yourself out of this position as being a judge. You deserve to be judged. If God would decide to sit down and bring out all of your debts, you'd be in a lot of trouble. And not only that, you're not in a position to judge because you don't know what that person deserves. For all these reasons, you make a commitment. It's an external behavioral commitment, even though you're talking about the thought life. I will no longer be a judge. One writer puts it this way. He says, what really matters is those little marks or twists on the central inside part of the soul, which are going to turn it in the long run into a heavenly or a hellish creature. We may punish if necessary, but we must not enjoy it. In others, something inside us, the feeling of resentment, the feeling that wants to get one's own back, must be simply killed. I do not mean that anyone can decide this on the moment that he will never feel it anymore. That's not how things happen. I mean that every time it bobs its head up, day after day, year after year, all of our lives long, we must hit it on the head. It's hard work, but it's not impossible. So the first thing is you make that external decision. And the second thing, on the inside, you have to put on the new man. Now, don't forget this. I hit it every week, but I'll just say it rather briefly now. The Christian way of morality is so utterly different than any other way of morality. I mean, many systems of morality will say, don't lie, don't steal, and forgive. Just like Paul is showing us here in Ephesians 4. But you will not be able to forgive if you do not do the internal work of putting on the new self. The way you put on the new self is that you remind yourself who you are. See, for example, here's the person who is trying to follow Confucius. Confucius says, forgive. Here's a person trying to follow the Koran. The Koran says, be merciful as Allah is merciful. The Christian comes along and says, you see, why does Confucius say he should forgive? Because generally, Confucius will say, because it is in accordance with heaven. It's right to forgive. The Islamic person will say, because Allah is merciful. But the Christian says, here's why I've got to forgive. Because I see what God has done. God was angry with me, and yet he never willed me ill. And he sent his son. You know, here's the Lord. The Lord turned my heart toward him. And I continually, again and again over the years, turned my back on him. He was continually prodding me here, prodding me there, pulling me here. I resisted. God continued to be patient. And finally, he got through my thick skull. And now that I became a Christian, it's been taking me years for him to teach me even how to do the most basic kinds of Christian disciplines. Everything that he wants me to do, it takes me ten times to figure out what he's saying. Every time he shows me what he wants me to do with my gifts, it takes me a hundred times to figure it out. He leads me to himself. He gives me every good idea that I've ever had. He then gives me the power to do it. And on the last day, he's going to show up and reward me for this. Look at who I am. I'm adopted into the family of God. I've been completely forgiven. His anger for me has all fallen into the heart of Jesus Christ. I am his child. See, a Christian is putting on the new self. It means a Christian is trying on the new identity, sort of like clothing. C.S. Lewis says you dress up as a Christian in your mind until you begin to realize that's what you are. You are adopted. You are forgiven. And the more you think about this, the more it melts away the anger. See, there's an external behavior that you must do. You say, I'm going to grant forgiveness even when I don't feel it. But the internal behavior is to continually say, what does it mean that God in Christ forgave me? What does it mean? That's the reason 18, where it talks about the man who owed the king 10,000 talents. We mentioned this last week. The king forgave him, and when this man wouldn't forgive another person five talents, the king comes and says, I forgave you 10,000 talents. You won't forgive this person five bucks. You read those passages and you say, look at what he's forgiven me. Look what he's done for me. And that is the only way, the only way you ever, ever, ever are going to see yourself change. But on the other hand, you've got to do something externally, you've got to do something internally. They happen together. An unforgiving heart is an unforgiven heart. That means either your heart is a heart that's never seen what it means to be forgiven. If you can't forgive somebody, in the long run, in the short run, in all of us struggle. But in the long run, if there's somebody you cannot forgive, it either means you've never known the pardon of Jesus Christ. You've never known the joy and the glory of being forgiven, or else you've forgotten momentarily the joy and glory of being forgiven. In John chapter 7, it tells us how Jesus, no, John, pardon me, in Luke chapter 7, verses 36 to 50, Jesus comes and meets with Simon, a Pharisee. Simon has Jesus in, and at one point a woman breaks into the room. Now, can you imagine this? You're in somebody's dining room. Somebody else comes, I don't know how she got by the doorman, and she comes on in with this big jar of perfume, sits down and begins to weep over Jesus, and washes his feet with her tears, and wipes his feet with her hair, and starts to anoint his feet with perfume. And Simon is thinking, he says, if Jesus knew who this woman was, a woman of the streets, if he was really a prophet, he would know who she is, and he wouldn't have anything to do with her. And Jesus turns to him, he says, Simon, yes, master? This is very dangerous whenever Jesus turns to you and says, let me tell you a story. He says, there were two men, and they both owned a money lender money, but one owned 500 denarii, one owned 50. And the man forgave them both. Now, who will love the lender more? And Simon says, well, obviously the one who was forgiven 500. And he says, Simon, when I came in here, you didn't give me water for my feet, and this woman has washed my feet with her tears. Simon, when I came in, you didn't kiss me once, and she hasn't stopped kissing me. Simon, you didn't give me oil for my head, and yet she has given me perfume for my body. Simon, let me tell you something. She who is forgiven much, loves much. Now, that's a slam, of course. Because here's what he's saying. He's saying, Simon, you and she are both debtors. Now, you have to remember that, see, she and he are in that parable. They're both debtors. One owes 500, one owes 50. Jesus is not minimizing the fact that this woman has lived a debauched life. He says, yeah, 500 denarii, it's a bigger debt than Simon owes. But you have to remember that if you can't pay your debt, it doesn't matter how big your debt is, you go to prison. It's sort of like if a spider, you know, bites you on the back of the leg, and you die, and they lay you out, or if a lion mauls you in the face, and they lay you out, because you're dead. In one case, you're pretty dead, and in the other case, you're ugly dead, but you're still dead. It doesn't matter how bad it was, once you're dead, you're dead. And Jesus says, the fact is, Simon, yeah, I admit her debt is very great, but you're both in prison. You're both dead. And here's how I can tell who has really received forgiveness and pardon. The one who loves me the most. See, he's saying a forgiven heart is full of love. If you cannot forgive, if you cannot love, if you don't find Jesus himself delightful, if you don't find, if you're not in love with him the way the woman was, if you don't find it absolutely, and this woman so much wanted to be at his feet that she was so unselfconscious she just walked right in to a strange person's house. She didn't care what anybody thought about her. She was that delighted just to see and touch him. That's the mark of pardon. You can't hide it. If you're forgiven, if you're pardoned, you're a loving person. You're a compassionate person. You're a forgiving person. Now, the last thing we have to say, talk about, and that is, what do you do if you continue to be sinned against? Because, you see, because, you see, to abuse you? One of the reasons a lot of us have, a lot of us can handle bitterness, provided the evil is sort of done and over, and we struggle and struggle, and I believe that a lot of you probably have been okay with the people who have sinned and it's done. You have a lot more trouble with people who you're trying to forgive who continually do it to you. In other words, there's active evil going on, there's active sin going on. And the answer would be this, and what I would suggest is that sometime you read Romans 12, verses 14 and following. At verse 14 to 21, that's the place where it says, Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good. Let me just really briefly say something about it, and we have to close, because this is not exactly what this passage is dealing with, but it's implied. Because it says we have to continually be kind and compassionate to one another, and forgive one another. See, a lot of people think that to forgive simply means I just stay away and I don't punch them out. It doesn't say forgive, withdraw, just refrain from hurting them. It says be kind and compassionate to one another. To overcome evil with good means this. It means you defeat evil, not by withdrawing from it or just by not paying back, but by positively addressing or answering evil with good. Now, what does that mean? It means, for example, it says in that passage, Bless when you're cursed. Bless and curse not. That means with your words, make sure that you give respectful and courteous responses. If somebody has cursed you, slammed you, at the very least you have to bless. What does that mean? It means saying something like this. It means finding anything good you can possibly say and yet standing for the truth, with courtesy and with respect. You know, there's a place in the book of Jude where it says that even Satan deserves a respectful answer. A place in Jude, maybe we'll look at that sometime. But what it means is, you say to the person something like, you don't say, oh yeah? Or like Bob Newhart. What did Bob Newhart used to say? He always says, and so are you? No. What did he say? He had a cute little slam, but no. In the situation comedies, cute little slams? No. You say something like, listen. Listen, I'm really sorry you feel the way you do, and I want you to know I appreciate your leadership in the office. I think you're the best person we have in the office at this, but I really hope we can work this out. I really want to work with you. On the other hand, I cannot agree with this and this and this. Now, what is that? That's blessing. You're showing the person you appreciate them. You're answering in a respectful way. You're standing up for the truth. That's the first thing you do. To overcome evil with evil doesn't just mean that you shut up, and it certainly doesn't mean you curse back. It means you bless. Secondly, you try as much as you can to pray and wish they're good. You don't just speak good to them. You wish they're good. You pray for them. In your heart, you say, I don't want to see that person destroyed. Sit around and think about that. Sit and think and say, I don't want to see that person destroyed. The sin that they've done to me, as much as it has hurt me, is going to hurt me hurt them far worse, because their sins will find them out. And as much as it's hurt me, in the end, that person is going to be a shell of a man or a shell of a woman, if they keep that up. So what you do is you begin to pray for that person against the sin that's devouring them. Very important. That's another part of what it means to be good or wish a person good. Extremely important. Thirdly, as much as you possibly can, be good to them. That means don't withhold. In some cases, the person might be so mean and so wicked that you need to stay away just so they don't continually abuse you. But it doesn't, you know, pull back only as far as you have to go to keep them from sinning against you. But no further. Send them birthday cards when their birthday comes. Be courteous and kind when you possibly can. This is what it means to say, overcome evil with good. Do not ventilate your anger, because then and only then have they defeated you. You know how, you know how in the last of the Star Wars trilogy, the place where the emperor is trying to get Luke to hate him. You know, he's always sitting there saying, he says, he says, go ahead, you know, strike me down with your anger. Then you become my slave and you will enter into the bondage of the dark side. Go ahead. And you know, it's a hokey, it makes for a hokey movie, but a good illustration. It's true. What is the emperor saying? He says, hate me. See, resent me, kill me, and I've won. the Bible says, is he's absolutely right. The only way that you can really be defeated by evil is if you hate the person. Now, some people say, this is ridiculous. Overcome evil with good? You're kidding. Why do that? And the answer is this, and then we're closed. First of all, when you respond just with courtesy, when you respond with good, with forgiveness, you give that person the chance to do it right the second time. You leave the door open. Listen, if a person is mean to you, and you're mean back, even if there was a chance for them repenting, you have just snuffed it out. Oh, listen, you know, many of you know how much I love that the trilogy of The Lord of the Rings by J.R.R. Tolkien. That author said that the part in his book that was the most poignant passage for him, the one that made him cry every time he looked at it, was a part that you may not even remember if you've read the book years ago. There's a little creature named Gollum. Gollum is a very evil, wicked little creature, creature, and he's been around for many, many years, and there's almost no good left in him. It's a great, great illustration of sin. He's slowly killed through his sin. He's killed more and more and more what originally was his goodness, what was there, and it's almost gone. And he becomes a kind of slave guide. He's enslaved. He's a captured captive, and he's guiding two hobbits. They're good guys. One of them is Frodo, who's a wonderful, noble hobbit, and the other one is Sam, who's loyal but not quite as noble or as wise as Frodo. Frodo tries very, very much to reach out to Gollum and to just fan the flames of the good that's left in him. And therefore, Frodo's continually forgiving him, continually overcoming evil with good. Sam doesn't trust him a bit. And the most sad and poignant section of the novel, according to Tolkien, is a place where Frodo is asleep. And Frodo has around his neck a ring that Gollum wants. And there's a place where Gollum starts to move toward Frodo, and there's a strange light in his eyes. And the light is an old light. It's a light of humanity. It's a light of goodness. Frodo is starting to love his master. He's starting to finally be overcome by the good. And he's reaching out just to touch Frodo's hand, just to do something kind and affectionate. It's like all the things that Frodo was doing to him to help him to come around were starting to bear fruit. And Frodo's asleep when this is happening. And there's Gollum reaching out to do the first loving thing he's done in a thousand years. And Sam sees him. And Sam says, uh-huh, trying to pick my master's pocket. Sam remembers all those awful things that Gollum had done to them over the years. He knows that Gollum is an unworthy creature. He knows that Gollum is full of, has done many things. And so Sam suddenly jumps up and says, thief! And Gollum turns to Sam and the book says, the light went out of his eyes forever. He says, nasty thief, huh? I'll show you. And he runs away. That was the last chance. See, Sam put out Gollum's last chance to repent. You overcome evil with good by saying, the door's open. You want to come to me? I haven't slammed that door. And even if that person never turns around, your conscience is clear from then on. The greatest ministry you can have to people in many situations and in many cases is to overcome evil with good. It doesn't necessarily mean that you can get close to some of these very, very, very unjust, wicked and nasty people and do good deeds for them necessarily. It means by your demeanor. They want to hate you. They want to think you're bad so they can justify their meanness toward you. You take that way because you act civilly toward them. You act courteously toward them. You practice forgiveness. You grant it even though you haven't felt it. You put on the new self and you'll be amazed at how that defeats evil and how that might actually fan the flames of some spark left in the hearts of some of these people whose humanity has almost gone out. An unforgiving heart is an unforgiven heart. Are you like the woman who just couldn't keep her hands off of Jesus? Like the woman who just couldn't help but want to kiss and hug him and delight in his presence? An unforgiving heart is an unforgiving heart. And a forgiven heart is a generous heart, a loving heart, a heart that lavishes love and forgiveness on all sorts of people. If we just had a few of us around, I wish I was one of them. I'm not. If we just had 10 like that in this church, it would turn the city. now, in just a moment of silence, to maybe make us one of those, or at least as close to that as we possibly can be. Let's pray. Put away all bitterness, rage, and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice. Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in Christ, God forgave you. Father, let these words be true of us. Would that they were. We are being defeated by evil, many of us tonight. Help us to forgive. Help us to overcome evil with good. Enough said. No need to drag this prayer on. We know what we have to do. Enable us and empower us to do it. How free we will be. How greatly that spirit in our hearts will benefit all those around us. Make us like your Son, who stretched out his arms on the cross and forgave and said, Father, forgive them. Father, forgive them. Make us like him. Make us like him. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
