TITLE: Called to the Kingdom
SCRIPTURE: Mark 1:14-34
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Light in the Darkness: Glory of Jesus in Mark
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/called-to-the-kingdom/

============================================================

This week's reading is from Mark 1. After John was put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee, proclaiming the good news of God. The time has come, he said. The kingdom of God has come near. Repent and believe the good news. As Jesus walked beside the Sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and his brother, Andrew, casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen. Come, follow me, Jesus said, and I will send you out to fish for people. At once they left their nets and followed him. When he had gone a little farther, he saw James, son of Zebedee, and his brother, John, in a boat, preparing their nets. Without delay, he called them, and they left their father, Zebedee, in the boat with the hired men and followed him. They went to Capernaum, and when the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach. The people were amazed at his teaching because he taught them as one who had authority, not as teachers of the law. Just then, a man in their synagogue, who was possessed by an impure spirit, cried out, What do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of God. Be quiet, said Jesus sternly. Come out of him. The impure spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek. The people were all so amazed that they asked each other, What is this? A New Testament, and with authority. He even gives orders to impure spirits, and they obey him. News about him spread quickly over the whole region of Galilee. As soon as they left the synagogue, they went with James and John to the home of Simon and Andrew. Simon's mother-in-law was in bed with a fever, and they immediately told Jesus about her. So he went to her, took her hand, and helped her up. The fever left her, and she began to wait on them. That evening, after sunset, the people brought to Jesus all the sick and demon-possessed. The whole town gathered at the door, and Jesus healed many who had various diseases. He also drove out many demons, but he would not let the demons speak, because they knew who he was. This is the word of the Lord. So traditionally, this time of the year, in the earliest weeks of the year, churches have taken time to look at who Jesus is. When you get near Easter, you get into the weeks up to Easter, and Easter itself, you're looking at what Jesus did. You're looking at his death and his resurrection, trying to understand what he came to do. But before you can understand what he came to do, you need to understand who he is. And we're going to be looking at the early chapters of Mark to give us an idea of that. And this passage right here is the very beginning of Jesus' ministry. You see, he gives in verses 14 and 15 his message in a nutshell. He then calls his very first disciples. Then he begins to actually embody the message in the way in which he ministers. So there's a few places in the Bible where you could go to ask the question, who is he, and get a more fruitful answer. And because it's such a fruitful passage, you're going to hear me give you six points, six things that we learn about Jesus. And some of you are saying, how long will this sermon be? And I will say, it's nasty out there. You need to stay until it melts, you know, about noon or so anyway. So you don't have a time problem. Just trust me. So actually, by the way, just to warn you, the points are of varying lengths. But we're going to learn here he's the king. He's the king of your salvation. He's the king of your mind. He's the king of your heart. He's the king of your life path, and he's the king that can be trusted. First of all, he's the king. In other words, when John is put in prison, Jesus went into Galilee proclaiming the good news of God. The time has come, he said. The kingdom of God has come near. That's the very first thing he says as he's about to announce his message. The kingdom of God has come near. Why? Because he's come. He's the king. Now, what is he saying here? We've got to spend just a moment on this, but it's very important because, especially in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, he's constantly talking about the kingdom, that he brings the kingdom. He brings the kingdom because he's the king. And in the Bible, in general, the kingdom of God is the healing. He brings the kingdom to the kingdom of God. He brings the kingdom to the kingdom of God. that he brings the kingdom. He brings the kingdom because he's the king. And in the Bible, in general, the kingdom of God is the healing, renewing exercise of God's ruling power. It's the healing, renewing exercise of God's ruling power. If you go into the Old Testament, there are four things you need to know about what the Old Testament teaches to help you understand what Jesus means when he says the kingdom of God is here. One is that, and actually the very beginning of Mark cites it, places like Isaiah 40 say that the world is in such a mess that someday God himself will come and put it right. God himself will come. A second strain that you have to know something about is that in places like 2 Samuel 7 and in Isaiah 1 and Isaiah 11, a lot of places in Isaiah, it says that there will be a king in the line of David who will come, and he will put the world right. And he will deal, he will put, he will end war, and he will end poverty, and he will end suffering, and he will make the world right. He'll unite the peoples of the world. A third strain is in places like Jeremiah 23, Jeremiah 31, Ezekiel 37, where it says that God will enter into a new relationship with us, a new covenant that will finally deal with the evil in our hearts, will finally change us. But perhaps the most important background, you have to understand from the Old Testament, understand what Jesus is talking about, is you have to go all the way back to Genesis. And in the very beginning, we see that when God created the world, the world was a paradise. There was no death, no war, no crime, no oppression, no suffering, no disease, nothing at all. You know why? Because God was in control. In other words, he completely ruled, he was in control. Imagine a great car in perfect condition, an expensive car, just a miracle of engineering, a wonderful car, and in the driver's seat, and the car's moving, is a five-year-old. It's under the control of a five-year-old. What will happen? Bad things. Bad things will happen. And you could, by and large, put them under the general heading of disintegration. Things will fall apart, lampposts, walls, the car itself, all sorts. Maybe you, if you're in the car with the five-year-old driving. Disintegration. Why? Because there's something wrong with the car? No. The car is fine. It wasn't built to be under the control of a five-year-old. Your life, if the Bible's right, and it is, you were created, your life was created, the world was created, the human race was created, but we were not created to be in charge of our own lives. We were created to serve God. We were created to be under his control. And when you live your life without God being under your own control, it's actually probably worse then, but it's my best shot today, is it's like a five-year-old driving a car. And we see in Genesis 3 that as soon as the human race turned away from God, said, no, no, no, we're going to be in charge. We're going to put ourselves in the driver's seat of our own lives. Things started falling apart. The center cannot hold. Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world. We fall apart spiritually and psychologically and socially, and even physically, it all falls apart. Why? Because now we were built to serve him, and when we serve ourselves, when we, our own lords, our own masters, our own kings, when God's ruling power is no longer hold sway over us or over our race, over our world, over our lives, things fall apart. Because we're going against the grain of the universe. We're going against the fabric of reality. If you just want a real, real mini case of it, just a miniature, miniature case of it, someone wrongs you, really wrongs you, what should you do? God says, our king says, you must forgive. It's a rule. It's a law. It's in the law. You must forgive. You must forgive. You must no longer hold the person liable. You must, you know, forgive from the heart. It's all through the Bible. Fine. What if you don't? If you don't, you're taking your life in your own hands. You're being your own master, your own Lord, as it were. You're actually making yourself the judge of this person sitting in the judgment seat. And what's going to happen? If you're really angry at them, bad things will happen. Disintegration. It won't be good for you psychologically. There'll be fear and anger. It won't be good for you in your relationships. If you stay angry at this person, you'll tend to generalize your anger toward other people like that person. It'll hurt your relationships. It'll destroy your relationships. It might even hurt your body. It might even create, it might even... bad for your body. What's going on? It's a miniature version of what happened in Genesis. It's a miniature version of what happens all the time. So what does it mean then when Jesus Christ comes and says, the kingdom of God has come? What it means is that when we enter back under his lordship, we start to heal. Things start to come together. However, something very important to see. Notice he says, this is the last thing we're going to say under this point, and don't worry, all six points are not the same length. What does it mean to be a king? Notice it says, the kingdom of God has come near. And what you'll see throughout the rest of the New Testament is that even though Jesus Christ brings the kingdom of God, it's not here fully. It's only here partially, and here's the reason why. Most people who heard Jesus Christ say, I'm the king. I'm bringing the kingdom of God. They were startled because when they read the Old Testament, it looked like the kingdom of God comes in at once. Everything's dark. Now the kingdom of God comes in. There's places in the Old Testament. It certainly looks like that. There's all these places where the great king, the heir of David, like Isaiah 11, will come and make everything right. But there were always in the Old Testament these other passages, like the suffering servant passages of Isaiah 42 and Isaiah 53, where it talks about some mysterious person who comes and suffers for the people. Nobody who read the Old Testament, read the Hebrew Scriptures, understood that that suffering servant could possibly be this messianic king. How could that happen? How could that be? But what Jesus shows us is, as the king, he comes not once to set everything right, but twice. He comes the first time, not in power and in judgment, to put down all evil, but in weakness, to bring mercy, as we'll see in a second. And someday he will come back at the end of time and put all evil down, and the kingdom of God will be full. And see, what that means is, and this is extraordinarily important, what that means is that right now, if you come into a relationship with him, you begin to heal, but it's not fully. What do you mean begin to heal? Well, I'll just give you two or three. For example, your image, your self-image, your identity. If you are from a traditional culture, your identity is based on living up to what your parents think you should do. If you come from a very religious background, your identity is rooted in being a very good person who obeys all the religious rules, and you're very spiritual, and you're very religious. If you come from a secular background, or if actually that's where you live right now, then your identity is based on your performance and your achievement. I've achieved this, and I've achieved this, and I have expressed myself, and I'm being who I'm supposed to be. All of those, listen, all of those models for identity will crush you. Jesus Christ comes along and says, no, no, I give you an identity rooted in a knowledge of your value and love that's not based on your performance that you begin to heal. You also begin to heal when your relationships, because of the incredible capital you've got in your identity now, you're able to forgive, and you're able to be open and recognize the humanity of people who are deeply different from you. It begins to heal your perspective. You begin to realize, wait, God knows what he's doing here, and when bad things happen, instead of immediately freaking out, you say, maybe there's some reason for it. In all sorts of ways, you partially, not fully, but substantially begin to heal, because the kingdom of God in Jesus Christ has come near. So he's the king. Secondly, though, he's not just the king in general, he's the king in all these ways. He's the king of your salvation. Because the second thing he says immediately is, not just the kingdom of God has come near, repent and believe the good news. Now, the word he uses here is gospel. It's the word, the Greek word, euangelion, you know, euangelion, which means the good message or the good news. And it had a very specific meaning when Mark and Jesus used it. And the fact that Jesus chose it and the early Christians chose it to express the essence of what Christianity is all about is extremely important. It probably, if I was only, instead of being here for 25 years, I was only here for two and a half minutes, and I only had one thing to say, it would probably be what I'm about to tell you. The word gospel means news of a great historic event. It's a report or news that some incredible thing has happened. And I just, I use the word great. It wasn't daily news, the kind of, you know, you know, this is what happened yesterday. It meant some great. we've got an inscription in Greek that reads like this, the beginning of the gospel of Caesar Augustus. You say, what? The beginning of the gospel, what is that? It was the announcement of his coronation. That when his coronary, when he was made emperor, that changes things. He's the emperor. There's an emperor. That's history making. That's history changing. It's life changing for everybody who's there. And therefore, it was a gospel. So, what was Jesus doing when he said, my message is a gospel? What he's actually saying was, I'm different than any other religious leader you ever have heard of or ever will hear of. Because every other religion, its core message is basically not news, but advice. Advice. Oh, every religious founder came along and maybe said, here's the miracles that happened. So, it's not like every religion teaches this or that miracle came, but it's not the most important thing. Believing in those miracles is not what connects you to God. It's not what gets you to heaven. Here's the most important thing. You have to live like this. You have to do these things. You have to live in this way. Then you'll connect to God. Then you'll please God. Then you'll connect to the divine. Then you will go into bliss, into heaven, however it's defined. And therefore, the core of every other religion, the core message is always advice, what you must do. But Christianity, the core message is news. Not what you must do to connect to God, but what has been done. It's news that Jesus Christ died and rose again for us. So, you see, if you're saved by what you do, then the core of religion is advice. If you're saved by what he has done, and we just have to believe the news and rest in him, then the core of Christianity is not advice, but news. The essential message of Christianity is you're not saved because of your record and your past. You're saved because of Jesus' record and Jesus' past. And to put a fine point on it, the moment you believe the good news and rest in that and say, Father, accept me because of what Jesus Christ did, that moment you are as loved by God right now as you will be a billion years from now when you're perfect and glorious. And then you begin to heal. Then you begin to participate in the kingdom. When you repent and believe, not say, by the way, if you, and most, an awful lot of people do, if you continue to understand Christianity in an advice model, if you still basically think of Christianity as advice, how you should live. And if I live, then God will bless me and take me to heaven. If you continue to kind of use the advice paradigm to understand Christianity, you're cut off from the kingdom of God. You're not connected to God. You don't have any of this that Jesus offers. It's only when you shift your paradigm from advice to news and you realize, no, it's not how I live, but what Jesus is, how Jesus lived. It's not what I've done. It's what Jesus has done. It saved me. Then you begin to participate in the kingdom. Then you begin to heal until the very end in which Jesus Christ comes back and the kingdom is all in all. And then you'll say, the exile out of paradise is over finally. I've come home at last. This is my real country. I belong here. This is the country I was looking for all my life, though I didn't know it. And so he's the king and he's the king of your salvation. You must not be king of your own salvation. There's plenty of people, plenty of people who say, oh, I believe in Jesus and I try to be like him and I try to emulate him and I respect him so much and I just try to really be a good person. I try to live like Jesus. In other words, you might love Jesus at that point, but you are king of your own salvation. You have to make him king of your salvation. So he's king. He's king of your salvation. Thirdly, he's king of your mind. This is, by the way, for those of you keeping records, this is a short point, but it's an important point. Notice twice, you go down here to verse 21. It says, when they came to Capernaum, when the Sabbath came, Jesus went into the synagogue and began to teach. And the people were amazed at his teaching because he taught them as one who had authority, not as the teachers of the law. And later on it says, a new teaching and with authority. Here's the reason they were so shocked. And if you think about it, you'll immediately see the difference. What did teachers of the law say when they taught? They said, it is written. What did even the prophets say? Elijah said, I mean, there were prophets. They were getting revelation. Even they said, thus saith the Lord. But Jesus comes along and says, I say unto you. Jesus claimed original, not derived authority. If I get up here and I open the Bible and says, this is what the Bible says, I hope I have some authority as I'm talking, but it's derived authority. Jesus had original authority. Even the prophets didn't ever say such a thing. It is written, or thus saith the Lord, but Jesus said, I say unto you. Or for example, some of you know in the old King James Bible, it's really almost lost in the modern translations, which is a shame, but in the old King James Bible, very often Jesus would begin a statement like this. Verily, verily, I say unto you. You know, it's kind of quaint. We really don't realize how astounding that is. Literally, he was saying, amen, amen. That's what he was saying in the Greek text, amen, amen. And then he went on and spoke. What was he doing? Well, maybe this isn't a total surprise. When the synagogue was assembled and someone was speaking, the elders were always seated up front. And it was the elders' job to make sure that whatever people said, whatever the speaker said, was true to the scripture. And so the elders needed to ratify it. So after the person would speak, the elders would say, amen. You know, and by the way, there's still many churches in the world where people still ratify what the preacher just said by saying, amen. It's a way of saying, you say that, I agree with you. But you know what Jesus is doing there? When he starts saying, amen, amen, he says, I'm not going to let you judge me. You don't have the right to judge me. You can't say, well, I think I believe in what, you know, or I once heard a minister say, and Jesus said, and rightly so, I think. Jesus says, you can't say that. Because if I am who I said I am, and I am, if I am the son of God, then I have to have authority over your mind. I have to have intellectual authority. Even if your culture says one thing, even if your mind says one thing, even if your reason says one thing, you've got to believe what I tell you. And see, what that means, of course, is if you find some place where Jesus is saying something that you think is regressive, like on hell or something like that, and there's plenty of things that he says that do not fit in at all with the cultural currents or the intellectual currents of our time. You can't say, well, I accept most of what Jesus says, but I can't follow him there. Where do you get that grid that you put down on Jesus and you decide which things you're going to accept and which things not? Where does that grid come from? What could be higher than him? What you're actually saying is, oh, I really respect Jesus, but I can't follow everything you see in the New Testament. I can't follow all of his teaching. What you're really saying is, I don't believe Jesus is who he said he is at all. He's a fraud, or he was a lunatic. He couldn't be the son of God, because if he is, he's got to have authority over your mind. So he's king over your salvation. Thirdly, he's king over the mind. Fourth, he's king over your heart. Maybe you noticed the demon exorcism there. He says, we're told that just then, this is verse 23, just then a man in their synagogue who was possessed by an impure spirit cried out, what do you want with us, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know who you are, the Holy One of God. Be quiet, Jesus has sternly come out of him, and the impure spirit shook the man violently and came out of him with a shriek. Now, as modern people, we wonder about that. We're skeptical of such a thing as demon exorcism, and I can't take too much time here, but let me just give you a couple thoughts, because I don't think that's the main point for us to have to decide here. But if you believe in God, now maybe you don't, but if you believe in a personal supernatural being like God, I'm not completely sure what would be irrational about believing in a personal evil supernatural being. I'm not sure. I mean, if you believe in a supernatural good being, why couldn't there be a supernatural evil being? Or, may I ask, do you just look out there at the world, and does it seem so wonderful that it's just impossible to believe that there's evil supernatural forces at work out there? Maybe you should read your paper more closely. That was ironic. I know it's not always easy to tell when I'm being ironic. I mean, is it really all that hard to believe in supernatural evil forces aggravating things, taking sort of normal human depravity and making it a considerably more demonic and worse than it would be otherwise? I don't think it's that hard to understand. Bible is concerned, demon possession is only an extreme end of a condition that we're all in. Because the Bible continually talks about the fact that we're all slaves till Jesus liberates us, till the King liberates us. How so? Because we're all under the control of something. We're all possessed by something. So this just absolutely tremendous quote by David Foster Wallace in his famous Kenyan College commencement address, he says this. Listen to this and then you'll see what I mean. He says, there's no such thing as not worshiping. Everyone has to worship something. What he means is everybody's got to live for something. And then he says, the only choice you get is what to worship. And then he says something very interesting. He says, you probably should worship a God or Jesus or Allah or something. Because then he says, because anything other than God that you worship, pretty much anything else you worship, quote, will eat you alive. If you worship money and things, if they are where you tap real meaning in life, you will never have enough. You will never feel you have enough. Worship your body and beauty and sexual allure and you will always feel ugly. And when time and age start showing, you will die a million deaths before they finally take you away. Worship power. You will end up feeling weak and afraid. And you will need ever more power over others to numb you to your own fear. Worship your intellect. Being seen as smart, you will end up feeling stupid, a fraud, always on the verge of being found out. But the insidious thing about these forms of worship, tapping into meaning, is their unconscious, their default settings. You see that term when he says these things, they will eat you alive. They will eat you alive. So if you live for power, if you live for people's approval, whatever you live for, you're going to have to have it in order to feel good about yourself and to feel like you even have a self. And if something gets in the way, then you get afraid, you're paralyzed with fear or you have overwhelming anger toward whatever is blocking you. You're possessed. And the only thing, according to Jesus, who can liberate you is me. Why? Because he says, I'm the one master that won't eat you alive. I'm the one master that will forgive you. Worship money or worship career and fail in your career. Your career will never forgive you. Worship beauty. Your mirror will never forgive you. You know that, right? Never. He says, if I'm the source of your value, of your meaning, of your hope, I forgive. I'm the only master that will not eat you alive. Well, then how does that healing begin? How do you get to that place? Well, it's very interesting. Look at the beginning of the very first four people who are called to be Jesus' disciples. As Jesus walked beside the Sea of Galilee, up here in verse 16, he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting a net into the lake, for they were fishermen. Come, follow me, Jesus said, and I will send you out to fish for people. They left their nets and followed him. When he'd gone a little farther, he saw James, son of Zebedee, and his brother John in a boat preparing their nets. Without delay, he called them. They left their father Zebedee in the boat with the hired men and followed him. There's two astounding things here. First of all, they have a living. And he says, I must be important than your living. I must be more important than your career or your work. But the second, do you have a father? And this is a patriarchal culture. And what he's essentially saying is, I've got to be more important than your family. I've got to be more important than your father. You've got to love me and serve me and trust me more than your father. I have to have supremacy. Why? Because otherwise, how will I do the healing? St. Augustine, which I'll keep bringing up, St. Augustine said that you are mainly what you love the most. And what's wrong with us is the loves of our heart are disordered. They're out of order. So if you love your job more than you love your children, you'll destroy your family. But if you love your children more than you love God, you'll smother your children. Only if your loves are reordered will things start to work so that you're not eaten up with anxiety or anger because you don't need these things. You just have them. You enjoy them, but you don't need them. They're not the end all and be all. And that's the reason why Jesus has to be king of your heart. See, you're going to see this as you go through the book of Mark or Matthew over and over again. Jesus is constantly discerning the heart. saw what was in their hearts. Why? Because it says, actually, Matthew 6, 21, Jesus says, where your treasure is, there is your heart. Whatever you treasure the most controls the whole life. If you treasure a career, if you treasure anything other than Jesus Christ the most, your heart's under control of something else, and it will eat you alive. And by the way, test yourself. If you say, I'd be very happy to obey Jesus, I'd be very happy to obey Jesus if. I would be happy to be a Christian if whatever's on the other side of the if is your real God, and it's going to eat you alive. There will be no conditions. Or he's not king of your heart, your mind, your salvation. Second, lastly, point five. He's also the king of your life path. Now, what do I mean by that? Jesus Christ, when he calls for disciples, he doesn't just say, obey me, though that's implied. He says, follow me. Follow me. You're called not just to obey him, though you are called to obey him, but more comprehensively, you're called to follow him. Now, why? Well, what the theologians and the biblical scholars will tell you is that word follow meant to at least this, to not just show up at classes where Jesus was teaching you the way you'd go to a college today, but to live with him, to center your whole life around him, and to have an intimate personal relationship with him. And so to really participate in the kingdom and to really see the kind of healing to your perspective and to your relationships and to your self-image, partial but powerful healing, is to follow him means you have to have a prayer life. It means you have to, you know, you need to have a personal relationship with him. That's one thing the word means. But just for the next three or four minutes, I'd like you to consider something else. Follow means we're going somewhere, and you have to follow me whatever you do. You have to stay faithful to me no matter whatever you do. I'm going to take you someplace. Follow means I'm going to take you someplace. Your life is going to go in a certain way. You're going to go certain places, and you must follow me. You must be faithful to me whatever you do, wherever I take you. If you think about it for a minute, you know who these four guys were? We don't know everything about these four, Peter, Andrew, James, and John. We don't know everything about how they died, but we do know that three of the four of them, because they followed Jesus, were killed. The stories, we know James, by the way, was executed. It's actually in the book of Acts. He died young because he followed Jesus. Peter supposedly was crucified upside down. The legends about Andrew, by the way, is that he was praying, and someone came and ran a spear through him. That's a legend. We don't know. Maybe it's true. John, of course, died lonely as an exile on the island of Patmos. They followed Jesus, and he took him someplace, and it didn't seem like it was a very nice path. But here's what I'm going to tell you here. This is sort of the second last thing I want you to think about. There's nothing more crucial to being a disciple. There's nothing more crucial to giving Jesus Christ the kingship of your life. There's nothing more crucial to participating in the kingdom of God and getting that healing than when your life path becomes dark and difficult and confusing and painful, and he doesn't seem like he's really there. You don't feel him. You feel like he's abandoned you. You stay faithful to him anyway. You keep following him wherever he takes you. You keep following him whatever you do. Now, the story I haven't used in a while but I love, and the reason I bring it up every so often is I'm very happy to have people go out and get the book. George MacDonald, over 100 years ago, wrote a fairy tale called The Princess and the Goblin. The Princess and the Goblins. And it's about a little girl named Irene, and she's in a kingdom in which there's a lot of goblins. She lives in this great big house, and she discovers that in the high room of that house, every so often her fairy grandmother appears. She's beautiful. She's ancient. Irene loves her. She appears. Sometimes she's there. Sometimes she's not. One day she appears up there in that room, and they're talking, and the fairy godmother gives, grandmother, excuse me, gives Irene a ring and gets out a little ball of yarn, I guess as it were, a little ball, and attaches the end. she says, now I'm going to keep the ball with me. And the thread is so fine you won't be able to see, you can only feel it. But if you ever get in trouble, put the ring under your pillow and then follow the thread with your finger. And Irene says, oh, that's wonderful, grandmother, because now I'll be safe. She says, well, it may take you on a roundabout way, but it will take you to me. Always follow your thread, whatever you do. And then, of course, what happens is one night in the dark, she realizes the goblins have come into the house and they're trying to get her. So she takes a ring and she puts it underneath the pillow, and she begins to follow the thread. But to her great unhappiness and confusion, the thread does not take her up the back stairs to the high room where her grandmother usually is. It takes her downstairs, where the sounds of the growling and the snarling are coming from. And she starts to come back and realizes, guess what? If you come back, the thread disappears. It only works forward. So she follows the thread downstairs and it does take her away, but then it takes her outside. Outside, not in some little hidey hole, no, in the house, no, outside. And then worse than that, it takes her toward the goblin cave. And then it takes her into the goblin cave. And every time she starts to come back, it finally takes her right up to a wall of rock. And she says, what in the world? And then she says, well, maybe I'm supposed to pull this down. And she starts to pull the rocks down. And inside is her friend, Kurti. And Kurti says, how did you ever find me? And she says, I followed my thread. He says, great, let's get out of here. I was imprisoned by the goblins. She says, okay, let's follow the thread. And the thread takes her down deeper into the cave. And he says, that's crazy. This is the way out. You can't go that way. And she turns to him and she says, I never would have found you if I had stopped following my thread even when it looked foolish. I must follow my thread wherever it goes, whatever I do. And eventually it takes her to the fairy grandmother. You know, what's the point? Jesus Christ knows what you need. Jesus Christ has a vision for your glory. And his love for you and his plan for you fits with the possibility of some things that look like dead ends. You must follow the thread. You must obey him. You must be faithful. He says, follow me. He doesn't just say obey me in some kind of abstract way. Here are the rules. Follow me. Stay faithful to me. Don't go back. Continue to obey. Continue to love. Continue to pray. Continue to worship. Continue to believe. I don't care how bad it is. And it will bring you home. He's king. He's king of your salvation. He's king of your mind. He should be king of your heart. He's king of your life path. But lastly, he's the king that can be trusted. Now, here's why I say that. I am telling you something that is so counterintuitive. It goes so against everything your culture is telling you. Those of you who have... Everybody tells you in this culture, you can't let somebody impose their threat on you. You decide what is right or wrong for you. So, of course, if you do what the culture tells you, you hear the goblins, you just go right upstairs where the probably goblins were ready to eat you. And that's the story of the human race. I'm going to... I'm going to... You know, I'm not going to follow the thread. My goodness. Nobody has the right to impose the thread on you. The fact is, honestly, that you have to trust him. You have to obey him. Or the healing won't happen. You've got to give up the right to self-determination. You say, well, how can I trust him? It's interesting that when he heals Simon's mother-in-law, Simon's mother-in-law was in bed with a fever. They told Jesus about her in verse 31. So he went to her and took her hand and helped her up. One commentator says, this is typical of Jesus, unnecessary tenderness and compassion. See, we know that Jesus can just say, you're healed. But over and over again, he touches the leper. However, the deaf mute, he puts his hand on his mouth and he puts his hand on his... This is in Mark chapter 7, his ears. And he sighs. Here he takes her by the hand. Unnecessary. He's got the power. He doesn't have to do it. It's unnecessary tenderness and compassion. And here's why you can trust him. You know how the story ends, right? Look forward and see this. Jesus called James and John to leave their father, but he'd already left his father. He left his father's throne above, so free, so infinite, his grace. Emptied himself of all but love and blood for Adam's helpless race. Because not only had he already left his father, but on the cross, he's really going to lose his father. And he did it for you and me. Or put it this way. hell. But he knew on the other end of it was our salvation. Here's how you can trust him. If he followed his thread into absolute cosmic rejection and nothingness, into hell itself, you can follow your thread for him. He did that for you. You can follow your thread to him, especially knowing it's going to lead you right into the father's arms. Trust him. Say to Jesus Christ, I trust you. I give you my life. My brother, my captain, my king. Let's pray. Our father, we thank you for this very fruitful part of the scripture that shows us who Jesus is. He's the king. He's the savior. He's our teacher. He's our healer. He's the one we can trust. And we pray that you would help us begin to heal more than we have been because we've come more and more under his lordship. We know, Lord, that we're kind of like a fish out of water when we are living for ourselves, flopping around, gasping. But it's in Jesus Christ and in his ruling power that we fall back into the water and we're able to move about with the freedom and the power because that's our true element, our true place, our true country. So help us to make him king and help us, therefore, to have the joy that comes from that and also help us to give you the glory. And that's the only way, and that's the only way we can give you the glory that we owe to you for all you've done through us, through Jesus Christ for us. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
