TITLE: Christmas Message 1995
SCRIPTURE: Luke 2:7, 34-35
TOPICS: Christmas and Advent Jesus' Birth
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/christmas-message/

============================================================

The passage on which our teaching is based tonight is not printed in your bulletin. Don't look. It's not there. And it's partly, it is risen. It's not there, but it's because it's very familiar and most of it's already been read to you. Let me read you a very, very, very familiar verse out of the second chapter of Luke. And then let me read you an extremely unfamiliar verse out of the second chapter of Luke. Same chapter, same basic narrative. One you already heard tonight. And she wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger because there was no room for them in the inn. Okay? That's Luke chapter 2 verse 7. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger because there was no room for him. In the inn. But then, just a little longer, a little further away, we have the famous place where Simeon sees the Christ child in the temple. And he gets very excited and he says, This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel and to be a sign that will be spoken against so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed and a sword will pierce your own soul too. Now, why did I just read this little part out of God's word? Here's why. There's, this is probably not the last Christmas thing you're going to go to this Christmas season, Christmas service or event. And so you're going to hear other passages read. But Luke chapter 2, if you read the whole thing, you'll see that Luke is talking about one theme that's very seldom brought out at Christmas time. It's an important part of the teaching of the Christmas stories. The Christmas accounts is a very important part of what the Bible teaches about Christmas. And it's seldom brought out and looked at in an undiluted form the way I want to do tonight. Because it seems like a downer, even though it isn't. And that is, the Christmas story tells us that Jesus Christ came to be rejected. Everything about this chapter in Luke is foreshadowing. Luke is not simply a reporter, though he's certainly telling us accurate things about how Jesus was born. He's also a teacher. And he's showing us that Jesus Christ came to be rejected. So on the one hand, you have this very famous place that I mentioned. It says, and while they were there, the time came for the baby to be born. And she gave birth to her firstborn, a son, wrapped him in clothes, placed him in a manger. There was no room for them in the inn. Why does Luke bring that out? He's shut out. Here's Jesus Christ at the very beginning. Shut out. Doors barred. Manger. Out in the cold. No room. But then later on, we have this strange place further on in the chapter in which this old man, Simeon, a devout old man, sees Joseph and Mary offering Jesus up for his right of circumcision. And he says two things. Now, the first part of what Simeon says is very famous. Many of you, if you've had experience in other churches, know that many churches end with something called the nunc dimittis, now demiss me, and that's the Latin form of it. But Simeon, at a certain point, grabs the child and he holds him up and says, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And that's, in many church services, that's the dismissal. Now, Lord, dismiss me. Now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word. And that's very famous, of course. It's been enshrined in all sorts of services for centuries. But the second part of what Simeon says, people don't think about, they don't talk about, they don't look at it. And that's where he says, then Simeon blessed them and said to Mary, this child was destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel and to be a sign that will be spoken against so that the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed and a sword will pierce your own soul as well. Jesus came to be rejected. Jesus came to get people mad at him. Jesus came to reveal hearts and have people speak against him. Jesus came to be barred. Jesus came to be shut out. Jesus came to be rejected. Why? Now, it wasn't because he loves rejection. There are people who look for rejection. And the reason they seek rejection is because it makes them feel important. This reminds me, I'm reminded of something I saw on TV recently, a little incident in which a man is in the counselor's office. And the man says, Doc, he says, it was an awful situation. I was walking by and there were two men up on a roof. They were doing roof work. They were doing construction. And they were both up there with hammers. And they were doing roof work. And they were doing roof work. And they were doing roof work. And they were doing roof work. And they were doing roof work. Thank you. and says, Doc, he says, it was an awful situation. I was walking by and there were two men up on a roof. They were doing roof work. They were doing construction. And they were both up there with hammers. And they were hammering. And one of them called me a paranoid little weirdo in Morse code. Now, so there are people who look for rejection and you know why they look for rejection. It makes them feel important. Jesus Christ came to be rejected, but not because he needed to feel important. He came not seeking rejection for its own sake, but he came knowing that he was going to be rejected and yet embracing that rejection because it is at the very essence of why he came if you don't understand rejection, why he was rejected, that he was rejected, and the implications for us, you don't understand Christmas. Now, let me just, let me say that there are three reasons why he experienced rejection. Three. Let's look at all three and there's a lesson we can draw from each one. He was rejected because of the superficiality of the world, because of the threatening nature of his truth, and because of the substitutionary character of his work. Those are kind of mouthfuls. Let me just show you rather briefly what each one means. First of all, he was rejected because he didn't meet the world standard for Messiah. The first reason he was rejected is because he wasn't the right kind of person. He didn't look like a Messiah. He didn't act like a Messiah. Even the manger shows that he came from the wrong side of the tracks. When you get to the place where he is presented for circumcision, the offering that Joseph and Mary give are two pigeons, two doves, two birds, and that was the offering that was by the Jewish law was offered up by the very poorest of all people, which means that Joseph and Mary were poor people. Jesus was a carpenter. Jesus did not look like what the world would say a leader, a Messiah should possibly be. In fact, recently I was going through the book of Mark in a Bible study, and in chapter 6 we're told of Mark that his hometown friends, his family and his relatives and the people that knew him coming up, they were more rejecting of him perhaps than anybody, and here's the reason why. He came from a carpenter. He was a carpenter. He came from a poor family. In fact, there's even an allusion in the chapter which makes perfect sense that they knew that he was illegitimate. You know this, certainly you don't you. I mean, in families this happens. I mean, if you get married at this month and then four months later you have the kid, everybody goes, I mean, you don't hide this in a family and you certainly don't hide this in a small town. And therefore, what did they know of Jesus? All they knew about Jesus is this is not leadership material. Okay? Illegitimate kid. Poor family. Wrong side of the tracks. Father died young, raised by his mother. No connections. Socially marginal. And beyond that, we're told he was unhandsome. You know in Isaiah 53, he had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him. Nothing in his appearance that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected. That's what Isaiah 53 says. He was not pretty. He was not good looking. If you do, now here's why he goes completely against what the world says. What is a celebrity today? What has always a celebrity been? A celebrity is somebody who's real pulled together looking on the outside even if on the inside they're a wreck. The important thing is on the outside they're svelte. On the outside they're beautiful. On the outside they're talented. In fact, it's not a matter of in spite of that they're a mess inside. In fact, from what I can tell, that's what makes you a celebrity today. That on the outside you look all together. On the inside you are a wreck. Your relationships are a wreck. You're struggling with drug use. Fine. We read about it. That's what makes them a celebrity. People who are unbelievably strong in character but they're dowdy they're not celebrities. It's the externals. It's the superficial. It's the image. It's the outside. Jesus comes along and completely destroys that. He says, your status, your beauty, your look, your image, your connection, your position, nothing. What matters is the inside. You know the place where Samuel was looking for the next king and he goes to Jesse's son under the influence of the revelation of God and he sees all the sons and he sees the oldest son and he's tall and he's handsome and Samuel says, this must be the one and God immediately speaks in his heart and he says, and he sees all the sons and he sees all the sons and he sees all the sons he's tall and he's handsome and Samuel says this must be the one and God immediately speaks in his heart and he says uh-uh. He says human beings look on the outside but I look on the heart. God now this means and this is the first lesson we got to move on to the other two but this is a very important lesson. Christmas means snobbery must be the farthest thing from the Christian. Snobbery. Christmas means the end of snobbery. All the people who thought everybody the world thought were great they had rooms and the greatest thing that the world has ever seen was out in a stable. The world doesn't get that. The outside is more important than the inside you see. The pedigree is more important than anything else. Christmas says that is bunk. Christmas the spirit of Christmas is the absolute antithesis of the spirit of snobbery which means Christians have to have x-ray vision. Christians care about their insides. They care about character. They care about nobility. They care about greatness. They care about wisdom. They care about compassion. They care about integrity. They don't care about the figure they cut. And that's what they care about in other people. You have to have x-ray vision. Do you? Here's a perfect example of this. A perfect example of the spirit of Christmas. A perfect example of the wisdom that comes by looking at that. This is a true story. It's a great little story. Somebody sent it to me. During World War II, a man named John Blanchard was a lieutenant in the Navy and at one point he had a chance to use a library and he got a book out of the library that had belonged to somebody else that had been sold and come to the library. And even though he liked the book, the thing he really liked were the notes. Somebody, a woman who lived in New York City, had written all the notes on, you know, in the margin and he loved the notes. And he loved, he was intrigued by the wisdom of the notes and the insight of the notes. And he was attracted to the person who wrote the notes. And her name and her was on the inside of the book and you could tell it was from New York City. So with a little bit of effort, he discovered where she was and he wrote her. Her name was Hollis Manel. I don't know if I'm saying it right. And he wrote her and she began to write back. And while he was, during the war, they had this wonderful correspondence and it turned into an incredibly deep friendship. And he had the utmost imagined, admiration for her, but he also had an imagination for her. And he asked her for a picture and he, she never, she never sent him one. I wonder what he means, I wonder what she means by that. But anyway, finally the war was over and he decided he was coming back and they had set up a point at which they were coming, he was going to meet her at Grand Central Station at a particular spot at 7 p.m. And she wrote him the last letter and said, hey, we don't know what we look like. And I don't know what you look like at all, but here's what I'll do. I will stand at a particular place and you'll know me because I'll be wearing a great big red rose on my lapel. So he gets out of the train. He walks over to the spot and he sees actually two women there. One woman, beautiful, and the other woman, much dowtier, much older, much heavier than he had imagined wearing a great big red rose. And he stopped in his tracks. And as he waited there, the pretty woman walked away and the woman with the red lapel stood there looking for somebody. And he said, I was split. He says, I felt choked up by the bitterness of my disappointment, but, quote, so deep was my longing for the woman whose spirit had companioned me and upheld me during my time at war that I thought, well, this won't be love and romance, but it could be something so precious, maybe a friendship for which I would always be grateful. So he summoned up his courage and he swallowed hard and he walked over and he said, hello, I am Lieutenant John Blanchard. You must be Hollis. I am so glad to meet you. May I take you to dinner? And she smiled and said, son, I have no idea who you are or what this is really about, but the young lady who was just standing here beside me that walked away, she said that I should wear this red rose in my lapel and only if I were to, you were to ask me to ask me to dinner, I should tell you that she's waiting for you in that restaurant across the street. Now, you see, Christians, we should have known, underneath the dowdiness of Jesus, you know, underneath the unhandsomeness. You see, what does Isaiah say about him? He says, there's nothing about him that would make us long for him. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him under his dowdiness, under his unhandsomeness. There was a beauty greater than the sun shining in all of its strength. And you see, someday the veils will come off. See, veiled in It's veiled. But a Christian becomes somebody who says, I'm never going to ever be fooled again. I was failed at first by the ordinariness. When I was, William Lane wrote a commentary on Mark, and he makes a commentary on Mark chapter 6 where all of the hometown people reject Jesus as the Messiah. And William Lane puts it this way. He says, they could not pierce the veil of ordinariness around him. They couldn't pierce the veil of ordinariness. He was too ordinary. He wasn't what they expected. They got offended. They looked on the outside, not on the inside. But a Christian realizes, under the dowdiness, under the unhandsomeness, under the social marginality, there was an absolute beauty. And therefore, I'm never going to be. Once you realize that, you know better. You say, all that matters is that I develop my own nobility, my own heart, my own love, my own compassion, because that will last forever. Someday, my outsides will look like my insides. In fact, that's true of everybody. Someday, the people who are ugly on the inside will be ugly on the outside forever. That's what it means to be a Christian, is to have a worldview like that. And it also means that those people who have become lovely on the inside will become lovely on the outside forever. And Christians say, that's what I'm looking toward, because this current situation, in which underneath the dowdiness is the beauty and underneath the beauty is the ugliness, is temporary. But I'm going to live a life utterly unsnobbish. Utterly unafraid of glitz. Not unafraid, but, you know, utterly unintimidated by glitz. Unaverwhelmed by it. Let me go one step further. Christian friends, some of you, some of us, right now, in more subtle ways, even, are kind of unhappiness with the ordinariness of Jesus. You know that place where we're Pilate in Jesus Christ Superstar, the rock opera? Where Pilate, Jesus comes before Pilate, and Pilate says, if you're the Messiah, do a trick. He says, oh, so, you are the Christ. Yes, the great Jesus Christ. Prove to me that you're no fool. Walk across my swimming pool. Remember that? When Jesus Christ comes into your life, and he doesn't immediately change things, and he doesn't do miracles here and there, about six months into the Christian life, a year into the Christian life, two years into the Christian life, some of you, now you know who you are, you start to say, where's the miracles? You see, Jesus' approach is splendor in the ordinary. He injects splendor into the ordinary and transforms it bit by bit into his likeness. And we can't handle the ordinary. And we get offended in some more subtle ways by Jesus' ordinariness. And we look for glitz, and we look for fireworks in our lives, when what he wants is hard work. He says, be faithful to me, and wait till you see what I'll do to you. But what do you want? Prove to me that you're no fool. Walk across my swimming pool? You know, there's this great place in Lewis's Screwtape Letters. C.S. Lewis writes a fanciful book about, it's letters from a senior devil to a junior devil, teaching the junior devil how to tempt and really foul up human beings. And the trouble with this particular junior devil is one of his clients, human clients, has become a Christian recently. So the senior devil writes and says, ah, he says, well, there's a couple things you can do. It's, you know, all is not lost. And he says, work hard on the disappointment or the anticlimax, which is coming during his first weeks in the church. When he gets to this pew, oh, well, not here, good. When he gets to his pew and looks around him, provided that any of the people around him who are Christians sing out of tune, have boots that squeak, or double chins, or odd clothes, the patient, your client, will quite easily believe that somehow their religion must therefore be ridiculous. See, people won't be able to penetrate the veil of ordinariness around Christianity. The enemy, Jesus Christ, that is, allows this disappointment to occur on the threshold of all these human endeavors. It occurs when the boy who's been enchanted in the nursery by stories from the Odyssey actually tries to learn Greek. It occurs when lovers who've gotten married, they begin the real task of learning to live together. The enemy, Jesus Christ, takes this risk because he has a curious fantasy of making all these disgusting little human vermin into what he calls his free lovers and servants. Sons and daughters is the words he uses. Desiring their freedom, he therefore refuses to carry them by their mere affections and habits to any of the goals which he sets before them and therein lies our opportunity. Don't let him do it to you. See, what is, what's going on here? The manger means, Jesus says, look beneath the surface, penetrate the veil of ordinariness with which I come and even through which I work. Anti-snore. Anti-snore. walking across the swimming pool now, unfortunately. That's the first reason that he was rejected, is he utterly violates the world's standards. And once you see that, you shouldn't be fooled by them ever again. Secondly, and I can be more brief, but it's pretty important. The second reason that Jesus Christ was rejected was even a little bit more serious here. And that is, as Simeon said, the thoughts of many hearts will be revealed. What that means is, Jesus Christ showed people who they were, and they didn't like it. Jesus Christ came to show people who they really were, and they didn't like it. So, Romans chapter 1 tells us that deep down in our hearts, we all know we need God. We all know we should be obeying God. We all know we're sinners, and therefore we need God. But the way in which the average person, the way in which all human beings deal with that, is we have this engine of self-justification deep in our hearts. And that engine wants so desperately to think we're okay, and therefore it suppresses the truth. It does not want to know about God. It doesn't want to know what God requires. It doesn't want to hear that we need God. It doesn't want to hear the grace of God. It doesn't want to hear that there's anything wrong with us. And anything that makes it hard for them to suppress the truth gets them very mad. And that's the reason why when Jesus Christ came along, they hated him. It got very difficult for them to hold down the truth, to deny the fact that they needed God. Now, if you get, if you're anything like Jesus Christ, you're going to get the same kind of rejection. That's what, that's what, certainly that's what Christmas is all about. What about the slaughter of the innocents? People, immediately Jesus Christ comes into the world, and they're after him. People don't want, Herod did not want to be reminded that he was not the supreme king. So, when Jesus Christ comes along, he says, this reminds me that I'm not the real king. I will kill him. Don't you realize that when Jesus Christ comes to anybody, Jesus is saying, I'm not, you're not the real king. And we all get mad, just like Herod. We all want to slaughter him. And any human being that is so allied with Jesus, that it reminds, that you remind people of the same things Jesus reminded them of, you're going to get rejection too. I can just, I'll just, look, I'll give you just two quick examples. I remember a Christian cop years ago now, in New York City, who told me he became a Christian, and because the pimps would come to the precinct, and they would pass money around, and all the cops took the money, and they're his precinct, to stay away from the prostitutes on a particular corner. And when this guy stopped taking the money, a couple guys came to him and said, you better watch it. People are afraid that you're acting so pure, and next time you call for backup, maybe it'll be a little slow. Number two, a Christian family in a center, I remember, in an urban neighborhood in Philadelphia, were very welcoming to the very first black family in their neighborhood, and they got clobbered by their white neighbors who came over to them and said, do you realize if those people move into this neighborhood that the value of our property is going to go down? Everything I own, everything I have is bound up in this property. If it loses $50,000, I'm wiped out. How can you do this? How can you make it easy for them to live here? Don't you see? You don't have to be Jesus Christ to get rejected. Just living a normal moral life, just living an unsnobbish life, just living a life of integrity, you might get killed. You could get stoned. I mean, just a normal moral life is going to show up gossip in the office, it's going to show up corruption in government, it's going to show up racism in the neighborhood, it's going to show it up. The manger means, if you're like Jesus Christ, there won't be room for you in an awful lot of inns. That's what Christmas means. You can't be a snob, but the second point is, a lot of people will be too snobby for you. They will snub you. Now, here's the last thing, and the most important thing. Jesus Christ came knowing that he'd violate the world standards and be rejected, and knowing he would intimidate people because the truth would threaten them. But he came anyway, and here's the reason why, because of the substituting nature of his work. Let me just go back and read you that passage we've looked at a couple times. We're told that he was rejected in Isaiah 53. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected, a man of sorrows, familiar with grief. Like one from whom men hide their faces, he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Why? Verse 4. He took up our infirmities, he carried our sorrows, yet we see him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities. B Beauty, the mayor, that's the biggest change that you'veเคeteers, because, but that's the biggest change in the world is for us. He carried our sorrows, yet we see him stricken by God, smitten by him and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities. The punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed. We all, like sheep, have gone astray, turned each one to our own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. In a nutshell, his rejection is our acceptance. He didn't just come to be rejected as an example, he came to be rejected as a savior. Do you see this? His rejection means our acceptance. He was rejected for our transgressions. He was our substitute, and that means his rejection has led to our acceptance. God accepts us because he was rejected. See, Simeon says, he will be a sign that is spoken against. Because he's spoken against, you can be spoken for. Because he's rejected, you can be accepted. Because there's no room for him, you can dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Now, what does that mean? It means this. He knew that his acceptance would mean our rejection, but his rejection would mean our acceptance. And so he chose rejection for us. Now, we say to ourselves, if he received cosmic rejection for our acceptance, then I can certainly take some temporary earthly rejection for him. That's what a Christian is. A Christian is somebody who says, rejection, okay, it's part of it. I refuse to be a snob, and as a result, I'm going to be snubbed. But whatever I take, whatever I get on the chin, will be nothing like what he went through. He was utterly rejected for me. Maybe some of you may be finding right now that your lives are very difficult, and maybe you're experiencing rejection, and you say, gosh, I'm experiencing rejection. I'm not even sure if I am a Christian. But see, that's the way God works. That's the beauty of the way God works. God brings acceptance through rejection, and it could be that he's trying to accept you through Jesus, by driving you to Jesus through the rejection you're getting in life. That's the way he works. That's the paradox. That's the beauty of the way the gospel goes. That's the reason why George Herbert put it this way years ago. He says, I live to show his power, who once did bring, first my joys to weep, but now my griefs to sing. Do you know what that means? He says, before I was a Christian, even my joys wept, because on the outside I seemed to be all together, but on the inside there was an emptiness. But now I'm a Christian, I find that even my griefs sing, because even the rejection I experienced pushes me toward God, and I sense more of his welcome and love. What kind of gospel is this, he says? Greater the rejection on Jesus, the more the acceptance of God for me. And even here in my life, the more rejection I get from other people, when I get snubbed, when I get snobbed, when I get stuck on, it drives me to Christ, and I feel more the love that really, really makes me sing. And that's the reason why George Herbert is able to say, I live to show his power, who once did bring, first my joys to weep, but now my griefs to sing. How shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that Christmas means that the bad news is good news, that the worst news is good news. That if we simply, through the rejection of your Son, trusting in that and not in our good works, come and say, accept us. Jesus, we will have your love flood our lives. And then, as we grow, even sometimes through the difficulties of this life, greater and more noble and more like your Son on the inside, someday we'll have an outside that will match it, and we will live with him forever. Help us, O Father, to understand the meaning of Christmas, that though we may be rejected, we will dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Help us to understand these things and live in accordance with these things, for we ask it in Jesus' name, amen.
