TITLE: Christ, Our Life
SCRIPTURE: Colossians 3:1-14
TOPICS: Identity Worship
SERIES: The Vision of Redeemer
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/christ-our-life-2005/

============================================================

Our scripture reading this morning is from Colossians 3, verses 1 through 14. Since then, you have been raised with Christ. Set your hearts on things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in God. When Christ, who is your life, appears, then you also will appear with him in glory. Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature. Sexual immorality, impurity, lust, evil desires, and greed, which is idolatry. Because of these, the wrath of God is coming. You used to walk in these ways, in the life you once lived. But now you must rid yourselves of all such things as these. Anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips. Do not lie to each other, since you have taken off your old self with its practices, and have put on the new self, which is being renewed in knowledge in the image of its creator. Here, there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free. But Christ is all, and is in all. Therefore, as God's chosen people, holy and dearly loved, clothe yourselves with compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience. Bear with each other, and forgive whatever grievances you may have against one another. Forgive as the Lord forgave you. And over all these virtues, put on love, which binds them all together in perfect unity. This is God's word. What we're doing this fall is we're revisiting, as a church should do every so often, its vision. We're revisiting Redeemer's vision. Why are we here? What are we doing? And every single week, I'm taking a biblical text, some of them very familiar, because of revision, renewal time is a time to remember things that God has said to us in the past and called us to in the past, and we are each week going to be looking at a biblical text that tells us something about the vision of Redeemer. Now, the vision of Redeemer is we're here to build a great city for all people through a movement of the gospel that brings about personal conversion, community formation, social justice, and cultural renewal in New York City and through New York the world. That vision statement is actually printed when you open your bulletin on the left hand inside cover at the top. And every single week, I'm actually going to be showing you from a biblical text, I'm going to be expounding one part of that statement. Now, we're talking today about the gospel like we did last week. Last week, though, we saw that the gospel means the freeness of God's love. It's absolutely free. In fact, we saw that if you try to earn or deserve the favor of God, it makes you a Pharisee, it makes you a religious person, it makes you a moralistic person, it makes you a big part of what's wrong with the world. Because we saw moralistic people do good, they live good lives, but they do it out of fear, out of pride, and out of a need for control. They do it out of fear of rejection. You know, they do it out of pride of being better than others. They do it in order to control God, and that was last week's sermon. But a lot of people, when they hear that, the idea that God's love is absolutely free, it's unconditional, a lot of them say, well, okay, if I believed that, it certainly wouldn't change the way I lived. If I believed just God loved me that freely and that unconditionally, then I could live any way I wanted. But this passage shows us that it's not true. When you go to the bottom, and we can't, this is a wonderful long passage, but we can't look at every single part, but when it says, here there is no Greek or Jew, circumcised or uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave, or free. Here when it says, you're chosen, and by the way, that's not, to be chosen doesn't mean your choice. That's to be better. To be chosen simply means God came after you and he sought you. And it doesn't matter whether you followed the Bible and all the law or did not. What it's really saying, of course, is God's love is free, and yet the whole passage is about the fact that your life changes. If you're a Christian, your life changes. The gospel changes your life, not just in spite of the freeness of God's love, but being a Christian, your life changes your life, if you say, oh, I believe the gospel, and your life doesn't change, really change, in a way that other people can see, you haven't grasped it. The gospel brings about radical change in the life. Now, how does it do that? Well, let's look at this passage under three headings. I'd like to show you what this passage says about the inevitability of radical change, the gospel method for radical change, and why it works. The inevitability of radical change, the gospel method of radical change, and third, why it works. Now, what do I mean by the inevitability? Well, I'm struck by verse 9 and 10. It talks about you have put off the old self, and you've put on the new self. Now, what's intriguing about that is what radical language that is. I mean, everybody makes changes. You put off certain beliefs, you put off certain behavior, you put off certain practices, you put on other ones. But when you have done so much of a shift in belief, your beliefs have changed so much, your view of things have changed so much, your practices have changed so much, that you could actually say you're a new person. Paul deliberately, by saying you put off the old self, put on the new self, is evoking the language of identity. And he's saying that the change the gospel brings is so radical that it really, it means you become another person, as it were. You get converted. You don't just change in dribs and dribs, you get converted. Now, right away, a lot of people say, oh, there you go, Christians, you want to convert everybody. That's, you know, why, just let everybody be. I would like to propose to you that whoever you are, you're going to be converted by somebody or something. You're not just going to go on. You're going to be converted. What do I mean? Today, New York Times Magazine, a very interesting article by a professor. I'm sure I'm mispronouncing his name, but I couldn't find any way, I couldn't find his pronunciation. His name is Mark Lilla, L-I-L-L-A. I might be pronouncing it wrong. He's a professor at the University of Chicago. He's a major academic and writer, and he's an expert in relationship of religion and society. What's interesting about the article, he tells about how for several years, as he's a teenager and an adult, he considered himself a born-again Christian, and then kind of went away, and now he's a secular person. Yeah, conversion didn't work, and yet, get this, at the end of the article, he says something that very, very clearly shows he has had a lasting conversion. At the end of the article, he tells about the fact that because he's a writer in religion and society, that this summer, he went to the Billy Graham crusade in Queens. Afterwards, he met a young man who was from Poland, and he was a student at the Wharton Business School, University of Pennsylvania. He was in New York City to be an intern. He was doing a summer internship at a Wall Street firm, so he was, you know, at this elite school, and he was a bright young man and all that, and to the author's shock, he was talking to him, and he found that what Billy Graham said made sense, and he'd gone forward and given his life to Christ, and this just absolutely shocked the writer, and this is what he said. I found it hard to conceal my bafflement. I felt a professional lecture welling up in my throat about the history and psychology of religion. I wanted to expose him to the syncretic nature of Christian doctrine, the church's ambiguous role as incubator and stifler of human knowledge. I wanted to warn him against the anti-intellectualism of American religion today and the political abuses to which it is subject. I wanted to cast doubt on the step he was about to take. I wanted to help him see there were other ways to live to seek knowledge, love, and self-transformation. I wanted to convince him that his dignity depended on maintaining a free skeptical attitude toward all doctrine. I wanted to save him. Then I realized I thought I was out of that business, but maybe not. My education not only... Now, see, this is so self-knowing. It's really wise. He says, my education, I realized, not only was in books but in a certain comportment toward myself and the world around me. Doubt, like faith, has to be learned. It's a skill. But the curious thing about skepticism is that its adherents, ancient and modern, are proselytizers. Why do they care? Their skepticism offers no good answer to that question, and I don't have one myself. That's quite right and quite brilliant. Don't you see what he just said? Very, very directly. What he said was his doubts about Christianity were really an alternate set of beliefs about reality, about what it meant to be a dignified person, an authentic person. None of that can be proven. It's all a leap of faith. It's just a leap of faith to something else. And he was sure that the way in which he believed authentic personhood, which is to stay completely detached and skeptical against any doctrine, that's what makes you a wise person, sophisticated, authentic. If people were like that, the world would be better. He suddenly realizes he's really no different. Thank you. him. It's given him an identity. It's made him want to save other people from their wrong views of reality, and everybody's got one. Notice what he said was intriguing. His dignity depended on maintaining a free skeptical attitude toward all doctrine, except that one, his, you're going to be converted by something. William Willimon, who's the chaplain at Duke University, says this, the dominant culture in which we live is that of expressive individualism since the Enlightenment. People like to say, well, what the church says may be okay for some, but I think you have to determine right or wrong for yourself. But they're not thinking for themselves. They're doing exactly what the culture tells them. In reality, they're espousing the very way of knowing that's been imposed on them by their culture, and a very white, Western, individualistic one, it is. The question, do you think we ought to convert people to Christ, assumes there are already unformed, untouched people out there, and then there are these pushy Christians trying to convert them into their way of thinking. No, everyone has been deeply formed into some point of view that is not innate. The real question you must face is, which externally imposed formation will have its way with me? You're going to be converted by something. Some comprehensive view of reality is going to form your very identity. And whatever that view of reality is, it's not provable. It's a leap of faith. How silly to think Christians are trying to convert people. Everybody's being converted. You're going to be converted. You're going to have your life radically changed. You're going to have a new self, and it's going to be in response to something that comes into your life. Which is it going to be, though? Now, secondly, I'd like to show you the gospel way of radical change. How does the gospel bring about such radical change that it could be said that you become essentially a new self? And the answer is, I'm moving actually from the end to the, I'm moving up the passage, not down the passage. You can see it in the first two paragraphs. There they are, and I'm going to go in reverse order. Put to death, therefore, what belongs to your earthly nature, and set your mind on things which are above. There are two things you do, two things through the gospel that happen that radically changes. First of all, let's look at the first one. Put to death whatever belongs to your earthly nature. Now, what does that mean? It's, let's say, let's call these two things digging down and looking up. Okay, first of all, digging down. Now, there's a long list of things in this paragraph that they say it'd be better not to have, and I'll say, look at it. There's anger and rage and malice and slander, you see, and bitterness, and you say, oh yeah, I would love to be free from those things, yet they keep coming back, don't they? And here's the reason why. The key to removing those things from your life are two important words that are smack in the middle of the whole verse, of the whole passage. The first is the word evil desires, and the second is the word idolatry. Now, first, evil desires. I told you this is visual renewal, so let's look at something that has been crucial to the way people have had their lives changed in Redeemer for many years. This word evil desires is an effort on the part of the translators to get across a single Greek word, which is the word epitumia, which literally means an epi-desire or an over-desire, an inordinate desire, a magnified desire, an excessive desire. And when you and I look at this word, almost always it's translated evil desire or sinful desire or something like that, and it's very hard to translate into English in an easy way to be read, and therefore it pops up all through the New Testament. Whenever the Bible is talking about character change, it's in there, but seldom do we see how key it is because it's hard to translate. Because when you and I think of the word evil, you see the word evil desire, what do you think that means? You think it means desiring something evil, right? Wrong class. Class, I'm sorry, you're wrong. In other words, when you see the word evil desire, you think, okay, there's a forbidden list here, things that you're not supposed to do, and an evil desire is to desire one of those evil things. But we have a problem, because last week we saw, and even if you weren't here, you know, that Pharisees never do anything on the forbidden list, but they're lost. Not only are they lost, but they're very much part of what's wrong in the world. Not only that, they're the ones that killed Jesus, not the people doing the stuff on the forbidden list. So now we suddenly realize, okay, we can't say that the essence of what's wrong with us is that you desire something that's evil. And that's not what epithumia is. Epithumia is not so much talking about ordinary desire for something that's bad. It's an over-inordinate excessive desire for something that's good. That's the essence of what's wrong with us. And right away you say, now, wait a minute, what's that mean? you say, well, wait a minute, why? What is an over desire? Why is that the problem? And the answer is the second of these two words I said we want to look at, and that is this word idolatry. When you read this passage in Colossians, the word idolatry is only attached to the word greed, which means an idolatry of money. If you go to the parallel passage in Ephesians 5, a very similar passage, it's very clear that the word idolatry is attached to everything. What this is trying to say is that all your bitterness, all your impurity, all of your malice, all of the problems of our, everything that troubles us is a result of idolatry. And what is idolatry? It's taking a good thing and making it an ultimate thing. It's taking a good thing, it's making it an ultimate thing. This is how your heart works psychodynamically according to the Bible unless God changes it. Exodus chapter 20, first of the Ten Commandments, very clear. I am the Lord thy God, have no other gods before me. There's only two options. You either worship the uncreated true God, or you will worship some other created thing as a false God, but there is no third alternative. You're either going to worship God, or you're going to worship something else, but it's not possible for your heart not to adore something, not to build its identity on something, not to build its significance on something, not to make something your life. How do you know what those things are? This passage is telling you, the Bible tells you, you will never understand yourself, you will never understand your emotions, you will never be able to make any kind of permanent changes, they'll all be superficial and temporary, unless you understand this. You say, well, how do I know what those good things are that I've turned into ultimate things, and those things that I've turned into saviors, those things that I've turned into my meaning, my hope, little gods, as it were, how do I know what they are? Well, two questions. The first question is, what things, if you lost them, or if you failed them, or they failed you, or they slipped away from you, we can be talking about your financial status, we can be talking about a personal relationship, we can be talking about your family, we can be talking about a professional identity, we can be talking about an infinite number of things, we can be talking about human approval, or power and influence, or control of your environment, we can be talking about it, but what things that if you lost it, or if you lost them, if that happened, you wouldn't even want to live. What are those things? You've got something. And listen, there's two kinds of people in New York, and neither of them want to think about this. There's very religious people who say, I believe in God. God, there's very Christian people who say, I've accepted Jesus as Savior. I don't have any idols in my life. Yes, you do. Something is your functional Savior that's not him. There's something you're looking to functionally. That's how you know you're okay. That's how you feel good about yourself. That's how you feel like, that's what gives you meaning. That's what gives you security. That's what gives you hope for the future. So religious people don't think they've got it, but they do. And irreligious people say, oh, I'm a secular person. I don't worship. Yes, you do. See? See? Religious people say, God is my Savior. No, he's not. Irreligious people say, I don't worship anything. Yes, you do. This is true of everybody. Everybody's like this. And here's how you know what those things are. Number one, we said, you know that when, if you lose it, you knew you wouldn't even want to live because it's your life. You've made it your life. The second test is, follow the inordinate desires, follow the epithumias back to the source. If a good thing in your life is jeopardized, you worry, right? But if it's an ultimate thing, you're paralyzed. You fall apart. See? If a good thing in your life is blocked by somebody, you get mad at them. Sure, you get angry. But if an ultimate thing is blocked by somebody, you get bitter, rage. If a good thing in your life is lost, you're very sad. But if it's an ultimate thing, you want to throw yourself off a bridge. Do you understand your emotions? Do you see why certain things just absolutely cast you down? Do you see why you're out of control of your emotions in many ways? Do you understand why you found yourself doing certain things that you never ever thought you would do? It's because these things drive you. When you give your heart to a functional Savior, a functional Lord, a functional God, see, religious people or Christian people say, oh, no, no. no, no, I'm not worshiping anything, but everybody's doing this. Until you understand this, until you dig down deep, you cannot change, you cannot understand yourself. And whatever you have given your heart to, like this, it converts you. It gives you your identity. It gives you a sense of worth. And as a result, it drives you, and you'll spend all of your life never getting enough of it, always being desperately afraid, always being thrown about by inordinate desires. Have you dug down to see what those things are? Until you do that, you're going to have all these out-of-control emotions, all these out-of-control passions, all these lusts, all these problems, all these addictions, all these difficulties. So first you have to dig down, figure out who you really are, see what's down there, what's driving you. The second thing, and the gospel calls you to do. See, the gospel calls you to do this because the gospel is not basically about a list of, you know, do's and don'ts. It's about making God your Savior and Lord through Jesus Christ, right? And as soon as you see that as the gospel, not just a list of, yes, you know, things to do and things not to do, we talked about this last week, that throws everything else in your life into a new relief. It throws it into relief, throws it into a new light, and that's what we're looking at. So first of all, dig down, find your idol. Secondly, what do you do about it? Now what do we do about these things? When you begin to realize what's there and what's driving you, what's controlling you, what do you do? The first four, you have to believe and have your heart riveted by these top four things, these things in verse one to four. Since then, you've been raised with Christ. Set your heart on things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. For you died, and your life is now hidden with Christ in God. And when Christ, who is your life, appears, then you will appear with him in glory. Okay, now what is this saying? First of all, the idols of the heart cannot simply be removed, they can only be replaced. They can't be removed, they can only be replaced. I've seen many people over the years who have, very often through counseling, or just through the hard knocks of life, have finally started to realize that they're slaves to what their parents had said. You know, they're slaves to their parental expectations, their parents' expectations, or they're slaves to people's approval, or they're slaves to their need to control the environment. They suddenly realize they're slaves to something, and then what do they say? They say, they think just by a simple act of the will, I am not going to be controlled by these things. That'll never work. Not for very long. Thomas Chalmers, the great Scottish Presbyterian minister, put it this way in his very famous sermon. He says, there is not one personal transformation in which the heart is left without an object of ultimate beauty and joy. The heart's desire for one particular object can be conquered, but its desire to have some object is unconquerable. The only way to dispossess the heart of an old affection is by the expulsive power of a new one. What we're seeing here then, you see, in verse 2 it says, set your mind on something, but in verse 1 says, you have to set your heart on something. Something you grasp with the mind has got to be something that rivets and captures your heart. That is the only thing that's going to save you and change you and move you away from the old self, which is basically driven by these idols, to a new self. What is that? It says, you died, and then it says, you've been raised. You see how radical this is? Paul is writing to people who obviously are alive, and he says, you died. You died? What's that mean? You were raised with Christ, who is seated at the right hand of God. Is that just metaphor? No, it's not just metaphor, and here's what this is saying. First, there's a truth that you set your mind on, and then it's something you have to bring into your heart, and that's what actually changes your character. So what is the truth that you're supposed to know with the mind? We're being told here that when you become a Christian, when you say, I believe in you, Lord Jesus, what makes you a Christian is not now I'm living in a certain way, though, of course, as we see, change comes. What makes you a Christian is now you're in Christ. Christ. It means God sees you as so one with him that he looks at you as if you had died and been raised with him, because you have, in a sense. When it says you died with Christ, it means this. God sees you as free from the guilt of anything you've done wrong as if you had died on the cross and paid. It's already paid. No condemnation. And what's raised mean? To be raised at the right hand. Jesus sitting at the right hand of God. across. Think of what happened when a king would send his son out into a dangerous mission and the son would come back triumphant. He'd been noble, he'd been brave, you know, he'd been loving, he'd been sacrificial, he'd been wise. And then when the son comes back, the king's heart bursts with love and delight to see his son. And he puts him at his right hand, which was the place of honor, the highest, the greatest honor you could give a human being in the kingdom. And Jesus has this place of honor at the right hand of the father. We know about all the things that he's done, but it says you're raised with him, you're seated with him. What that means is if you give yourself to Jesus Christ, God now delights in you as if you had done everything he'd done. God delights in you as much as if, as he does in his own son. If you say that's an, if this is the first time you've ever heard that, okay, okay. But you got to start here. Unless, unless you know these things, the way people's approval, the way family relationships, the way parental expectations, the way the world's emphasis on money and power and sexual beauty and that's what, those things, you're going to go look into those things because you've got to get a sense of self. You've got to get a sense of worth. Only if you know this can you even begin to be free from those things that drive you with anxiety, that drive you with addictions, that drive you. The only way is to first know that. Do you believe that? That's the gospel. The gospel is not that we give God a good record and God blesses us, but rather God through Jesus Christ gives us a perfect record and delights in us in him and then we live for him out of the freeness of that. That's the gospel. So first you have to know that, but then secondly, you have to set your heart on that. Now what does that mean? It means, first of all, well, let me give you the perfect example that I know. Many, many years ago, there was a woman who lived in practically in a trailer right up the road from my, the little church I was a pastor of in Virginia and she, she came to the church for a while and moved away. She had become a Christian recently, came to my church, was going to a counselor because she'd had a very hard life. I remember very, very clearly, she certainly looked awful because she had been beaten over and over again by one man after another man over the years. She had been in one abusive relationship with men after another and she, she showed the scars, but she'd become a Christian. She was coming to church. She was going to a counselor and I would visit her like the good little pastor boy I was at the time, 25 or 26 years old, knowing almost nothing about how people's hearts work. And even though she was not a very educated person, so what I'm going to read you here is a transcript of what I remember her saying. I wrote these things down because they were so weird and interesting to me and amazing to me. But here's the sort of things she said. She was trying to tell me how Christ had turned her life around and it was quite amazing. She said this, and of course I'm putting it in my own, basically my own words, but these are all her thoughts. She says, I'm going to my counselor, she said, and much of what she has said is right. My counselor said I've built my very significance and acceptability and identity on men. That's why I've been defenseless with them. I simply have needed them too much. All of that is right and helpful. But she went on. However, my counselor doesn't have a very good solution for me. My counselor says what I should do instead is to get myself a great career, get an education, have a successful career. Well, my counselor means well. And of course, I absolutely do need to get some training, get myself a job and career. But what she's saying is I should do that so I will also feel better about myself by doing that. But that would mean I would be switching from one kind of idol to another. Now, I'd never thought about this in my life. So I said, what are you talking about? Okay. For many years, she said, my heart has been looking at men and saying, unless I'm successful at love, I'm nothing. But the therapist wants me to look at my career and say, unless I'm a successful independent businesswoman who's in control of my own life, I am nothing. I don't want to be enslaved to my work as I was to men. I don't want to be as enslaved to my independence as I was to my dependence. I'm actually being asked to exchange a typical female idol for a typical male idol. I don't one either. You see, the therapist knew how to help her down, dig down into see what her idols were, but had no way of giving her anything but an alternate idol. And so I said, well, what are you doing? I mean, how are you doing? And she actually quoted Colossians 3, when Christ who is your life appears, you will be glorified. She says, it's very practical. When I go to church, when I'm in worship, when what Jesus did for me... I think of the men in my life, and I say, I speak to them, and I say this, I'm glad to know you, and I certainly wouldn't mind being married, but you are not my life. Christ is my life. I'm done making anything else my life. You're a good thing, but you're not an ultimate thing. I would love to have a husband, but if I don't, I've got Jesus. I set my mind on things above. You can't give me any of the things that Jesus has given me. See, I don't want to look to men or to a career. A career can't die for me. If I live for a career and fail, it'll beat me up all my life for having been a failure, but if I fail Jesus, he died for me to forgive me. See, she realized something. Jesus is the only Savior who, if you get him, will satisfy you, and if you fail him, and we do fail him, can die for you. In other words, here's why this works. This is not just cognitive therapy. This is not just will therapy. Religious people, when they get downcast, tend to put the emphasis on the will, and they say, buck up, be strong. Non-religious people in the secular world, when they're downcast, put all the emphasis on the emotions, and they say, you know, feel better about yourself, you know, do something nice for yourself, right? There's another kind of therapy that sort of uses the head and uses the mindset. Well, now, you realize you're doing wrong thinking. That's self-defeating thinking. You need to do this kind of thinking, but the real solution is worship. What's interesting about what she would do? She didn't say that she just walked around and thought about this. She says, during worship, when what Jesus Christ has done for me is real to me, and that's what Paul's doing. Paul says, you died. You were raised. He's going to the past. I said, what are you talking about? He says, go back into what Jesus has done for you. Go back into the story. You're there. He's doing that for you. If you saw an artist who'd done this beautiful sculpture, and he threw himself into the path of the bulldozer and died rather than have the sculpture, you'd say, oh my gosh. Obviously, if you're willing to die for the sculpture, that sculpture must have been his life. Jesus Christ died for us. We were his life. And when that moves you, when you see him doing that for you, when you see yourself as being part of that story, as it is, it changes your heart. You can actually look at anything, things that cow you, things that make you afraid, and say, you are not my life. Paul always does it that way. In 2 Corinthians 8, Paul's trying to get the readers to be generous, but he doesn't just say, be generous. He doesn't work right on the will. He doesn't just say, oh, how awful of you to keep all your money when there's so many poor people out there. He doesn't work on the emotions. Here's what he said. You know the generosity of Jesus Christ on the cross. He was infinitely rich. He became infinitely poor so that you, through his poverty, could become rich. He's taking you back into the story. He's saying, you were there. He was doing that for you. He says, think about his generosity on the cross. That's how you become generous. You don't do it through working on the will, working on the motions. Or there's a place in Ephesians 5 where Paul's trying to get men to be faithful to their wives. And what does he say? Be faithful to your wife. Don't you dare commit adultery. He says, but you know Jesus Christ, who was infinitely faithful to you when he went to the cross. He should have gone. He could have gone. He certainly wanted to go, but he stayed. He was infinitely. And because you know the infinitely wonderful faithful spousal love of Jesus Christ on the cross, you now have the freedom. The freedom from the need to go to some prettier woman. See, or generosity. The freedom to need to have a lot of money. You're free from these things. Instead of just being generous or being faithful because I want to do a good job, because I want to feel better about myself. The gospel utterly changes you in the heart, in the root, and it frees you to live the self-sacrificial and happy and peaceful life that you can. There was a movie review yesterday in the New York Times, and the movie reviewer was talking about a certain class of movie that are really cool, like It's a Wonderful Life with Jimmy Stewart, like Groundhog Day with Bill Murray, and he was listing a whole bunch of them, and he called them metaphysical second chance comedies. And you know what he said? He said metaphysical second chance comedy. These are, he says, movies in which the laws of time and space are bent to give characters access to self-knowledge unavailable in ordinary circumstances so they can transform themselves. A metaphysical second chance comedy in which the laws of time and space are bent so characters who otherwise would be locked in their old selves get self-knowledge unavailable in ordinary circumstances. you? Your life can become a metaphysical second-chance comedy because God has sent Jesus Christ into the world to literally change, bend, break the laws of time and space to bring you a knowledge and power that otherwise would be utterly unavailable to you. Take it. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us a way to change, a way to change that's permanent, that's not superficial, that's not just a matter of willpower, that's not just a matter of emotional bursts that go away, that's not just a matter of moralistic and stoic self-control that really, really changes and converts and melts and reshapes our identity and frees us from this world. Our life is hidden with Christ and God. He is our life. Nothing else here is, so we can look at the world and snap our fingers at it. We pray, Father, that you'd give us that kind of power to be gracious to each other, to be forgiving each other, to be generous to each other, to sacrifice and serve our neighbors instead of being absorbed in accruing wealth and power and beauty and happiness for ourselves because that's when...
