TITLE: Christian Unity
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:11-22
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: Ephesians – God’s New Society
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/christian-unity/

============================================================

Teaching this morning is based on a passage that's printed in your bulletin. Hope you can turn to it with me. I'm going to read it to you aloud. We're going here in our morning services in the summer through the book of Ephesians. And today we get to Ephesians chapter 2. I'm going to read verses 11 to 22. Ephesians 2, 11 to 22. Therefore, remember that formerly, you who are Gentiles by birth and called uncircumcised by those who call themselves the circumcision, that done in the body by the hands of men, remember that at that time you were separate from Christ, excluded from citizenship in Israel, and foreigners to the covenants of the promise, without hope and without God in the world. But now in Christ Jesus, you, who once were far away, have been brought near through the blood of Christ. For he himself is our peace, who has made the two one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility, by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace. And in this one body, to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put the dead, death, their hostility. He came and preached peace to you, who were far away, and peace to those who were near. For through him we both have access to the Father by one spirit. And this is God's word. This is one of the great passages in the Bible on the church, on what the church is, what the church should be. Now, why should you be interested in it? Here's the reason you should be interested in it. The tone, I believe, of this passage, and it's very hard, you know, when you're reading something. It's very hard when it's not being spoken by the author, but you're reading something the author wrote. It's very hard sometimes, or very, I should say, it's very easy to miss the tone of voice. Notice, this is not basically a comforting passage. This is not basically even an exciting passage. This is a confrontational passage. This is a gauntlet thrown at our feet. This is a challenge. And no matter who you are, if you feel like you've found God, or if you feel like you have not found God, or if you're not sure where you are spiritually, no matter who you are, no matter where you are in your spiritual walk, your spiritual journey, there is, this is enormous, these are outrageous claims that are being put forth here for the church. And they're so outrageous, I just know you're going to want to hear them. These are challenges, and there's four challenges. This passage challenges us to see four things about the church. Number one, first of all, this is a challenge to see the absolute necessity of the church. The necessity. Now, you get that, actually, from this little word in the very, very beginning of the passage. What's the very first word? Therefore. Now, it's important, if you're ever going to understand a passage or a text, to understand the context. And what we see here is that Paul is, that this passage on the church is intimately connected to what Paul has said before. See, Paul is not saying, okay, now, let's see, what's another thing I could talk to you about? Oh, I know, let's talk about the church. No. Instead, this is intimately tied in, and what has gone before? Here's what's gone before. At the end of chapter one, Paul makes a tremendous prayer. And at the end of this prayer, he says, he prays for a number of things for Christians, his friends. But he prays for this. He says, I pray that their eyes will be enlightened to see a number of things. But mainly, the main petition is to see the surpassing greatness of the power of God in us. The surpassing greatness of the power of God. And then when he gets to chapter two, what is he doing? Well, he's not changing the subject. He's going right on in chapter two, and he's showing the way God's power plays through in our lives. And in verses one to ten, which was covered last week here in the morning service, in verses one to ten, we see how God's power comes into us internally. verses 1 to 10, shows how God can come in to us and where there's brokenness and there's deadness and there's emptiness, God puts life, vitality, wholeness, okay? That's verses 1 to 10. And then suddenly in verse 11, we're just continuing on because in verse 11, then Paul is saying how God's power, in a second way, how God takes different people, disparate people, diverse people, and brings them together into one body, into one new group, into the church. He puts these two things together, verses 1 to 10, how God comes into your life individually and internally. Verses 11 to 22, how God comes into your life and changes your life corporately and relationally. How he gives you life in yourself and then he relates you in very, very, as we're going to see, deep ways to other people in the church. Now, this is very confrontational. This is right in the face of modern American people. Why? One of the things, the expert opinion, scientific surveys, and common sense tells us is going on. There's two things that are going on spiritually in American society now. Now, I'm not going to give you statistics. I'm not going to give you lots of quotes. I'll tell you one thing. In December, the New York Times magazine devoted an entire issue. The magnitude of this cultural trend here is such that the New York Times gave an entire issue to it. And on the cover, the name of the issue was God Decentralized. And in it, it said the same thing that you could read almost anywhere, like I said, common sense tells you there's two things going on spiritually amongst American people today. Number one, there's an enormous spiritual hunger. There is more interest in faith. There's more interest in the soul. There's more interest in spirituality than there has been amongst Americans on the whole for years. There's a tremendous passion and a tremendous hunger for spirituality, number one. But number two, at the same time, absolutely linked, there is a movement away from religion, especially institutional religion. There's a hunger for spirituality, but not for the church. There's a hunger for faith, but not for religion. We want to do it on our own. That's why it's called God Decentralized. It's true. It's a great title for what's going on. Now, what does that mean? It means the modern American observer reads chapter two. And when you go through verses one to ten, and you see all this talk about how God's power can come into your life, and it can put life where there's deadness, and wholeness where there's brokenness, you see, and vitality where there's emptiness, and it can come in and really, and everybody goes, yeah. You see, you're listening. Wow. This is what I'm after. And then verse 11 to 22 says, and it'll bring you, the power of God will bring you into the church. And right away, we say, well, no, no, no, no. But Paul puts them together. And it's not Paul. Anybody in the Bible, Jesus, Moses, Abraham, anybody, this is in your face. The Bible says, deal with this. Now, somebody says, wait a minute. Objection. Listen, are you saying, sir, that you can't be saved without being a member of a church? No, I didn't say that, and I don't believe that. But that's not the question. Here's what the question is. Remember the context. The power of God. Let's ask this question. Can the power of God work in your life? Can the surpassing power of God, see, Paul is saying, I want you to see the surpassing power of God, and immediately he begins to talk about the church. You know, you have to stand back and look at the drift here of this passage. Power of God, therefore, church. Can the surpassing power of God come into your life and change your life only individually and not corporately? Can the surpassing power of God come into your life and flow through your life if you are not willing to become deeply grafted into a community of love, truth, and mission? Can the power of God, according to the Bible, come through your life only as an individual and not as part of a new group which you get involved with? And the answer is absolutely not. So that's the first point. Now you say, well, I don't like that. All right. Now here's the best way to put this. I mean, this passage tells us what the Bible tells us throughout, and that is this. If you come and you're looking for God, you're looking for spirituality, you're looking for faith, and you come to God, and if you come to the God of the Bible and you say, I would like you're in my life individually, but I would not... I really... want to become involved in an institution. 81% of all Americans answer yes to this statement. Do you believe you can be a very good Christian or a very good Jew without attending a church or synagogue? 81% of Americans say yes. And that's deeply, that's where we are. 81%. And the Bible says, absolutely not. No way. Power, therefore, church. And if you go to the Bible with your mind so closed that you say, I want to meet a God who will help me individually but will not relate me corporately to other people or get me involved in a church, then the God of the Bible says, fine, you're knocking on the wrong door. There are other spiritualities and other philosophies and other religions that are very, very, that they're right in tune with the spirit of the age, but I am not. If you want a God like that, you're going to have to make one up out of your own imagination because I'm the real God and I don't work that way. So the first thing we learn, we're challenged to see the necessity of the church. Oh, okay. Somebody says, well, all right. Okay. I see this. Yeah, I get it. You know why God will not work in my life individually unless he's also working my life corporately. Okay. God would not just transform me in one aspect without transforming me in all aspects, psychologically, spiritually, socially, individually. Okay. Okay. I can see the necessity of involvement, but how involved? How involved do I have to be? That's what I want. How involved do I have to be? And so let's get to the second point. The second thing this passage teaches us, it doesn't just challenge us to see the necessity of the church, but it also challenges us to see the intensity of the church. If you look at the last part of the passage, look at these last three, four verses. In verses 19 to 22, you have to look a little carefully. It goes by rather quickly, but Paul uses three images, three metaphors, three illustrations to describe the church. And each one increases in intensity. The first one is, you are fellow citizens with God's people. Well, that's actually pretty intense. What that tells you is that the minute you become a Christian, you're not primarily from Ohio anymore. You're not primarily from the United States. You're not primarily from Asia. You're not primarily Asian, or you're not primarily white, or you're not primarily African. You're not primarily anything. You're primarily, you've been translated out of all those other groups, and now membership in the kingdom of God. You become a citizen in a new nation, a new race, in a sense, a new ethnos. And the formative influence of this new race, new ethnos, this new nation, has far greater impact on you and who you are than your membership in your old groups. That's pretty intense. Ah, but it gets more intense because then it says, you're fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household. Now, the word household, you know, what is a household? It doesn't say God's house. Household means a family. This is more intense. Now it's moving on and saying, you see, God is not just your king. He's your father, if you're a Christian. And you are not just citizens. You're his children. You're his sons and daughters. Well, that's more intense, of course. But then look, it goes on even further and says, built on the foundation with Christ as the cornerstone. In him, the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord. And in him, you are being built together to become a dwelling place in which God lives by his spirit. Now, the third image is this. You are building blocks in a temple in which God's royal presence, his Shekinah glory lives. You're built together as building blocks into this temple. Now, you see why I'm saying this is of increasing intensity? First of all, it's increasing intensity. It's in two ways. First of all, it's increasing intensity to show us how intensely we're connected to God. You see, from king to father to someone who indwells us. You see, it's almost ridiculous. It's saying he's not just near us, he's with us, and he's not just with us, he's in us. When Jesus Christ called himself the temple, he meant the glory of God fills me the way blood fills a body. I'm inhabited. I am possessed. I mean, and you see, a father dwells much more closely to his children than a king dwells with his citizens. But when you come to the idea that as Christians, you are a temple, you are... you. He actually doesn't just dwell near you or with you, he dwells in you. So each one is more intense in your connection with God, but each one is more intense in your connection with each other. The connection between citizens is a very important one, it's a social contract, but the connection between siblings is a much more intimate one of genetic material and common roots and so forth. But in the last illustration, we're actually cemented together. I mean, you know, how much more close can you be than that? You're cemented together, not even a silly millimeter between us. And here's what I have to say. Now, at this point, if you don't know me, some of you say, gee, he just must like me, make me feel bad. And if you do know me, you know, I don't like confrontation, but I have to put it this way. Remember, we asked the question, how involved? Yes, we need to be involved, the power of God. How involved do we have to be in the church? Look at those intense metaphors. And let me ask you, can you possibly square this idea of being cemented, being siblings, being related by blood, being actually inhabited by God because we are cemented together? If you come to church every week and give your money and you know a few people and even occasionally take a class, does that square with this level of intensity? No way. Even if you come to church every week, even if you occasionally take classes, even if you give your money, even if you've met a few nice people. No way. Absolutely not. You know that. You can look at it. Well, you say, all right, well, how involved then? Come on, tell me. Well, I'll give you, I'll give you two very specifics. And it's hard to give specifics, but I'll give you two. And they arise out of the metaphors. Your involvement has to certainly go beyond attending and giving and, you know, and that sort of thing. It has, your involvement has to go to the point where two things are happening. I'll say them and then I'll explain them. Personal accountability and corporate spirituality. Personal accountability and corporate spirituality. Number one, personal accountability. Think of the metaphors. A lot of you are single, right? And you're living alone. You go when you want to go. You come when you want to come. You eat when you want to eat, right? The minute you get married, the minute you become part of a household, you suddenly realized, I got to tell her where I'm going. I can't just go. I kind of got to clear it with her almost. Well, you know. I mean, suddenly the minute you're in a household, you're accountable. All right, let's get a little further. Think of the stones in a wall. Think of the stones in a wall. Stones in a wall are supported by blocks without which you'd be falling. And it's supporting blocks without you, they would be falling. Now, here's what's going on. Hebrews chapter 3 verse 13 says to Christians, exhort one another daily lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Think about that. Exhort one another daily lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. This means that you must be so deeply involved with a community of Christians that there are some Christians who know not just your sins, your big sins, but the sins that you tend to miss, the sins that tend to harden you, the sins that tend to blind you, your most besetting sins, your most hidden sins. That assumes that there are a group of Christians who know you that well because, A, you've told them about these things, and, B, they're with you so often that they have been shown these things. They're not going to see your deepest and your most hidden sins. They're not going to be able to help you talk to you about them unless you spend so much time with them and you're so intimate with them that you talk about these things and they see them. And this assumes that there are opportunities in which they can regularly, lovingly exhort you about, how are you doing? Are you growing? Are you avoiding these things? Are you doing these things? And you've given them permission to do it. Are you so involved with a community of Christians that that's happening? Hmm? Are you so involved? Are there people who know your deepest and your most hidden sins and when it says daily, that means regularly, intimately. You're talking about your character and you're talking about your life. You're talking about the direction you're going and you now, you are not making unilateral decisions because you're actually not single anymore. You're in a household. You're in a wall. Are there people, depending on you, and are there people without which you're going to fall? Personal accountability. But then secondly, corporate spirituality. first idea, but they hate the second, I think, even worse. A lot of people say, boy, I certainly don't want to be so intimately involved with a group of people that they know those kinds of things, and I've got to actually let them know what's going on in my life. But here's the second one. New Yorkers certainly say, look, religion is very private. I pray, but I don't want to pray with other people. I have a spiritual life. I don't want to talk to people about it. I don't want to talk to people about how I feel about God, and I don't want to talk to people about how I'm feeling about my relationship with God. That's very, very private. But look carefully. We are only inhabited with the presence of God as a wall. See, think about this. A single block cannot be an habitation of God. God cannot live in a stone. God has to live only in a building of stones, which simply means, this is saying very, right in your face, this is saying God's presence only can inhabit a group. Well, what does that mean? Somebody's going to raise your hand again. Objection. Are you saying that I can't know God individually? No. Here's what I'm saying. The more alone you are in your Christianity, the less intimate you will be with God. And the more Christians you know intimately, the more Christians you pray with, the more Christians you talk about, what do you see in Jesus? What do you see about Jesus? The more Christians that you know intimately, the more intimately you'll know God, because God inhabits a building. He can't inhabit a stone in the same way he can inhabit a building. See, this is the biblical basis for that wonderful thing that C.S. Lewis says that many of you know I love to quote. Lewis was part of a little threesome. There were three men once, Jack, Ronald, and Charles, and they were very, very close. And when Charles died, Jack thought, ah, I'll get more of Ronald now. I won't have to share Ronald with Charles. But to his shock, he found that when Charles died, he didn't get more of Ronald. He got less of Ronald because there were only, there were certain things in Ronald that only Charles brought out. And then when he realized that the, that the less he had now of Ronald, because the more he had of Ronald, you see, the more alone he was with Ronald, the less he really knew Ronald, he suddenly said, wait a minute, Jesus Christ, the eternal, multidimensional, rich Jesus Christ. There is absolutely no way that I will ever know him all by myself. Only when I know lots of other Christians who all know a part of Jesus that I probably don't will I know him fully and will I know him truly. If you don't have people that you're praying with and that you're talking about how your pro-life is going and what you see in Jesus and what you love about Jesus and what you can't understand about Jesus, unless you've got people that you're not just personally accountable to on your, on your, you know, about your character and your sins, but you're spiritually, corporately practicing your spirituality. You're corporately accountable for your, your prayer life. And not just accountable, you're actually praying together and you're talking together and you're praising God together. Rather, you have to be involved to the level of personal accountability or, and corporate spirituality or else power of God in your life? No. Okay? Well, thirdly, somebody says, okay, I'm beginning to see the necessity and I see now the intensity, but why? Why does it have to be like this? I don't like this. You're making me feel uncomfortable. I'm an individualistic New Yorker. I like to show up and get inspiration and get to know a few people and I, you know, I like to, I'm a consumer. I'm a spiritual consumer. I can't, I have to be. I'm part of consumer capitalism. You know, there's been three phases to the economy of the West. There was laissez-faire capitalism, welfare capitalism. Now we have consumer capitalism and, and that's me. I'm part of that. Get over it. The Bible says, get over it. The Bible says, fight against it. See, somebody says, why does it have to be? Why is this necessity and why this intensity? And here's the third point. This also challenges, the reason why the necessity and why the, the reason for the necessity intensity is the vitality. This challenges you the vitality of the connection. Look at verse 18. By one spirit, in him, we have access to the Father through one spirit. The spirit of God, when you become a Christian, comes in and unites you to what? The triune God. Now stay with me for 120 seconds. You have to listen to virtually everything I say. I mean, you know, usually you can come in every so often. But not, not for the next 120 seconds, okay? When you become a Christian, you are vitally and organically... this. The triune God. Somebody says, oh yeah, the Trinity, why did you bring up that? That's the one thing I don't like about Christianity. I don't get it. Well, I don't either, but I love it. And here's why I would like you to love it. On the one hand, you've got religions that have many gods and many persons. Polytheistic religions. Many gods and many persons. But they all have different wills. Sometimes they're in competition with each other. They all have their different desires. Sometimes they even fight. Many gods, many persons. And then you have a lot of the, then you have the other monotheistic religions that have one God, but only one person. And in that view, that means that from all eternity, this one God was all by himself until he began to create angels or began to create humans or whatever he began to create depending on the religion. And when he began to create other beings, then he began to develop relationship. But you see, relationship wasn't intrinsic to him. You see, if you believe in one God and one person, that means that there were eons in which there was no love at all. Relationship comes along later. It's secondary. He's by essence a solitary God. So here you have, you have a lot of diversity, but not unity. And over here you have this incredible unity, but absolutely no communication. But in, in the Christian God, you don't have many gods and many persons or one God and one person. You have one God in three persons. And they have all, that means we have a God who is three persons, one will, one soul, one heart, all working together for our salvation. See, in him, we have access to the Father through the Spirit. They're all working together from all eternity. The Christian doctrine of God is that at the very essence of God is unity and diversity. At the very, the very essence of God is love, communication. From all eternity, our God is three persons who have just been pouring their love and delight in each other into each other until one day, I guess you could put it this way, they decided to create a race of beings that could participate in the love and glory that they have. Now, what I'm trying to say is this. How in the world could God possibly, how can you relate to a God like that? How could you relate to a God who is a community without it automatically bringing you into community? How can you relate to God who is not just a loose community, he's not a poly, we're not talking about polytheism. How can you relate to a God who, the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit are absolutely one, deeply cleaving to each other, absolutely one, without you being brought into a community in which you're absolutely one? How can you know a God otherwise? It's the vitality of our relationship with God. We don't know him far off. When we become Christians, we are vitally related. We get his life's blood, in a sense. We are engrafted into him. The Spirit comes into us. He dwells in us. How can we be that vitally related to a God who is a community without immediately pushing us into a community? And not just, you know, kind of a consumer aggregation, but a real deep community of love and truth and unity and mission in the world, because that's what God is. You can't know a God without being part of a community like that. Because without, why not? Because he is a community like that. Now you get, see, so now somebody's getting to this place. You're starting to say, wait a minute, wait a minute. This is scaring me. I see it's necessary, all right, and I even see how intense it is, and now I even see the logic of it. But I'm scared. I'm afraid. I've been hurt. And besides that, there's an awful lot of Christians that I don't like. See, now we get to it. Unfortunately, you know, our time's up. You know, why didn't you start with this? This is the problem. I've been hurt by Christians. I've been hurt by other people. I don't like them. They bugged me. And besides that, you know what? Let's get down to it. Now, see, Ephesians 2 is all about this. Ephesians 2 is saying that when you come into the church, the old distinctions don't matter. If you're a black person who doesn't like white people, if you're a white person who doesn't like black people or doesn't trust, when you come into the church, you have to leave that behind. There's a new unity here. There's a new basis for unity. There's a new possibility of unity. When somebody says, that's troublesome, I get into the church. You know what? Frankly, some black people say, I see white people in the church kind of acting like they did out there. Men and women. You might be really burned. You're a woman. You've been burned by men. You don't trust them. You get into the church and, you know, wait a minute, men still kind of act like that in here. This is the problem, isn't it? So, see, the last question is, how? How can the barriers be see the necessity, the intensity, and I even see the rational, the reason, the vitality, but how? Now, all I can do is this briefly, but it's very briefly, and the answer is, in this passage, the answer is, how you can become one is, by the way, if somebody's taking notes, this is the word causality, the necessity of the church, the intensity of the church, the vitality of the church, and now the causality. How does God cause us to be one like this? How does he actually bring down the barrier? Ah, get this. There's a word in here that shows up twice, and you notice where it is? You see the word, it shows up twice, it's the word hostility. Hostility. Let's face it, we're hostile. Some of us, because of our background, we tend to be hostile to this kind of person, or hostile to that kind of person, or we're hostile to this person, and you know, that word is a horrible word. In the old King James, it's translated enmity, hatred, hostility. How are we going to deal with that? This text tells us the way you deal with it is this. On the cross, verse 16, God killed the hostility. Do you see that? It says he slew the hostility. He destroyed the hostility. He put it to death. How could that be? You look up on the cross, and you say, the only thing I see dying on the cross is Jesus. Ah. You realize why verse 16 is a profound theological statement. How could God have killed the hostility on the cross? All I see is Jesus on the cross. You know why? God made Jesus the hostility. It didn't say God made Jesus hostile, because he was up there loving, he made him hostility. In 2 Corinthians 5.21, I'm sorry, this is another 120 seconds, you're going to have to listen. I'm sorry to do this twice to you. In 2 Corinthians 5.21, it says God made him sin who knew no sin that we might become the righteousness of God in him. It didn't say God made him sinful, because he wasn't sinful. It doesn't say God made him hostile, because he wasn't hostile. It said it made him hostility. It says it made him sin, which means God treated him legally as if he was, as if he'd done all the terrible things that we've been doing to each other for centuries. We've been hurting each other. We've been trampling on each other. Racism, oppression, war, family violence, hostility. What God did was he treated Jesus Christ as if he'd done all those things that we've been doing to each other. And when he did that, when he put our punishment on him, what happened was he slew the hostility objectively and subjectively. Objectively, we're told, he slew the hostility between him and us. You see, why doesn't God just get rid of us? He created us to love each other, and we've been trampling on his creation. We've been trampling on each other. Why doesn't he just throw us away? This is how he does it. Justice demands punishment for hostility, and Jesus took it. And therefore, don't you see, the minute you embrace Jesus Christ by faith, this is what it means to become a Christian. Your record of hostility goes to him where it's punished, and his record of peace comes to us. That's the reason why he's not just the source of our peace. He is our peace. You see, we are loving people legally in God's sight. We are perfect people legally in God's sight. The minute we become Christians, so he slays it objectively, but get this, he slays it subjectively. When I see Jesus Christ slain for me because of all the things that I've done wrong, all the ways in which I've been proud, all the ways in which I've hurt people over the years, all the ways in which I've been hostile, that humbles me. And you see, self-righteousness is the reason we're ever hostile. Why is it that if you're a man and you're hostile to women right now, you know why? You know why? Well, they treated me this way. No, no, no, no, no. I'll tell you what the source is. You're only hostile to people when you say deep in your heart, I would never have done that. You can't stay hostile with saying, I would never have done that. Self-righteousness is the reason you're hostile. And the cross shows you, no, no, no. You're estranged from God. You deserve to die. Jesus took it. It humbles you. It humbles you. And that's the reason why if you look at him, if you look at him, it slays the hostility in your heart. Not just slays the hostility objectively, it slays it subjectively. Hey, this is gay pride day. If you're a gay person and you've been hurt by straight people, or if you're a straight person and you feel like you've been hurt by gay people and you look down at them, you're hostile to them. You know why? You're hostile to them because you say, I would never do that. Self-righteousness. Look at Jesus Christ dying for your hostility. Black, white, gay, straight, male, female. If you're hostile to any group, if you're angry at any person today, if you look at him, it'll slay the hostility. say. Find out what the cross means, my friends. Find out what this means. If this is new to you, you're not going to get it in one 15, 20-minute slice. Stay put, stay here, stay coming, or read the scripture, or talk to Christians till you understand what this means. He is our peace. Know him together. The more you look at him, the more you're built together into a holy temple that rises up, and he'll dwell in you, and you with him, and his beauty will pass into you. Let us pray. Our Father, as we go to the Lord's table, which represents unity, it represents love, it represents community, it represents how, because you were broken, Lord Jesus, we can be whole together. One bread, one cup, one loaf, one body. We pray that you would help us to see your son, Lord Father, dying on the cross, so that our hostility to others is really slain, subjectively, more and more. We pray that we might be a community of love, in which the distinctions and the hostilities that plague the world would be put to rest. We pray that we would be a community of love, a community of accountability, a community in which our race relations and our family ties, our economic relationships would be things of beauty and of distinction, so the world might know that you sent your son, Jesus Christ, in whose name we pray. Amen.
