TITLE: Christ Our House
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:18
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) God the Father The Holy Spirit
SERIES: The King and the Kingdom
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/christ-our-house/

============================================================

Ephesians chapter 2 verses 14 to 22. For he himself is our peace, who has made the two one and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility, by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace. And in this one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility. He came and preached peace to you who were far away and peace to those who were near. For through him we both have access to the Father by one spirit. Consequently, you are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household. Build on the foundation of the apostles and prophets with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord. And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his spirit. The word of the Lord. We're looking for three weeks at this passage about the church. Last week we talked about the fact that the spirit of God, the life of God coming into our lives as believers, creates a tie stronger than any other tie that can exist between human beings. And it's a tie that transcends the deepest differences that can exist between human beings. Differences of family, differences of race, differences of culture, differences of class. And therefore we say the church has a unity and a fellowship, a solidarity that the world has been seeking between human beings for years in vain. Tonight we're going to look at how the same principle relates to our worship. Last week fellowship and unity, this week worship. There's volumes in one verse here, verse 18. In fact, all we're going to look at is verse 18. For through him we both have access to the Father by one spirit. Every word in there is loaded. It reminds me, the hymn writer once talked about a verse like that. It said, the verse is, A box in which sweets compacted lie. A box where sweets compacted lie. And that's what it is. Every word is sweet. Look at the first one. For. It's a sweet word. Why? Look at what comes before it. All of Paul's discussion of how Jesus Christ died on the cross to reconcile people to God and to reconcile people to one another. But what is the point of it? What is it for? It all boils down to verse 18. For. Through him we have access. Access is the bottom line of the Christian life. Access. Access. You may be religious. You may have experienced forgiveness. You may have experienced changes in your life. You may have overcome habits. You may have experienced a certain amount of peace. But listen. All those things are great. But that's not the bottom line of the Christian life. Those things are symptoms. Those things are sparks in a sense. They're results. The bottom line of the Christian life is access. It's all for this. Through him we have access. Getting in. Getting in. The bottom line of the Christian life is are you in near God? Are you out on the periphery? Are you in close? Do you experience access to him? Do you enjoy him? Do you know him? Or flip it around. Is he in the center of your life? Or is he out on the periphery? Does he enjoy access to you? Do you enjoy access to him? Or does he have absolute access to you? You see. Are you in his center? Is he in your center? Access. That's what the Christian life's about. That's why we have to look at it. And notice all three members of the Trinity, the triune God, are involved in bringing us this great gift. For what? Through him. Who's that? Christ. We have access to the Father by the Spirit. Three prepositions. Through Christ, to the Father, by the Spirit. Three little words. Prepositions of all things. You know, not a noun. Not a verb. Not even an adverb. Three prepositions on which you can build your whole life. Not only that, and it's been done, on which you can build a whole civilization. Thank you. them. This gift of access is to the Father, through the Son, by the Spirit. Okay? Number one. Okay? Let's look at what this gift of access is. It's to the Father. Now, this word access, it's one of those few times in which it's helpful to know Greek. You know, usually the Greek word means exactly what the, you know, the translation says it means, you know. In this case, it's helpful to look at it. Because the word access here, in Greek literature, means to have an introduction to a VIP. To have an introduction to a very important person. And therefore, Paul is, in a very specific way, drawing a picture. Imagine this. Modernize it a little bit. But there's some great man coming to town. A man of the greatest importance, the greatest significance, the greatest fame. And, in this case, which isn't often the case, you admire this man mightily. So much that you're willing to go out into the crowd, just hoping you'll catch a glimpse of him. Maybe even push to the front of the police line, you know. And you're waiting there, and along comes the entourage, and you haven't even seen the man yet. But all of a sudden, to your surprise, in the entourage, you recognize somebody. Somebody in his entourage comes over and says, Oh, I can't believe you're here. This is marvelous. Would you like to meet him? And you say, I can't believe it. Why, yes. And so you're on the outside, see. You're behind the police line. You're outside, just hoping for a glimpse, you see. Through the door, through the window, you know. And maybe when the limousine comes by, for some strange reason, you know, if there's a light on the other side, even those dark glass places you can sometimes see through. Maybe you're just a silhouette. And suddenly, the friend takes you and leads you in. Not just inside the police line, but inside the house. Not just inside the house, but inside the room. Not just inside the room, but right up to his chair. And you sit down, and the man, he gets the introduction from your friend. And he turns to you, and he says, Why, this is marvelous. I'd love to get to know you better. Could you come back for dinner? Just you and me and my wife. You're in. You're in. You've experienced access. Is that far-fetched? Let me tell you something, friends. If you think that's far-fetched, the reality that Paul is pointing to is as far greater than that story as an ocean is greater than a dew drop. The reality is far greater than that story, which many of you say, That's never happened to me. That sort of thing never will happen to me. The reality is greater. And that is, every person who's received Jesus Christ as Savior has an introduction. Not to a VIP. Not to somebody in a limo. In New York, they're a dime a dozen. You know, when I lived in... There's a lot of other places a limo. Anybody in a limo. Anybody in an entourage. Anybody behind a police line. You know, that might happen once a year, twice a year. But here, it's every day. It's every block. Like, you know. But you say, Even so, it's fantastic. That would never happen. The reality is so far greater. Because you have an introduction, an irrevocable permanent introduction, into the courts of the King of the cosmos. See, the Lord of all life and love and power. He takes you in to his heart. Into his secrets. Into his counsel. Into his confidence. You. You're in. Now, listen. This is important. Because whether we recognize it or know, many of us, to one degree or another, are really dominated and influenced by a deep need to be on the inside. And our lives are actually run as much by that as they are by a fear of being left out. There is no worse fear than being left out. See, human society is full of little, what we call, inner circles. There's all sorts of inner circles. And the worst thing in the world is to be outside of one. If you get near one. Now, the most famous inner circle, of course, is high society. And a lot of us want to be in high society circles. Well, we don't admit that to ourselves until we get near enough to one to get an introduction. And then we go wild over it if it happens to us. And, of course, we consider them snobs. Who's we? Anyone outside of that circle. But, listen. Those of us who are the most disdainful of people who are social climbers trying to get into the inner circle, many of us are just as consumed by a need to be in some other inner circle. Oh, no. We don't want tall ceilings and chandeliers. We want... We want... or five friends and the delicious knowledge that we, even we, just we four or five, are the ones who know. Know what? It depends, you see. See, it depends if you're a Republican or a Democrat. You know, it depends, but there's all these inner circles, and we want to be in there. Now, before any of you say, I'm not dominated by that kind of thing, I'm not influenced by that kind of thing, realize, think about it, we are. It's one of the great mainsprings of human behavior. Why, I'm talking, I'm going to say kids, but you know, lots of us were. Those of us who weren't hatched. Why is it that most kids have sex the first time? Why is it that most kids use drugs the first time? Why do they have sex the first time? Is it their hormones? Ridiculous. Those of you who remember realize you're too scared to have your hormones involved at all. It's the desire to be in. It's the fear of being out, you see. It's one of the mainsprings of our professional lives, let's face it. It's one of the reasons we get galled if we're not brought in. And it's any profession. It's my profession, too. Kathy and I, is she there? Kathy and I know that there's a particular friend of ours, a pastor friend who's gotten up and up in the world, and over the years, he's really developed an inner circle. And I've never been invited in. And there have been many times in which I was rankled by that. It's the same cancer. When you start a new church, one of the things that very often happens is that there, in the early stages, tension between the people who perceive that they have not gotten into the pastor's inner circle and by the people who are in, you see. And on and on it goes. I was just reading, I read a very interesting biography not too long ago. It was a testimony of a man who had been gloriously converted to Jesus Christ after a long career as a very highly successful female impersonator. And, you know, I was just reading through the thing rather quickly. It was rather light reading and interesting and helpful and very glorious in many ways. At one point, he's telling how, after all his life being a sissy, marginalized, always on the outside, always mocked. The first time he got onto the stage and went into his act, this is what he wrote. He says, I went into my act. They demanded encore after encore. I was in for once in my life. All those normal people out there clapping. And the power that lifestyle had for him was that need to be in. It wasn't all that, you know, you can go into psychoanalyzing him. You can go into checking out his hormones. But the whole idea was, he was out and now he was in. It does affect us. And how can we keep from this sort of thing ruining our lives? There's only one way. You can sniff and say, I won't let that happen. But then you look around for other people like you who are just as sensible about these inner circles. The next thing you know, you've got one. You see? And look. Look. You have to acknowledge the fact that this is a need for access. And the only way that it will not run your life and ruin your life is if you fill that need with the only thing that can truly satisfy it and that is access into the only circle that counts the circle of God the Trinity. He takes you all the way in. It says in the Psalms the secret of the Lord is with those who fear him. The secret. That's a big part of being on an inner circle when people tell you secrets, you know. And the Lord tells you secrets. It says in Revelation 2 that to those who overcome he gives you a white stone and on it is your name written a name that is known only to you. Now, if you think that I'm so wise as a teacher of the Bible that I know what in the world he's talking about I don't know. But all I know is it probably has to do with the fact that God the longer you work with him the more he shows you who you are the more he shows you what gifts he's given you what your purpose is you know, he brings you in. He brings you all the way in. And therefore the only thing that is going to satisfy the need for access is access to God. What is that access? It's knowing God. See, the word for access and the word for knowing God is the same. Knowing God is the essence. John 17.3 Jesus says an amazing thing. He says, this is eternal life. What's eternal life? Is that kind of esoteric? know you, the only true and living God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent. Knowing God is eternal life. Now, what knowing God means is very critical to understand, and the best way I can explain it is to realize, is to tell you that the word knowledge in the Bible always has two layers to it. Two layers. You can know something at the informational level, but you also can know something at the personal level, and those two things are intertwined. In John 14, 9, Jesus says to Philip, Philip, have you been with me so long and still you do not know me? Now, what's he mean? He says, Philip, you have a lot of information about me. You've been living with me. You know all about me. You've heard all of my words. You've memorized all of my teaching, but you still don't get it. You see, what is he talking about? Philip had an informational knowledge, but no more. He was missing something else. Or in Matthew 7, Jesus says that on the last day, now this is a sermon in itself, but I'll do it some other time, where Jesus says on the last day, people will come to him and they will say, Lord, Lord, didn't we do great deeds in your name? Didn't we cast out demons in your name? Didn't we prophesy in your name? And Jesus will look at them and say, I never knew you. I never knew you. Now, that's a, don't ask me to go into that now, but what he's saying is, this is the all-knowing creator who's talking. It doesn't mean, Jesus cannot mean, I don't know about you. It doesn't mean I don't have all the information on you. He knows everything about you. He knows the number of hairs on your head, but I never knew you. He's talking about personal knowledge. Put it this way. You can know something at an informational level, not personal. My brother-in-law, I remember some years ago, my brother-in-law hated to wear seatbelts, and I used to joke about it. He says, I hate seatbelts. One day, one time I visited him, he lives far away, he had a seatbelt on, and I said, ooh, well, you know, I joked around in a macho way, you know, guys do. So, hey, what you're doing with a seatbelt on? And he was very serious. He says, I went to visit a friend of mine in the hospital who was in a fairly minor accident and went through the windshield. Did not have a seatbelt on. Had 30 stitches in his face. And he says, ever since then, I put on my seatbelt. Now, think about something. Did my brother-in-law, his name is Jim, did Jim get any new information about seatbelts? Did he get any new information? He already knew all this stuff about seatbelts. He knew the statistics. Did he get any new information? Then what made the difference? The difference was, though he got no new information, listen, the information became new. Got no new information, the information became new. It moved down from the informational level to the personal level. In other words, it got down to the place where it affected him as a whole person. His mind, his will, and his emotions were engaged. He saw how he related to seatbelts as a person, see, personally. And now it changed him, you see. In the same way, it's possible to have a whole lot of principles, knowledge about the Lord, knowledge about the scriptural teaching, knowledge about God. But the question is, has that knowledge ever come down and become personal? Have you ever actually met him? The Bible talks about this in Ephesians 1.18, where Paul says, I pray, he says this in the Ephesians, that the eyes of your heart would be enlightened so you might know the hope of your calling. Now that is one of, to me, that's a locus classicus, that's a classic text. He tells you, these people, he's praying that they would know the hope of their calling. Now, these are Christians. They know about their calling. They've heard it all. And he's saying, but you don't really know it, do you? At the deep level, at the personal level, you haven't really encountered it. And I'm praying that the eyes of your heart would be enlightened. And right there, you've got it. I can read something in the scripture, but when the truth begins to shine, because of what God's doing to me, when the truth begins to shine, truth that's always been there, truth that's been a letter on the page, it begins to shine. The eyes of my heart are enlightened. I begin to know that truth. You see, there's places where the Bible says, oh, taste and see that the Lord is good. Now, there it is. A lot of you in this room, I would hope, most of you probably, believe in the goodness of God. You believe that God's good. You know that he's good. But is that truth shining at you? Are you experiencing access to the goodness of God? Is it thrilling you? Is it comforting you? Is it changing you? Is it personal knowledge, knowledge, the way it became? I've had people, when I was a pastor, people would come on in and I would see that they were eaten up with worry, eaten up with it. And this is back in the days when I was fairly naive about this. I would open the Bible and I would read places where it talked about God being good. Oh, there's so many places about God being good. And what worry is, is a complete mistrust, a throwing out the window of the whole idea of the goodness of God. You can't worry without denying it. And I would say, you know that God is good. And the people would look at me and they would say, I know that, but it doesn't help. Began to realize as I began to read what the Bible said about knowledge, what it meant to know God, what it meant to have access. I realized that you can't say that. If you say, I know about the goodness of God, but it doesn't help, you're contradicting yourself. If you know about the goodness of God, you wouldn't be worried. If you really knew it, I'm not saying that Christians don't worry, but it's because of a lack of access. You see, if the truth begins to shine, if the eyes of your heart are enlightened, if you know it, if you experience access to the goodness of God, it wipes out that kind of anxiety. And to the degree, and nobody has perfect access, but to the degree you have access to that degree, there's peace. The truth shines. That's what this great gift is. It's a remarkable gift. It's unbelievable. Do you see it? And just before I go on, real quickly, there's two opposite errors that churches fall into about this idea of knowledge. So there's informational knowledge and there's personal experiential knowledge. And there's some churches that put all the emphasis on informational. And the big, the emphasis is all on learning the doctrine and understanding it and knowing it inside out and mastering it and being accurate, but without a commensurate emphasis on working that truth into the life before God in repentance and prayer. So the truth shines and changes you. And if you don't have that commensurate access, if you put too much information, emphasis on the informational knowledge, what happens is you develop a legalistic church, an authoritarian church, a heresy hunting church. But on the other hand, if a church puts much more emphasis on experience and actually even eschews dogma, it's always saying, we don't believe in doctrine and dogma. We just want you to bring you to Jesus. And now the danger with that, first of all, that's silly. Because as soon as you say, I don't believe in doctrine, just Jesus, I say, oh, who's Jesus? Oh, Son of God, fully God, fully man, savior, mediator, but I don't believe in doctrine. You can't. You can't have personal knowledge without informational knowledge. Real knowledge, real access is based on informational knowledge. It's more than informational knowledge, but it's never less. You see, I mean, that's not the way it works. If you sit down with somebody and you're trying to get to know them personally, you ask for information. You want to know where they are, where they live, what job they've got, and so on, don't you? And then, of course, you use the informational knowledge to build personal knowledge, and that's the way it goes. But the danger is, it's more dangerous than that. You have to realize that Christian mysticism, if I can use the word Christian experience, is utterly different than Eastern experience. Eastern mysticism puts all the emphasis on destroying, frustrating the one side of your brain, the analysis side, the rational side, the logical side, and says, let's frustrate it. You know, all those, you know, the things you're supposed to meditate on, like what is the sound of one hand clapping, and so forth. You're supposed to meditate on that because it frustrates the logic. It frustrates the one side of your brain until the intuitive side is brought out. That's absolutely unbiblical because, you see, Jesus said to the woman at the well of Samaria, you must worship in spirit and truth, with your left and your right brain, with your analysis and your intuition. Information. And I can't go into more detail on that now, but you see why there's these opposite errors? Knowledge is never, is always more than information, but never less. This is the gift. We have access. But now how do we get it? How do we get it? And there is the last two prepositions, which we actually have to look at together. Why is it that most of us do not experience that access very much? And why is it that some of you have never experienced it, and you know it as I'm describing it? Okay? Because the gift, there is the gift to the Father. That's the gift. But the gift comes through the Son and by the Spirit. In other words, the gift is brought by the Son and delivered by the Spirit. says, through Him, through Him, we have access to the Father. Go back to the illustration about the entourage. Remember the key? Why is it that you got in to see the man? It was the friend. And that friend just can't be any friend. You don't think that just anybody in the entourage could have gotten you in. It had to be a friend with tremendous standing, right? With the VIP, with a very important person, okay? It had to be a person with great standing. Why? Because a great person who doesn't know you has got to trust the introducer. So then he knows he can trust you. And if you try to introduce yourself, that's tremendously arrogant. Because what you're doing, if you try to introduce yourself, is you're actually granting this person an audience. It's tremendously arrogant, you see. So I'll tell you who I am, and I don't need an introduction. Which, of course, is just setting yourself up over top that person. The only way to get in is to have an introduction by somebody who a great person trusts. It's the only way. Now, who's Jesus Christ? We're told that he is the one who stands before the Father. We're told right here in the same passage, up in verse 13, we're told that we're brought nigh. We're brought nigh by his blood. He died in our place. He took our punishment for our sins. Now, the Bible says, he stands before the Father. Hebrews 7, 25, he stands, he lives to intercede for us. We read a little earlier in the service. He stands as one making our defense. In other words, we have a permanent, irrevocable introduction. Anyone who approaches God through Jesus has access. And only through Jesus. Because if you go any other way, you try any other religion, you'll have to be introducing yourself. You're coming with your own reference. You are your own reference. Do you realize how arrogant that is? To come to someone who you're trying to get a job from, or you're trying to get in with, you're trying to get an audience from, and you refuse to even come up with a reference. You see, no one else introduces you. I introduce myself. Do you realize how incredibly insulting that is to the other person? You realize why you'll never get a job that way? Just try to go see the President of the United States without an introduction. You'll come down with bullets in you. It's the same thing with the Father. You have two choices. There's only two approaches. You can introduce yourself, or you can go through Jesus. And when you go through Jesus, you don't have to introduce yourself ever again. Ever again. And then we're told, by the Spirit. And what that means, excuse me, is that the Son has bought it, the Spirit has actually brought it. The Son has bought it, and the Spirit has brought it. Now, let me, it says, for example, in John 17, Jesus says, the Spirit will come and take of mine and show me to you. He will glorify me. The Spirit's job is to melt you under the truth. Back in the old days, before we had wonderful glued envelopes, you know how you sealed an envelope if you wrote it? What you had to have is you had to have a little piece of wax, right? And you had to have a seal, usually a signet ring, and you had to have a flame. And so you softened the wax with the flame, and what the flame did to the wax was it made the wax susceptible to the seal. If you tried to put the seal on the wax without the flame, there's only two things that could happen. What? It could break the wax, or it could just leave a superficial, only a superficial outline on the surface. But if the wax is changed, it's softened by the flame, then the wax is susceptible, and it's changed in the image of the seal. Now, that illustration, transform it. The wax is your heart. The seal is the truth, the Word of God. And the flame is the Spirit. When I go to the truth of God, and the Spirit is giving me access, do you see what happens? You can read about the power of God. You just read about the power of God. Without the influence of the Spirit, you say, oh, God's powerful. Without the influence of the Spirit, all that can do is make a superficial impression on the top of you. But when the Spirit of God is there, you read about the power, and there's access. The truth begins to shine. It begins to change you. And what happens is in your heart develops courage. And when you read about His goodness, it develops in you peace, you see. And when you read about His forgiveness, it develops in you relief. You shake off your guilty fears. And when you read about His forgiveness, it develops in you generosity and mercy. And when you read about His holiness, it develops in you conviction of sin and humility. Don't you see? You say? And only when the access happening. Only then. Now, why is it? Now, I told you that by looking at these two things, these two prepositions, through Christ and by the Spirit, we can understand why some of us in this room are not experiencing access. Do you know why? A lot of us are saying, I've been trying to do a good job, I've been working at being religious, I've been coming to church for a number of years. I've never had anything like what you're talking about. Never! The answer is there's no influence of the Spirit. There's no softening. In fact, I'd have to say that you've got to be careful, because the more and the more you try so hard to be religious and to be moral without the influence of the Spirit on you, you push that seal on the wax and you push that seal on the wax, all you get is a superficial, you know, outline, and eventually what happens is you'll crack it. And that's why we have people running around forming fundamentalist anonymous groups. People who have been cracked under the legalism, cracked under the word without the Spirit. Well, you say, well, okay, why isn't the influence of the Spirit in my life? The only answer could be you're not coming through the sun. It's the only possible answer. You might say, well, I believe in Jesus, but are you trying to introduce yourself? Are you coming to God, making yourself your own reference? Are you coming to Him and saying, Father, I've had a hard life, so I deserve... I mean, maybe you don't use the words, but I'm tough, I've tried, I've worked, I've worked. Or are you saying instead, O Lord God, O Lord God, the audacity of someone like me to come to you. You have the right to just to throw me out. But the gospel is this. Jesus has paid it all, and now He stands before the throne for me. He is my introduction. He is my reference. No other, all the other things I've ever done are worthless in your sight. Save me for Jesus' sake. See, and if you've never done that, you've never come through Him. Do you understand that? For as hard as you've tried to be a Christian, if you've never done that, if you've never stopped your introductions, you've never come through Him, and therefore you've never really had access to the Father by the Spirit. Now, where does this leave us? Let me just finish by applying what we've learned. Access to the Father through the Son by the Spirit. To three kinds of people here. Number one, ready? If the shoe fits. Number one, there's those of you who know about this access because you've experienced it. But you don't experience it that much. You know what? Some tests of the experience. Quick, just to make sure you know you're alive. Number one, when you have access, when the Spirit's working on you, when the truth is shining. Number one, when you go to God in prayer, you feel the burdens come off. Come unto me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. You feel the burdens come off. You can feel the needs and the troubles come off when you're praying. Another mark of access is there's a confidence and boldness. Instead of saying, oh gosh, why would God even listen to me? There's a boldness, you see. There's an eloquence. Number three, there's besides the confidence, besides the sense of burdens coming off, number three, the real mark of access is surprise. You know, there's that hymn writer that wrote, sometime a light surprises the Christian as he sings. It is the sun who rises with healing in his wings. You see, when you're looking at the Word of God and it begins to sparkle out truth, your mind gets eloquent. That's access. You start to see new beauties that you hadn't seen before, things that surprise you. They sparkle out the way, you know, they sparkle out like sun on the water. Your mind gets eloquent. You're surprised by new beauties. Another mark of access, and the most important one, is that you find that it really changes the way in which you live. Do you know that access? Do you know what I'm talking about? Every real Christian knows about it, but I also know that every real Christian in this room also says, I wish I had more of it. In fact, I'm really missing it lately. What can you do? Here's what I tell you to do. Even you need to make sure that you're going through the sun by the Spirit. Through the sun means, do you rejoice in the access you have through the sun? Do you rejoice in it? Or do you run right into God's presence with your gimme prayer list? And you say, Oh Lord, I've got a lot for you to work on today. Or do you walk in like this, recollecting, thinking about the fact that the only reason you're not struck dead as you walk into prayer is because of your coming through the sun. And you have to say, Oh Lord, look at the standing I've got. Even you can't bring a charge against me because of the great salvation you've brought for me in Jesus Christ. To the degree that you rejoice in that access, to the degree you'll experience that access. Do you see? Do you just run into God's presence or do you enjoy, do you reflect on what you've got? Think about that. must pray in Jesus' name, do you know what that means? Do you think it's just a little thing you say at the end in a perfunctory way? To come in the name of Jesus means that you know that the only reason God will hear you is because of the irrevocable permanent introduction you have before the throne of God. And you relish that and you revel in that. Are you doing that? And then the other thing of course is you have to be by the Spirit. And one of the reasons many of us are not experiencing access is not only are we asking the Spirit for that access and yearning for it, a lot of us are grieving the Spirit in our lives. If access to God is by the Spirit and yet in our lives by sins of omission or commission, by a lack of Christian duties or by actually breaking God's commandments, you grieve the Spirit. Then you wonder why there's no access. You can't do that. My friends, don't be too discouraged here. You've got to realize that sometimes God doesn't give you high access and it's a way for him to test you. Because God actually, God values obedience given when there's very little feeling in the heart. When you don't feel close to him but you obey, he knows how hard that is and he knows how valuable that is and he likes it. But on the other hand, I must point out to you that God wants us to have that access. And the reason many of us don't is simply because of our disobedience and our laziness. You have to recollect coming through Jesus. You have to go by the Spirit. I'm probably going to skip the second group of people. You know, oh, I'll tell you who you are. The second group of people are people who are trying to start a new church here. Not all of you are. An alive church experiences access to the Father. That means an alive church is just as big on defending the faith and truth as spreading it. An alive church is not afraid of surprise. Because access means surprise. An alive church isn't afraid of surprise. An alive church is not. It's creative, I mean. It's not rigid. An alive church is a church that is ready to expect great possibilities because they have access to God. But I can't go into that right now. The last thing I just wanted to say is there's those of you who are here who have never experienced access and you know it. And my friends, I don't care. I mean, in New York City, it's possible to be in some mighty elite circles. I don't care what kind of circle you're in. If you've been in there long enough, if you're just getting in or if you think you're about to get in, it's awfully exciting, isn't it? And you're sure that this is going to satisfy that need for access. No matter what circle you're in, and if you've been in it long enough, you know this, you're in nowhere unless you're in God's circle. And the only way to do that is to come through the Father, come to the Father through the Son by the Spirit. Psalm 84. Psalm 84 says, How lovely is your dwelling place. My soul yearns, even faints for the courts of the Lord. My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God. Everybody in this room, whether you admit it or not, that is the language of your deepest self. And the door is open. Father, let's go in. Let's take time to pray silently. Time to say, Lord, here's what I've got to do to put into practice what I've learned tonight. Let's pray. If you're a believer who is really dry, come through the sun. Remind yourself of who's there for you. Stop trying to introduce yourself. Don't worry about that. At the same time, be willing to quit with those things that you know grieve the Spirit and have blocked off your access. And if there's anybody here who knows that you've got no access, that you really need to receive Christ as Savior, pray this prayer with me. Lord, I've tried off and on to reach you, but I see how it's all been my own efforts, really, to introduce myself to you. I thought that many things I did could get me in, but only Jesus Christ and His work can get me in. Now I receive Him as Savior, Master. Accept me for His sake. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen. Amen.
