TITLE: Christian Experience and Counterfeit
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 13:1-9; 18-30; 36-43
TOPICS: Discipleship and Spiritual Growth Atonement
SERIES: Growth in Christ, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/christian-experience-counterfeit/

============================================================

So, will you turn with me to Matthew chapter 13? If you've got Bibles, if you don't, just listen, and you'll be fine too. Matthew 13, and we're going to read two different parables. I don't know if you can see. I'm going to read 1 to 9, then I'm going to skip 18 to 30, and then I'm going to read 36 to 43 as well. Matthew chapter 13. Two parables, both about counterfeit Christianity, both agricultural parables. Listen. That same day, Jesus went out of the house and sat by the lake. Such large crowds gathered around him that he got into a boat and sat in it while all the people stood on the shore. Then he told them many things in parables, saying, A farmer went out to sow his seed. As he was scattering the seed, some fell along the path, and the birds came and ate it up. Some fell on rocky places where it did not have much soil. It sprang up quickly because the soil was shallow, but when the sun came up, the plants were scorched, and they withered because they had no root. Other seed fell among thorns, which grew up and choked the plants. Still other seed fell on good soil where it produced a crop a hundred, sixty, or thirty times what was sown. He who has ears, let him hear. Skip down to verse 18. Jesus said, Listen then to what the parable of the sower means. When anyone hears the message about the kingdom, he does not understand it. The evil one comes and snatches away that which was sown in his heart. This is the seed sown along the path. The one who received the seed that fell on rocky places is the man who hears the word and at once receives it with joy. But since he has no root, he lasts only a short time. When trouble or persecution comes because of the word, he quickly falls away. The one who received the seed that fell among the thorns is the man who hears the word, but the worries of this life and the deceitfulness of wealth choke it, making it unfruitful. But the one who received the seed that fell on good soil is the man who hears the word and understands it. He produces a crop yielding a hundred, sixty, or thirty times what was sown. Jesus told them another parable. Are you ready for another one? Two in one night. The kingdom of heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field. But while everyone was sleeping, his enemy came and sowed seeds among the wheat and went away. And when the wheat sprouted and formed heads, then the weeds also appeared. The owner's servants came to him and said, Sir, didn't you sow good seed in your field? Where then did the weeds come from? An enemy did this, he replied. The servants asked him, Do you want us to go and pull them up? No, he answered, because while you are pulling up the weeds, you may root up the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the harvest, and at that time I will tell the harvesters, First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles to be burned, and then gather the wheat and bring it into my barn. Jump to thirty-six. And he left the crowd and went into the house, and his disciples came to him and said, Tell us, explain the parable of the weeds in the field. He answered, The one who sowed the good seed is the son of man. The field is the world, and the good seed stands for the sons of the kingdom. The weeds are the sons of the evil one, and the enemy who sows them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels. And as the weeds were pulled up and burned in the fire, so it will be at the end of the age. The son of man will send out his angels, and they will weed out of his kingdom everything that causes sin and all who do evil. They will throw them into the fiery furnace where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, and then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their father. He who has ears, let him hear. This is God's Word. Maybe somebody knows what I'm doing. All fall, and all winter, and all spring, we've been looking at Christian growth. And I'm really giving you a kind of mopping up a few, I'm taking you to the end of June, with miscellaneous sermons on teachings on the subject of how do you know you're a Christian and Christian growth. We had a number of series on the Holy Spirit and on the fruit of the Spirit and so on, but now it's miscellaneous helpful safety tips for Christians who want to know you. cover, and I don't know when, I wasn't sure when to tackle this, and I just decided to do it tonight, is the fact that Jesus is constantly telling people to look at yourselves and test yourselves to see whether you're really growing Christians or whether you're just fooling yourself. There are so many places where Jesus says this that we have to deal with it. Now, I personally, I'm always a little bit scared to deal with it. I'll tell you, on the one hand, when I first came to a church in Virginia where there were a lot of people who had been there for many years and where there was no real enthusiasm for the gospel and where there was very little life, I began preaching on parables like this. You know how often Jesus Christ says, you may be fake, you may be bogus, you may be counterfeit. Paul says, examine yourself to see if you're in the way. Jesus says on, in Matthew 7, on the final day, many people will come on the last day of judgment and say, Lord, Lord, we've been busy for you. We've been active in the church. We've been prophesying, which is preaching. We've been casting out demons and healing people in your name. We've been very busy. And on that day, Jesus will look at some of these people and say, I never knew you. Now, there's all these scary statements in the Bible, and when I began preaching that, because I wanted a lot of people to get nervous. And I wanted them to look at themselves and say, am I really a believer or not? I am not quite as prone to preach that way in New York. And part of the reason is because, whereas in a blue-collar town in the South, even the prostitutes were members of First Baptist Church. Everybody had walked an aisle. Everybody had given their lives to Christ, you see. Everybody, no matter what. And that was rather dangerous. By the way, well, let me see. There's two, there's a high and there's a low. Probably, probably, check out low. That's, is that off? That's low. Thank you very much. That's right. There's a sermon illustration here, but I don't know what it is. I'm not as prone to preach on this because, first of all, I think it's usually a lot clearer in a place like New York whether you're a Christian or not. I think the lines are drawn. I think there's plenty of hostility. I think our lifestyles, I think the normal lifestyle in New York is so, is so different than the lifestyle outlined in the Sermon on the Mount and the Ten Commandments that if you decide to give your life to Christ, you know, you know immediately where the lines are drawn. It's just not as true in other places. You follow me? That's the reason why I haven't pressed this as much. And yet, time comes to look at the teaching. And I, see, on the one hand, the reason we have to look at the teaching is because we do see people around us who look like they're going fine in the Christian faith and suddenly they disappear. So on the one hand, we've got to explain why that happens. But on the other hand, I don't want you to get rattled. See, on the one hand, haven't you noticed that there'll be people that right alongside of you doing well, it seeming to be coming into Christianity and enjoying it and you watch them and all of a sudden they're gone. Now, of course, a lot of people are gone in New York because they've moved. And the average New York person now moves more often than, you know, more days in the year than there are days. I mean, he moves constantly all over New York or out of New York. I'm not talking about that. I'm talking about people who suddenly stop coming to Christian activities and they lose their interest and they fade out. It gets even more frightening and even more difficult for people to understand when Christian leaders do that. And they do. And unless you understand something about the teaching here, you are going to get enormously disillusioned when some man or woman that you admire tremendously, who seems to be a very dynamic and fruitful and effective Christian leader, suddenly goes down with a spiritual arrow in the breast. In other words, somebody who suddenly either gives up the faith or goes into a non-Christian lifestyle or something like that. And people say, how could that be? How could it be? Jesus tells very clearly here in these two agricultural parables that there are counterfeits inside the body of Christ. The first parable tells us that there are people who come on and they look like they're doing very well and they look like real Christians in every way, but then they're not. John says, Beloved, they were not of us, for as if they were of us, they would have continued with us. That's a mighty strong statement. He's saying, real Christians last and they stay to the end. And if they haven't stayed to the end, then no matter how authentic they looked, they weren't authentic. That's what he's saying. But Jesus' second parable tells us that there are counterfeits who actually will stay to the end. That on the last day, the day of judgment, it will be revealed that some of the people who are standing there, sitting there, in the community of the saints, really aren't saints at all. And I'm using the word saints, not in the Roman Catholic sense of great, super, abundantly, incredibly wonderful Christians, but in the biblical term, which means saints, which means any Christians who have the Spirit of God in them. At the end of time, there'll be people who will say, Lord, Lord, didn't we do this and this and this and this? And Jesus will say, I never knew you. Now, we have to come to grips with that. We've got to. It's in the Bible. It makes us nervous. It makes us scared. I don't want you to get too rattled because I don't want you to say, oh my gosh, I wonder, you know, am I bogus? And the answer is the word of God tells you. The word of God gives you guidelines. The fact of the matter is, to an expert, nobody can really get a counterfeit bill. Pardon me, I should put it this way. No counterfeiter can make counterfeit money that is so perfect that the experts who really know what to look for can't tell. Now, of course, some counterfeit money is so great, you have to be a real, real, real expert. Biblically, any person can be an expert on authentic Christianity versus counterfeit Christianity by going to the word of God. So, let's go. And let me just show you what it says and take a look at it. Fairly simple. I'm going to give you what I consider a fairly simple formula for understanding the difference. Okay? McShane, by the way, Robert Murray McShane said, our hearts are like a smoking furnace. Nobody can really see more than a foot or two into them. But the fact is that the word of God can blow a lot of that away and help us really see what our hearts are made of. Nevertheless, number one, the first thing we learn here, a real Christian is somebody whose heart is transformed by the word of God. That is clear. When Jesus is explaining the first parable, and he explains it in verse 18, he says, when anyone hears the message about the kingdom and does not understand it, the evil one comes and snatches away that which was sown in the heart. What's the seed? What is the seed? What is the seed that brings about new life? What is it? The message of the kingdom, the gospel, the truth, the word of God. That is extremely clear. In fact, you know, there's a lot of places that say we're born again of the spirit, but it says in 1 Peter, we're born again of the word, which is also true. What makes a Christian a Christian is that there is a body of truth that comes in. There's no doubt that being a Christian is more than doctrine. Being a real Christian is more than just knowing and understanding a couple of doctrines, but it's not less. There are a couple basics. You have to believe, you must know, you must accept that there is a God who is both a good father and also a holy God who demands justice. You have to believe that there's a Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who did something on the cross that dealt with our sins. You have to believe that the Spirit of God can come into your life and completely regenerate you. You have to believe that that's all received by faith, not by works. Those are very, very, very, very basic, but you see, you can't go beneath them. You can't reduce Christianity below that. There's a message of the kingdom, and that's what actually brings about the miraculous transformation of the new birth. That's what does it. And that seed has to go all the way to the heart. What's the field? Look at verse 19. The seed is the message of the kingdom, but the field is what? The heart. And the whole point of what actually, actually as a Christian, is does the seed actually get into the heart or not? The first set of people is represented by the soil that the seed doesn't even begin to get into. It just lays there and the birds snatch it away. It never penetrates at all. The second and the third soils, however, there is minimal penetration of the soil, but it doesn't get down deep enough. That's the most important thing. That's what Jesus is bringing out. He says, what makes this inauthentic seed that fell on rocky places is the man who hears the word and receives it with joy, but he has no root. He has no root. He has no root. The seed doesn't actually go into the soil. It stays right at the top, right on the surface, so it's very easily either knocked out or, in the case of the parable, when the sun comes up, the roots don't go down deep enough to draw moisture from the soil, and so they burned up immediately. In other words, it's on the surface, but it doesn't penetrate the heart. Same thing with the third soil. The one who received the seed that fell among the thorns is the man who hears the word, but the words of this life and the deceitful of wealth choke it, making it unfruitful. The third seed is even closer, and yet what happens is there's other things, other things in the heart. You see, the second soil, the seed never gets into the heart at all, but in the third soil, the seed seems to get into the heart, but there's other things in the heart too. The first, the second soil is somebody who's very shallow in their faith, and we'll talk about that in a minute. The third seed is somebody who really looks like they've got some depth, but the real problem is that it's really somebody who has shown a lot of interest in Christ, but there's other things that are really down there and already have the heart, really. The weeds and the thorns have a deeper root than the word, the message of the kingdom. And so when push comes to shove, when a choice has to be made between the weeds and the thorns and the message of the kingdom, the real root, the heart is really rooted in the cares of this world. And so you might say the first one is a shallow heart, but the second one is a divided heart. But it's not really equally divided. You don't really have a kind of equal division between the Lord and between the cares of the world, but the cares of the world are stronger, and their root chokes out what's in the word. And the last one, look, verse 22, the one who received the seed that fell among the thorns is the man who hears the word. Oh, pardon me, verse 23, excuse me. But the one who received the seed that fell on good soil is the man who hears the word, and look at this, understands it. Understands it. See, I'm really happy for this word, because it all, it seems very nebulous. I keep thinking, well, what in the world does it mean for the, you know, this, the message of the kingdom goes, doesn't go into the heart at all with the first soil. And the second time it goes in a little way, but it never really takes root. And the third time it seems to take root, but there's other things that have taken deeper root. What does that mean? How do I know what I am? And suddenly, the fourth time, we're told the person who has received the word into his heart is the person who understands the truth. The other people don't understand it. They may say they do. They may even have a lot of Bible knowledge in some cases, but they don't understand the gospel, the message of the kingdom. Now, see, what we're saying is a real Christian is a Christian who's been affected by the word of God, not just on the outside, but in the heart. Romans 6, verse 17, gives us a perfect picture. Do I have it down here? Yeah. A perfect picture of what a Christian is. There, Paul says, but God be thanked, ye have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching delivered to you. And it's all there. You obeyed from the heart the form of teaching. First of all, you see, the mind, the will, and the emotions are all involved. You have the mind first. There was a form of teaching that came in. We've seen that. You cannot be a Christian unless you accept truth and doctrine and teaching. It's got to come in. That's the first thing. A minimal core, at least, has to be there, the message of the kingdom, the gospel. Secondly, it comes into the heart. It goes all the way down to the bottom. And the way you can see that it's come all the way into the bottom, that you understand it, is that it issues in a changed life in obedience. So you have the mind, and you have the will, and you even have the emotions, of course. But the thing to keep in mind in the Bible, as I put in the, I'm not going to go into it all there, but I put it on your handout, is in the Bible, the word heart means the seat of the mind, the will, and the emotions. In English, the word heart means the emotions, right? Right? You know, just like, who is the, in West Side Story, who's the, What was her... Huh? Now, Maria was Natalie Wood. Anita, that's right. So Maria is saying at a place... You know, I know this boy is bad for me. She says, I know it in my head, you see. What you tell me is right in my head, but my heart... Anita, my heart, you see, I can't help it. My head tells me one thing, my heart tells me another thing. And there you have it. You know, poor Maria. I mean, she's doomed. I mean, her head says one thing, her heart says another thing. What she means is, what you're telling me, I know is true, but it doesn't affect my emotions. My emotions are operating on a different level. And that's what she means by the word heart. The Bible never uses the word heart like that. Sometimes the Bible says you think in your heart. Sometimes the Bible says you act with your heart. Sometimes the Bible says you feel with your heart because the heart is the seed of all three. And so what Paul is saying in Romans 6 is, if you, if the truth gets into your heart, it affects you mind, will, and emotions. All three. You see, the first seed, there's no engagement of the mind, the will, or the emotions. The first soil. In the second soil, it says there's joy, there's emotions, but nothing else. I think in the third soil, you've got some understanding and you've got some, probably, action. But underneath it, there's no obedience. So, you hear this? The first soil, there's no engagement of the mind, the will, or the emotions in Christianity. In the second soil, you have got only emotional Christianity. It says there's full of joy, but it doesn't go down. The third soil, there seems to be some understanding in the sense of, obviously, the person knows. There seems to be the intellect, maybe, is involved. Maybe even the emotions are involved. But the point is, deep down, the will is still set on the things of the world. But the way you can tell whether the gospel has come all the way down into the center of your being, your heart, is it engages your mind, your will, and your emotions. That is the biblical, as far as I can see, model of the difference between an authentic Christian and an inauthentic Christian. You see, it's easy when we see somebody who says, like the first soil, I hate the gospel. I don't like it. I don't believe in Jesus. I don't believe in that stuff. Then we know that person's not a Christian. But there's three kinds of Christianity that are fake, that are counterfeit, where the message of the kingdom comes in, but there's no real, true, central root that the truth actually takes. The first kind is intellectual Christianity. You following me so far? I don't know if I, my problem is I don't know tonight whether I'm going too fast or too slow. What do you think? Okay, am I going too slow? All right. Okay. First, intellectual Christianity. Second, emotional Christianity. Third, volitional Christianity. These are three kinds of counterfeits. I think emotional Christianity is mentioned as the second soil. I think intellectual Christianity, from what I can tell, is in the third soil. And we're going to, talk about the fact, probably, that volitional Christianity is represented by those people in Matthew 7 that on the last day say, Lord, Lord, didn't we do all sorts of great things in your name? And Jesus said, I never knew you. Let's take a look. Intellectual Christianity, this means these are people who are Christians mentally. If you ask them what you believe, they'll give you a long list of beliefs that are generally orthodox and right. But that's all. Now, I give you a couple of, let me give you a couple of examples. One of them is what you call nominal Christianity. Now, nominal Christianity is a person, generally, it says you're adjoining the church, assenting to, agreeing to a set of doctrines, and that's it. It never took root in their heart. I'll tell you where nominal Christianity comes from. It especially, it's especially rife in churches that are between 20 and 40 years old. Do you ever know that? Maybe some of you were. You see, I had a church like that. And what happens is that when a church is started, say, in 1940, when a church is started, ordinarily, the people that come together to start the church are people who are pretty vital in their faith. They say, we want to do something big for God. We want to do something new for God. And another neat thing that happens when you start a new church is on the average, between one-third and one-half of all the people that get involved have no other previous church affiliation or background. In other words, new churches tend to be able to win and be able to serve and be able to attract and be able to hold on to people who are not churchy. Because they come on in and they say, they say, full of tradition. It seems to be really trying to meet my needs. Because when you start a church, the people who come together really want to meet the needs of the people around them. They're not looking inside and saying, how can we meet our needs? So ordinarily, new churches tend to be much better at attracting new people and helping people come to Christ. And so initially when a church gets started, virtually all of those first people, the pioneers that started, have a lot of vital Christianity. But now unlike the center of a big city where there's lots of mobility, let's take the average American or the average place in the world, most of the people tend to settle down there and they stay there. And they raise their children in the church. And 20 to 30 years later, all of the charter members, you know, now are say in their 50s or 60s, very often. And their children have been raised in that church and they join the church and then they got married in the church and they're raising their children in the church. And what ordinarily happens is the charter members, though they tend to be set in their ways and very kind of old-fashioned in many ways, they have a vital Christianity about them and their children do not. Very, very often, the children are not creative, the children are not that interested in spiritual things, the children kind of come and they say, this is my church and I've always been here. Churches of that age tend to foster a whole generation of people like that, that are nominal Christians. They're not real Christians. They've never believed anything else. They've always believed it, but they never came under the power of the truth. Another kind of intellectual Christianity is what I call doctrinal Christianity. These are people who love learning. They love theological truth. They love to read books. They love to get together and talk about them. Now, there's variations of this. One of the most dangerous things is to find somebody who particularly gets into a certain kind of doctrinal teaching. Dr. Lloyd-Jones, one of my favorite writers, he's passed away now, he's a Welsh preacher in Great Britain for years, he said, whenever he would come across somebody who said, well, I became a Christian 10 years ago, but I've settled down right now. I'm studying biblical prophecy and I'm an expert on prophecy and I want to know what you think about this meaning and this prophecy and this prophecy. And Dr. Lloyd-Jones says, whenever he comes up with somebody like that, he feels like these people are in the most dangerous possible spiritual condition. Whenever you get a bee in your bonnet about a particular doctrine or dogma and you begin to check everybody out, you know, you have a little theological micrometer up there and you check everybody out to see whether or not you measure up or people like that. The problem with nominal Christianity, the problem with doctrinal Christianity, doctrinal Christianity, people can get into prophecy, they can get into charismatic gifts, they can get into Presbyterian predestination and election stuff, and everybody who doesn't measure up, you're not a real Christian. And actually, what Dr. Lloyd-Jones is saying, that attitude makes you wonder about them. Because the way you know you're a Christian is the truth comes into your heart, that means, that means that you come under the power of the truth. It's one thing to say, I believe in the atonement of Jesus Christ. I believe in the penal substitution. I believe in the substitutionary atonement of Jesus Christ, the vicarious sacrifice of Jesus Christ. You can throw all the words around. But it's another thing to have felt the power of it. Does it move you to weep for your sins? Does it thrill you or comfort you? Does it humble you into the dust? See, somebody who's always walking around saying, your view of atonement isn't right, is somebody who's never felt the power of the atonement. They've never been humbled by the atonement. The power of the truth has never been affected in their lives. Because if so, they'd be growing in humility. They'd be growing in love. They'd be growing in compassion, you see. So, an intellectual Christianity alone is a sign that this is not Christianity at all. Secondly, second kind, is what I call emotional Christianity. Emotional Christianity. I got two kinds here. First I call, the first kind I talk about is manic depressive Christianity. Now, I'll talk about manic depressive Christianity. Maybe that's an unfair thing to say. By the way, manic depression, from what I understand, is a disease. It's a physiological thing. It's a lot of people who have it, it's not their fault. They need medication to keep from the mood swings. Absolutely, I believe that. I'm not really talking about that. Okay? And so, after I wrote it down, I said, maybe it's a bad illustration, but not completely. People who have manic depressive, it's not their fault, but they have these mood swings. Manic depressive Christians, it is your fault. And let me tell you that there's no medication a manic depressive Christian is somebody who relies on their feelings for their assurance. They feel, I know that I'm a Christian because I'm having deep feelings. I'm having an experience of glory. Now, how does a person get like that? Well, some people have overreacted to intellectual Christianity. I've seen people who are so turned off by the folks that come along with their theological micrometers, or they may have gone off to a Bible school or a theological seminary or someplace, and they got so confused and upset with how everybody tries to reduce God into certain doctrines, and they got so depressed by all the theological controversies, at a certain point they said, doctrine doesn't matter. All this stuff doesn't matter. All that matters is I feel Jesus in my heart. That happens to some people. Other people, I think, very often a person who is seeking God, seeks God during times of transition in their lives. I think most of us will admit, I hope you'll admit, that the way you found Christ was not because one day you got up and said, boy, how foolish and proud and wicked I'm being. I want to be in charge of my own life. And the evidence for God, the evidence for God and for the existence of a creator is very clear. I've been studying it, and I just need to give my life to God. That's not what happens. Something goes wrong in your life. Something goes wrong that shows you your weakness and shows you your helplessness, and you're in a state of emotional turmoil. And when you seek for God under those conditions, which is fine, by the way, the danger is that you're very emotional at times like that. And you may actually give yourself to Christ, read a book, hear a sermon, listen to something on the radio, and make some kind of profession of faith in Christ in the midst of very deep emotion, which is fine. But then, isn't it pretty natural that you associate the emotion with the action of giving yourself to Christ? You say, that's what it means to be a Christian. To have to weep. To feel this great sense of love. Now, the danger, by the way, with that is, a real Christian can become a Christian like that and get stuck on emotion. But there's even a bigger danger. Emotional Christianity, it says here, Jesus says there's people who receive the Word with joy. They experience tremendous emotional catharsis, but the Word has no root in them at all. And what can happen is, you mistake the emotional experience for God's deliverance. You say, I know God's accepted me because, look at how great I felt. I sensed Him. Now, friends, that's the Roman Catholic understanding of grace. The Roman Catholic Church teaches, and wrongly, I have to say, at this point, the Roman Catholic Church says lots of great things, but it's wrong at this point, that the way you're saved is God infuses grace into you. He zaps you with grace through the sacraments. The Bible tells us that the grace of God that saves us is a legal action of God. When you give your life to Christ, He legally deals with your sin on the basis of Jesus Christ. It's a legal transaction. It's a legal standing that you have now. And it does not necessarily at all have to be an emotional experience. And the danger is, you can rely on the emotion instead of on Jesus. You can rely on the experience instead of on what Jesus has done for you. Now, there's another kind of counterfeit emotional Christianity I call group manic Christianity. And group manic Christianity is just people who find that they can only keep their Christian feeling when they're in vital churches or in vital small groups where people are worshiping God and people are praising God and people are talking about God. And when you're there, you find, yeah, your heart is warmed and you feel really close to God. And when you walk away, when you go away, you can't take your Christianity across the street. You don't find prayer interesting. You don't find the Bible an interesting thing to read. You find it impossible for you to really change your life. And then you come on back in and you have another emotional experience as long as you're with people. Now, one of the problems with this is, let's face it, if a church is a church dedicated to good worship, first of all, it's going to have good music and it's going to hopefully have good preaching. And there's a great danger with good preaching and with good music. Good preaching and good music does affect the emotions. It does. But it's also possible, very often, that it works directly on the emotions. You know, I struggle with this. Kathy and I were talking to a friend of ours about Jonathan Edwards, the great preacher, who preached sermons during a great revival in Northampton, directly appealing to people's emotions because he was afraid of emotional counterfeit Christianity, that this is what he would do. He would take his sermons and he would read his sermons like this. No intonation change. He would either look at his manuscript or he would look at a place on the wall in the back of the church. And he would read like this. The local church may become no living fellowship at all, but a retreat center where religious folk desperately need reassurance that they are all right with God. The church then becomes a religious cushion. And that's how he would read. You know, there was a great revival in this church. People fell down in the aisles crying out to God for mercy. And when that happened, what did Edwards do? Did he say, oh, that's emotionalism. I hate that. Oh, no. Oh, no. Absolutely not. Absolutely not. I hope I'm trying to paint this for you. Edwards loved and expected that if the word of God penetrated all the way to the heart, there would be strong emotion. And when he saw people on the ground crying out for mercy, he did not say, how awful, how undignified. Get up. Don't you know that you're Englishman? Did he do that? Huh? Absolutely not. He said, now I know that the word of God has penetrated the hearts because I did nothing to directly address their emotions. I gave them the truth. Now, if you ever read his sermons, his sermons are unbelievable. Absolutely unbelievable. His illustrations are incredible. And someday, in fact, I've written some articles on how to preach, on how to preach well, just by giving examples of what Edwards says. His illustrations are just incredible. His logic is unbelievable. And a lot of the things, if I read you some of his sermons, you'd say, haven't you said that? And the answer is yes, of course. I've ripped off Edwards everywhere I possibly can. He's a wonderful preacher. His illustrations are tremendous. His logic is incredible. His exposition of the word is powerful. He did nothing to appeal directly to people's emotions because he wanted to make sure that if they were bowled over and knocked into the aisle, it was by the truth. Because it's the message of the kingdom that makes you born again, that has to penetrate. You see, what was so interesting is intellectual Christianity is afraid of any emotion. They don't like it. Emotional Christianity is afraid of any intellectualism. Emotionalism, any discussion of biblical doctrine, any kind of reflection of an intellectual level. But real Christians, real Christianity can encompass all of those things. And what Edwards says is, the trouble with emotionalism is that it appeals directly to the emotions. Now, what are the marks of emotional Christianity? I'll just give you three. One, it has little to do with truth. It's not written down here, that's all. I'm just telling you. It has very little to do with truth. It bypasses the understanding. It de-emphasizes learning, okay? Secondly, emotional Christianity exhausts you in the end. You can't keep it up. If you've been in churches or if you've been in fellowship groups where really the Christianity is kind of emotionalism, not, listen, we are not against emotion. We are not against emotion at all. Do I look like I'm against emotion? I'm not. I get emotional. You see that. But, surprised you, didn't I? Yeah. I'm not against emotion. But, emotionalism, in the end, you can tell whether it's emotionalism or emotional because it exhausts you. It exhausts you. It drains you instead of building you up. But, thirdly, most interestingly, emotionalist Christianity doesn't really produce lasting changes in people's lives. It gives them a high for a day or two or even for a week or two or for a month or two, but it doesn't actually produce a lasting change. You obeyed from the heart the form of teaching that was delivered to you. It lasts. Dr. Lloyd-Jones has this incredible, interesting illustration that really changed the way I thought about a lot of things when I heard it. Dr. Lloyd-Jones was himself a very powerful preacher, and one evening he was preaching a set of evening services, and they were evangelistic evening services. And, one evening, he was preaching, and he could feel the spirit working through him, and he was preaching up a pretty good storm, and he noticed a particular man in the balcony who was seen to be very emotionally affected. And I was rushing back. Because receber was detached in the direction of Jeżeli estipe Uandini And when he said that didn't come out as retired as a progressive relationship to bridge the town, One evening, he was preaching, and he could feel the Spirit working through him, and he was preaching up a pretty good storm. And he noticed a particular man in the balcony who seemed to be very emotionally affected. He was pretty obviously upset, pretty obviously weeping. And Dr. Lloyd-Jones finished the sermon, and at the door, the man came on through, and he said, hello. And it looked like the man was going to say something, but somebody else came on up and asked him something else, and on the man went. The next night, as Dr. Lloyd-Jones was walking to church, the man was coming the other direction, not going to church at all. And he said, hello, Reverend. And Dr. Lloyd-Jones says, how do you do? And he remembered him. And he says, I'll tell you something, you missed your chance last night, he says to Lloyd-Jones. And he says, what do you mean? He says, well, I want to hear you preach. I'm not a religious man, I'm not Christian. I want to hear you preach out of curiosity, and you know, gosh darn, you are pretty good. And you know, you really had me there for a while. And you know, if you had given some kind of invitation to respond to Jesus Christ last night, I probably would have done it. In fact, at the door, if you had just said, come with me and let's sit down and talk, I probably would have prayed some kind of prayer or something. But you didn't. Well, Lloyd-Jones says, well, that doesn't matter. I got time now. Everything is fine right now. This is a matter of the most urgent and, you know, importance. So come with me right now, we'll go and talk. He says, no, no, no, I'm sorry. You didn't hear what I said. That was yesterday. He says, you know, I woke up this morning, I realized, gosh, I was just real upset yesterday, and I don't know what came over me. But the fact is, if you had done something yesterday, you would have had me, but you missed your chance. He says, I hope that teaches you a lesson, Dr. Lloyd-Jones. And Dr. Jones looked at him and said, my dear friend, I don't know what happened to you last night, but if it didn't last 24 hours, it was not the work of the Spirit of the living God. And he says, if you want to come with me right now, I'd be very happy to, but I didn't miss anything. And you didn't miss anything either. Now, you know what he's trying to say. It lasts. It works. You obeyed from the heart the form of teaching. Then, the last kind of false Christianity is volitional Christianity. Now, I give you two kinds of volitional Christianity. Now, volitional Christianity means, volitional Christianity are people who have really no interest in truth. They have a basic belief system. That is, they believe in all the basics. I believe in God, the Father, Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Jesus Christ, the only Son, our Lord. You know, they believe it. But, there's not much of a, there's no intellectual interest. They don't really have much of an interest in digging into the Word of God. God, they, you know, that's, we're not talking about that. Nor is there a lot of emotion with these folks. But, they are there. They are faithful. They do their duty, and they live an ethical Ten Commandments, straight arrow life. No emotion, no understanding, but volition. Now, I've got two kinds I listed down there. First of all, what I call fear-based Christianity. Fear-based Christianity is something fairly simple. You know, if you really take a look at the case for the existence of God, for the deity of Jesus Christ, for the validity of the Scripture, those things are pretty strong. You know, when I finally, when I finally gave my life to Christ, and I began studying that, I began to say, why? Why was I so blind to it? Was I just, you know, when you're in college, and you have all the people that you admire and respect, not disproving Christianity, but just sneering at it, which is far more effective than disproving it. Because it's not very easy to disprove something. That, you know, that's such a huge block of humanity is believed for 2,000 years. I mean, whatever Christianity is, it's not something that you can just write off in a Religion 101 class. So you sneer it off. And when I was in college, it was very hard to maintain my belief system in the face of all that sneering. Well, after I became a Christian, I looked and said, gosh, look at this, there's a lot of evidence for Christianity. I mean, it's really something. And there's a lot of people who see that evidence and realize it, but aren't converted. They see the evidence, they know that there's a God, they've been raised that way, or they just understand it, and they're looking for fire insurance. That means they're afraid that unless they do something for him, that he's not going to answer their prayers, he's not going to protect their children, or he's not going to take them to heaven. And fear-based Christianity doesn't mean the person is literally scared all the time, but it really means underneath it, there is far more fear of failure religiously than there is a desire for growth, success, and to serve God. Some of you know that any of you who have ever taken child psychology realize the most debilitating thing that can drive a child is that... desire for success. Somebody once did a little study and noticed that kids, when you took kids out and asked them to shoot baskets, there were some kids that only ever shot baskets from so far away that if they missed, nobody could say, boy, that was dumb. They shot so far away because they were afraid to come in too close. They were so afraid of failure that they didn't care about success as long as they weren't failing. You see, they go out so far that by not even really giving it a try, nobody could say, you failed. The same thing happens religiously. The fear of failure is what drives a lot of people. I don't want to be cut off from God. I don't want to be thrown into hell. I don't want to have my prayers not answered. I don't want to have a bad conscience. I don't want all these bad consequences of not believing in God. But as far as there being a positive hunger to serve Him, a positive desire to love Him and know Him, it's not there. That's fear-based Christianity. And then there's another kind of volitional Christianity, and it's the worst of all. These are the people that stick around to the end. These are the people who will be there the last day. And that's pharisaical Christianity. These are people who will be there the last day.
