TITLE: Co-Dependency – The Biblical Guidelines
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Self Esteem Seminar
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/co-dependency-the-biblical-guidelines/

============================================================

Somebody handed me some quotes from Tao De Ching, who was a, you know, a great Chinese philosopher, 4,000 years ago, and he said, care about people's approval and you will be their prisoner. And poor guy was struggling with codependency 4,000 years ago. So, poor fella. He didn't want his mother to see that, so he wrote it down. Let me explain what we're doing. You may or may not have been here last week, and I'm going to, I think most of what we do tonight is enough of a self-contained unit that, whereas I hope tonight will be probably more helpful and more coherent to you if you were here last week. Nevertheless, it's a self-contained unit that ought to be able to stand on its own. We're talking about self-image and self-esteem, and this evening we want to tackle a, a term that's new, though the subject isn't new, codependency. And actually, if this, if you had to give us a topic or a title, it would be a Christian perspective on a codependency movement and how a biblical understanding of self-image is brought to bear on this. And I'm going to do exactly what I did last time. I'm going to, I'm going to give a talk. My wife's going to get up and say something more concise and memorable. And then on the same subject. And then we're going to take questions and answers. So, let me open with prayer, please. Let me do that. Our Father, we, we're not praying just as a perfunctory ritual thing. We're praying because we're talking about truth. If we take seriously what you have told us in your word, and that is that our hearts actually are allergic to the truth, that all of us are born, in a sense, in denial. Therefore, we have to have your spirit to illumine us, not just to understand the truth in general, but also the truth about ourselves and the truth about you. So much truth is difficult to hear. So much truth is traumatic. We pray that you will enable us by your loving draw, the way in which your spirit lovingly draws us to the truth, that our eyes will be open and our minds cleared and our hearts invigorated because of our time that we spend together tonight. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen. Yeah. Now, in general, what I would like to say is that I think codependency is, it's a real pattern. I'm going to describe it. It's a real syndrome. And many of the books that I've been reading, I've been, I've just, in preparation for tonight, I thought it'd be good for me in general to read about 20 books on codependency. And Mike, I'll give you my quick conclusions, then I'll go into detail. One is, these folks whose books I'm reading are really not sure what they're talking about. And it gave me a whole lot of, it gave me a lot of confidence because I began to realize that almost nobody's really an expert on this. So rather than to say, here, all these people with all their degrees, they're experts, as I'm not. I'm realizing that almost everybody's shooting in the dark. And I, it just helped my own self-confidence so wonderfully to read the books. And I'm serious, completely serious about that. Secondly, I think codependency, as they describe it, basically is fairly helpful because it's a true syndrome, a true, a true pattern. What I have a problem with is that the causes and the, the solutions, the causes of the pattern and the solutions of the pattern, I think are ordinarily presented in a simplistic reductionistic fashion. And one thing that's going to run through everything I say is that any theory of personality that's not based in the scripture tends to be simplistic. It tends to reduce people or reduce personalities to a couple of themes. The reality is always far more complex. Christianity is actually not. My own understanding is Christianity is the only system of thinking that doesn't give pat answers and it doesn't oversimplify things. Now, I know to a lot of you that may surprise you. You may say, well, Christians are the ones with the pat answers. Not a bit. I mean, to say if you know Jesus Christ as your savior, all your problems will be solved eventually is not a pat answer. Frankly, beneath that is a, is a, a whole very complex, rich tapestry of truths. I think that when I read the codependency books on why people are codependent and how to deal with the codependency, I think they're unbelievably simplistic. And, and I think the Christian faith, the scripture, the Christian gospel gives a much more nuanced and subtle and rich and tapestry of answers to those questions. So. So. thing. Some of you have maybe read 40 codependency books and some of you are just, just have vaguely picked it up from your friends, some of whom probably are really steeped and saturated in all the lingo. Originally, for about 20 years, the term codependency, I think, was something that wasn't very well known outside of circles of therapists. And I want you to know, my thinking is, the original definitions and the original understanding of codependency was the best. And in a sense, what's happened to it in the last five to ten years is not as helpful. See, originally, the codependency became a concept because as early as the 1940s, the people who were involved with Alcoholics Anonymous began to notice that when some, when some of the alcoholics recovered, instead of their families getting strengthened by it, their families, many of them fell apart when they recovered. Partly out of that developed something called family systems theory, which is actually a pretty helpful thing. And, and it, and it also fits in a great deal with what the Bible says about the family, that the family is not a loose aggregation of individuals, but the family is a system. Have you ever seen a mobile? A mobile is a bunch of little birds or little somethings, you know, that are all suspended from a, a, a, an interlocking system of little balances. And so there's a bunch of little axles, you know, here's one little axle, and on the end of both of them is hanging a little bird. But then that axle is hanging by a thread on another axle, and at the end is another axle, and you've seen those mobiles. And if you pull one of the birds off, so there's an equilibrium in a mobile. If you pull one of the birds off, everything, you know, is appended, and the whole thing collapses. And what, what the therapist began to realize is that when a messed up person in a family gets better, it can really screw the family up because the family had developed a kind of equilibrium in which the messed up person was something that was taken into consideration. Everybody played a certain role. And the identified patient, the person who was the mess, had a very important role to play in the life of everyone else. And that when he or she became better, it, it fouled up the whole mobile, fouled up the whole system. And what eventually happened was therapists began to talk about people who were not alcoholics. They called them originally co-alcoholics or para-alcoholics. And a co- or a para-alcoholic was someone who was not hooked on the bottle, but was hooked on that person's hookedness on the bottle. In other words, this, let's just say, here's a wife and here's an alcoholic husband. The alcoholic husband has become dependent on alcohol, but the wife has become dependent on her husband being a mess. And therefore, the original definition went something like this. A co-dependent is someone dependent on dependence or someone who has found meaning in life through fixing, controlling, rescuing a messed up person. So a co-dependent is, the reason you have this word co is it's a person who, in a sense, feeds off of someone else's dependence. They need to be needed. They get their meaning in life out of fixing up other messed up people. So when a person that you've built your life on helping is okay, you lose meaning in life. And your life collapses. Now, characteristics that go along with that, that kind of person go like this. Now, this is all, I think, quite helpful. This is a description of something that's real. The characteristics of such people go something like this. People like this, co-dependent people, feel very or totally responsible for the actions and destinies of others. So if this person that you are co-dependent with is falling down, you feel responsible. Codependent people feel safe when saying yes, when over-committing, giving out, but they feel very uncomfortable when saying no, when they're letting other people help them, expressing their own needs. They don't like to do that. They only feel happy. They only feel safe somehow when they're constantly tired, overextended, weary, helping everybody else. Then they feel at some level good about themselves. On the other hand, they're always on the verge of anxiety and depression and unhappiness. Codependent people blame themselves for everything, feel lots of guilt, take everything personally, suffer silently in self-pity, are very down on themselves. And as a result of that kind of pain in their lives, very often codependent people also have compulsive behaviors. They may not be alcohol, but it can be any kind of compulsive behavior that helps them sort of mask or escape the unhappiness they experience in their lives. Now, eventually what became clear was it wasn't just the wives or the spouses of alcoholics, but the children. symptoms. And people began to realize that families of workaholics and compulsive gamblers and a myriad of other compulsive behaviors and the family members around this compulsive behavior shared that too. And then, especially in the 1980s, the concept of codependence suddenly got popularized. And maybe when you start asking me questions, I could talk to you a little bit more about this. One of the great difficulties with the last five to ten years, and I don't know if anybody saw, for example, recently a couple of articles about it in Time magazine. For example, Time magazine had a big article on Melody Beattie, who wrote the book Codependent No More, which has sold four million copies. And one of the things that many people worry about now is that the term codependency has become so broadly used that it means anybody who's messed up at all. I mean, I have read, here's a couple. For example, here's one definition I got. Codependency is any pattern of destructive feelings and behavior that makes healthy, loving relationships impossible. And today, in preparing for tonight, I called a friend of mine who's on the verge of getting a Ph.D. in the history of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, which is the best department, they say, around on that subject. And he said one of the problems today is the word codependency. Codependent has become absolutely synonymous with the word neurotic. It's the same word, you know, 50 years ago, even 20 years ago, the word neurotic meant maladjusted, a person who isn't sure of who he or she is, unable to really have good relationships. And he says the word codependence mean that and it has become meaningless. Therefore, be careful, frankly, about what you read. However, I personally think the original definition of codependence is really pretty helpful. Now, here's where I begin to have some problems. And the problems are when I read what people say the causes of it are and then the solutions. Now, when I read all the different books, I found that an awful, everybody comes from a different point of view. The reason, the reason it's been such an extreme explosion in books is because there's a market for it. And that means no matter who you are and no matter what particular theory you have of how to help people, you try to tie it into codependency somehow because that'll sell the book. And some of the books I read were coming from such different positions. It astonished me. An awful lot of the books come out of psychodynamic psychology. And psychodynamic psychology for years has been teaching essentially this, that basically we have a sweet, we start out as sweet, innocent, loving little children. And if we get a lack of love from our parents or if we have parents who are too demanding, if we don't get unconditional love, then that child is traumatized. And we spend the rest of our lives, in a sense, being controlled by our inner child of the past. And if there's that kind of, if there's a sense because of poor parenting, of not feeling lovable, or if, now see, this can happen from a lot of points of view. Psychodynamic psychology would say if you have an alcoholic parent, alcoholic parents, of course, are extremely capricious. So one day you walk across the carpet and your feet are muddy and your mother says to you, wipe your feet off next time. The next day you walk across the carpet with muddy feet and she takes your head off. And in that sort of situation, you never know, there's no consistency. But there's tons of reasons why a child, according to psychodynamic psychologists, would be unhappy and would feel that they're not getting the kind of love that they want. Now, if they experience pain or shame because of their past, you grow up into what the psychodynamic psychologist would say. Anyway, you're always controlled by that original family. That means if you've had a dysfunctional family life in which your love needs weren't met, there's a couple of things that you could do. You could grow up to be the eternal child. That means that you are always messed up and you're always broken and you're always looking for people to fix you. You're after a parent. You're after the parent you never had. And so you try to find somebody who's always picking you up and protecting you and taking care of you and bailing you out. And you desperately want that, you know, in a sense there's a side of you that says, I'm no good, you don't really love me, and you do everything you can to kind of prove to yourself that this person doesn't love you and yet constantly try to make that person prove their love to you. And you may get married to a person like that who ends up really being the parent that you never thought you had. Or the psychodynamic psychologists, on the other hand, say, instead of growing up to be the perpetual child, you grew up to be the perpetual parent. up one but you're the you're the one who's always in charge you're the one who fixes everything and you need people who are who are children for you to to put together and continually bail out so that in a sense you're being the parent that you never had now what happens is when you get the eternal parents together with the eternal children you know they just are so happy to find one another and they get together and then they just suck each other dry forever and uh now by the way i'm not making fun of this at all i'm trying to tell you that like any system any theology any system of counseling based on a personality theory that's not actually from the bible it's too simple it's it's just it's it's one-dimensional it tends to try to understand all behavior like that and the fact is that a lot of behavior can be understood by that like that but not all of it and then what happens is because of of this psychodynamic psychologists have certainly latched on to codependency theory there's a whole lot of other people new age people there's marxist coming in basically and saying the reason people experience pain in their past is because they've been oppressed but here's what every single one of them seem to be saying that there's pain from your past and what you do is you you get involved in compulsive behaviors in order to try to medicate or deal with that pain and all of the codependency folks say here is how you solve codependency you work backwards first you stop the behavior you dry out you get into it you go into a hospital or you you get into a support group or whatever it takes to stop the compulsive behavior now that the compulsive behavior is stopped now you're going to have to start to deal with the pain of your past the fact that you don't like yourself the fact that you're down on yourself the fact that you have to in all sorts of other ways try to find love elsewhere if you're the eternal child you have to admit the fact that you really are so low in your self-esteem that you're constantly trying to make people prove their love to you if the eternal parent you have to feel good about yourself by saying look how wonderful i am i take care of people i fix people and you stop the compulsive behavior and then the pain from your past shows up and now you have to address it and deal with it how do you do it almost all the codependency books talk like this like this particular one i think it's page 54 they say now this is the bottom line once you stop every i mean everybody agrees that if you're an alcoholic get him into some place where he stops it if you're a compulsive gambler if you're a workaholic if you're if you're into compulsive anything stop it and now the past is surfacing and then what do you do and like here's an example this is a a therapist a respected therapist in codependency theory and this she says many of us were not taught that we are valuable simply because we exist that's all that's why we are precious we are alive we exist therefore we are of worth many of us believe that our only value in being valuable is is being valuable to someone else i am my father's daughter i am my husband's wife i am my child's parent i am my employer's employee and so on but the fact that we are of worth in and of ourselves hardly ever occurs to s low self-worth person uh the hooks come from others expectations of us hooks need to be removed from us to be for us to be free we need to be detached from our two-way unhealthy dependencies on our families of origin on our work and even on our spouse and our children someone says well that sounds pretty self-centered but actually it's getting a centered self a centered self is a person willing to take such good care of him or herself that no one else has to they set their children free they set their spouse free they set their co-workers free uh they set themselves free free to make choices to go stay connect commit support and love now you see what she's saying is and what most of the books say you stop taking care of other people you say look i can't make you happy and you can't make me happy i got to start taking care of myself i've got to look out for myself i've got to nurture myself i've got to parent myself you know all the books they all have different ways of putting it i have got to start looking at what's good about me and i start patting myself on the back i've got to stop thinking that other people have that i can help other people i can't they're them and i'm me now this is where i begin to have some problems for a couple of reasons number one number one is this is the basic cause comes from the idea that our problems come because of the way in which we've been treated uh i say that on the one hand of course we are definitely affected the subway the other day, and I saw a woman sitting, and she had about a three- or four-year-old child in a stroller. They were all pretty ragged, and she was putting on her makeup, and she was just yelling at the kid. And she was saying, you're a pain in the ass, and you're the biggest pain in the ass in the world, and your father's just as big a pain in the ass as you are. And there was a little kid sitting there saying, Mommy, why are you saying that to me? And she says, because it's true. So I sat there and said, okay, here we go. Dysfunctional family right before my very eyes. There it is. There it is. The kid obviously is going to be affected by that. There is no doubt. Here's the problem. If we believe, if we believe, though, that we are simply the product of what people have done to us, I think that we're reducing ourselves to tabula rosses. You know, the psychodynamic theory says that we're all sort of blank slates, and our parents write on us, and we are really whatever our parents have done. Here's the problem with that. There's really four different kinds of scenarios you have. You've got messed up families, and out of it comes messed up kids. And then you have wonderful families, and out of it comes wonderful kids. And codependency theory can explain that. But what about the fact that you also have wonderful kids coming out of messed up families, and messed up kids coming out of wonderful families? How do you account for that? The codependency theory can't account for that. The Bible can, because the Bible says that we both are sinned against, and yet at the same time we are also sinners. There's a place in Solzhenitsyn's book, Gulag Archipelago, or is it Archipelago? I never say it right. And he's trying to, there's a place where, after talking about all the torture that the people who are in the archipelago go through, and he says sometimes you sit around and you fantasize what you could do if you could get to the guards and the soldiers and the oppressors. And at one place he says, when you sit there fantasizing what I would do to the people who oppress me, when I think about throwing them into a pit, he says I have to stop and I have to realize as a Christian that it is only, in a sense, the way things turned out that I'm the victim and they're the oppressor. In a sense, I mean, he's a Christian, so he didn't say it's an accident. But he says, in a sense, it's just the way things turned out that they're in a position of power and I'm in a position of victimization. And then he gives this little phrase that is often quoted. He says, the line dividing good from evil runs through every human heart. In other words, the line dividing good and evil cannot just be drawn around the world and say, now here's the evil people who are nasty and here's the good, wonderful people who are victims. He says, the fact is that every one of us is both a victim and an oppressor. However, we're both sinned against and we're also sinners. And therefore, what makes us what we are is far more complicated than simply how we've been treated. Now, let me go a little further. I'd like to give you a, in October of 1989, and I know that not that many of you were there then, in two evening services, I talked about a kind of, I gave you what I think is a very biblical understanding of why we are in bondage to the things that we're in. And let me just give you a little outline of it right now. Some of you might remember it, but I don't know how many of you were here at that time. In the book of Romans, Romans chapter 1, we read this. Let me give you the theory. And I think the good thing about this theory is it can account for scenarios A, B, C, and D. Not just nasty kids coming out of nasty homes and wonderful kids coming out of wonderful homes, but also wonderful kids coming out of nasty homes and nasty kids coming out of wonderful homes. In Romans chapter 1, we read this. It says, The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all godlessness and wickedness of men who suppress the truth by their wickedness. Since what may be known about God is plain to them. For although they knew God, they neither glorified him as God nor gave thanks to him, but their thinking became futile and their foolish hearts were darkened. Though they claimed to be wise, they became fools and exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like mortal man and birds and animals and reptiles. Therefore, God gave them over in sinful desires of their hearts. They exchanged the truth of God for a lie. They worshiped and served created things rather than the creator who is forever praised. Amen. Now, there's actually an outline in there. Now, I have to find it to make sure I give it to you right. However, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. we have a need for love, and if that need for love is thwarted, it's going to screw us up. But the Bible says there's a deeper need than that, deeper need than what the psychodynamic psychologist can tell you. There's something more profound. In a sense, I mentioned this yesterday in church, and some of you will remember this, or you'll make the connection. The Bible says that the most foundational need, the thing that makes us humans, is that we all need to worship something. We are homo religioso, man the religious. That's the most basic thing we have got, or as Bob Dylan put it, you got to serve somebody. In other words, nobody really, no one really stands on his own or her own. Everybody has got to serve someone. And the Bible says we are all created, therefore, to worship. Now, to worship in the Bible does not mean simply coming to a service and praying and making and singing about things. That's not what worship is. To worship means to give something glory, and the word glory in the Bible means weight. So, to worship something or give something glory means to give it the greatest weight in your life or the center of your life. And the Bible says that when you worship something, you make a covenant with it. Now, listen. Go into the scripture, and you will see continually covenants being made. A covenant is a legal binding contract in which you give yourself, you contract yourself to someone else who you think is going to meet your need. So, I mean, in the most basic sense, for example, what if you have a, here's a, this happened all the time in the Bible. Here's a small kingdom, and here's a great big kingdom. And they're afraid the big kingdom is going to sort of squeeze them out. So, the small kingdom comes and makes a covenant with a big kingdom. In the Bible, actually, in the Near East, it was called a suzerainty treaty. That was a lesser suzerain, or, which is a word for ruler, would go to a greater suzerain and make a treaty like this. You'd come and you'd say, I promise to obey you and to serve you. And if you do that, if I do that, you must bless me. So, I will pay you taxes, and I will give you tribute, and I will serve you in all these ways, and then you will bless me. You will not attack me. You will defend me from, from other marauders. So, if I'm in a covenant with you, and someone else comes up, if I'm in a covenant with Syria, and Egypt comes up, then Assyria will come and defend me. So, you will protect me, and you will provide, provide other sorts of blessings for me. However, if I do not obey you, you have a right to come down and destroy me. So, every covenant always had three things, a promise to serve, the blessings that would come if you served properly, and the curses that would come if you didn't serve. Every single covenant had those three aspects to it. Now, the Bible says that what is sin? Sin is the unwillingness for us to give up control of our lives to our great suzerain in the sky, the Lord. And the Bible says it is the nature of the human heart. This is what sin is. Sin is not just, you know, lying, and cheating, and swearing, and, and, and killing. It is bad as all those things are. The essence of sin is that we want to make our covenants. We want to worship other things that we think will give us the blessings, will give us the protection. We worship and center on other things, and we believe that those things that we are worshiping will give us the blessings. It'll give us the fullness, and we don't feel like we're giving up real control of our lives. We'll give our, we will do, we'd serve anybody but God. As Bob Dylan says, you've got to serve somebody. You've got to find someone or something that will give you meaning in life. You see, what is a codependent person? A codependent is someone who has made a covenant with an idol. It's a rescue covenant. And what you're saying is, as long as I can rescue people, and help people, and make people better, then I will have meaning in life. In a sense, there's an idol that you have given yourself to. And the blessings are supposed to be that the idol will say, well done, good and faithful servant. Look at all these people that you've helped. Feel good about yourself. However, Romans 1 says, you see, that's what it says right here when it says, although they claimed to be wise, they became fools and exchanged the glory of the immortal God to images. They worshipped, it's pardon me, they exchanged the truth of God for a lie and worshipped and served created things rather than the creator who is forever praised. But it also says, they exchanged it for a lie and therefore God gave them over to the sinful desires of their hearts. Idol worship always creates some kind of bondage. Because you see, covenant with the idol and the covenant the idol therefore drives you and therefore if you have made a covenant in a sense with um with your parents if you have made a covenant in your heart and say my parents wanted me to be a doctor by the way I'm not picking on anybody here for all I know that's what's happened to you but so you have you have picked up a parent doctor idolatry you've made a covenant in your heart years ago and in your heart you say if I become a doctor and live up to my parents expectations then I'll have meaning in life then I can look myself in the mirror then I can feel good about myself but you see what happens is you're being driven you're given up you're out of control that's your master and as long as you're moving along toward your goal you get blessings but whenever it looks like you may not be doing what you ought to do you start to hear curses in your heart a lot of you have got that little voices that go on and say what a failure you are how bad you are how terrible you are those are the curses of the idol they come from the idol because when you make a covenant with a suzerain and you say I promise to serve you and obey you then the suzerain has the right to bless you or curse you depending on how well you're doing the scripture says that all idols are false which means ultimately ultimately you are living some kind of lie because none of them can actually deliver what they promise they weren't built to be gods for example I was talking with Kathy about this before we were you know working this all through before we came and Kathy says okay what's wrong with rescuing people isn't that a good thing yes but when it becomes the difference between a codependent person and a normal person in this one area a codependent person has made a covenant with that it's become an idol in other words if I'm normal now for example in this area I think Kathy asked me to confess this in in this area I'm certainly a lot more like a codependent person than she is it's not surprising that an awful lot of people go into the pastorate or go into counseling go into helping professions sorry about I sorry to blow your cover because when you read down this little list of things that you know can't say no need to be available to everybody want to solve everybody's problems feel terribly guilty about everybody else's lives falling apart and that's one of the reasons why we go into the ministry you know and you see Kathy doesn't have that problem therefore if she's trying to rescue somebody and the person isn't being rescued she can sleep at night and if I'm trying to rescue somebody and I can't rescue them I can't sleep at night why because the curses of the idol I feel bad about myself I want to kick myself I say if only I'd called before here's another thing what if somebody calls Kathy and says I tried to get a hold of you and I couldn't and if and therefore I I I slashed my wrists I'm in the hospital now and if you'd only been available I'd be all right and Kathy in her own heart would say I can't be available for everybody I feel terrible I'm going to come over and see you but she's not going to feel guilty about it I will I feel terribly guilty about it why it's it's it's it's a it's an idol that I've got a covenant with and therefore it's the curses in my life let me uh there and idols always drive you there's always addiction you're giving up to it Becky Pippert's got a great quote where he says she says nobody belongs nobody belongs to him or herself if you seek power then power is your lord if you seek approval then approval is your lord whatever you seek is what drives you you don't belong to yourself and the only the only one that if you worship will not destroy you is the one who's created to be worshiped and that I mean the one who must be worshiped that is the only non-created person that's God he's the only one that can actually deliver he's the only one in a sense when you put God on the throne the throne of your heart was built for God but if you put anything else in the throne they're going to be bad kings they're going to be bad rulers they're going to demand things that you can't possibly provide because they can't deliver the blessings because they're not the one that you're supposed to be serving you're not built for that say for example um I've just got a couple of people that I I pulled out of here uh there's a lady who's bulimic and which when she went into counseling uh she used to say this that every single day she would wake up and the first thing she would do is feel her stomach and if she felt her stomach was nice and flat then she could sort of feel like I'm in control and I have uh uh I can get through the day fine but if she would wake up and she would uh feel that uh her she was bloated she would immediately begin to feel terrible about herself she'd look in the mirror and she'd see oh look how awful I am of course she's just like a size six but oh she's too she's too fat and so what she will do is binge and purge and so what she walked over shelaji Thank you. up, her father put a tremendously high premium on physical beauty. And there was no boys in the family, only daughters, only girls. And he was the only one that was allowed to eat sweets. Everybody else had to watch their diet. And he put a tremendous amount of emphasis on that. And as a result, here's what happened. A, depends on how you look at it. For example, she had an idol. She had a slimness idol. The slimness idol says, if you're slim and if you're beautiful, then I will bless you. I will make you feel good about yourself. But if you're not slim, you know, cursed be you. And remember, idols are false, which means they will always distort reality. They have to. And people who make that kind of covenant look in the mirror, and even though to anybody else, to any objective person, they look perfectly slim. Anorexic and bulimic women, they look in the mirror and they see themselves being very fat. Because, you see, the idol can never, ever, ever be satisfied. So, not only that, she also had a father idol. The father idolatry, if her great father, you know, thought she was wonderful, then she would feel blessed. But if her father disliked it, she was cursed. And what's interesting is because of that idolatry with her father, who was a male figure, she spent seemingly all of her life marrying men who were just like her father, who had just as much of a fetish, almost, about the wife looking perfectly beautiful, always having the makeup on, always looking incredibly trim. And she tended to go find other men who could do the very same thing that her father had done, because she had a father idolatry, which is the basis for her slimness idolatry, and so on. So, the point is, we're in a covenant with idols. Where do they come from? You know, the Bible says they come partly because the heart manufactures them. They come partly because your family, in some case, can give you the, an example for the idol. Your peer group can give you the idol. If you try to, the Bible is much more complicated than any behavioristic understanding, or psychodynamic understanding, or psychoanalytical understanding, or cognitive, rational, emotive therapy understanding. All of them tend to say, they reduce your problems to this, this, or this, or this. Actually, what's actually happened is that you have entered in to a covenant with something because you've got to worship something, and the thing that you're worshiping can't satisfy you, and that's why you're driven. Now, in conclusion, unfortunately, somebody says, well, what do you do about it? Now, here's where I have to kind of quickly talk about what I mentioned last week and drive it in. The gospel says that everybody is under the law. This is what I was trying to say yesterday, those of you who are in church here yesterday. Everybody's under the law. Deep down inside, we know we owe God our whole selves. That's an itch that we try to scratch through performance. So, we make a covenant with our Father, and we try to scratch the itch, knowing that we owe God our whole selves by trying to serve our Father's expectations, or serve the slimness idol, or serve the rescue idol, or millions of other kinds of idols. The real problem I've found in trying to counsel people the way I'm talking is that as soon as you begin to say, the real problem is you need to repent of your idolatry. The person says, oh gosh, I thought I was terrible. Now, I'm even worse than I thought. And I say, what do you mean you're worse and you thought, well, I'm a failure at this, and I'm a failure at that, and I'm a failure at that. And I say, that's the idol talking. I'm talking about the one sin that you never seem to deal with. And that's the sin. That's the sin of trying to be your own savior. That's the sin of doing an end run around God and trying to find your, you know, the one sin is you're trying to go about, as we said last week, establishing your own righteousness. Now, let me see, let me close with, and I shouldn't close. I'm going to assume most of you were here last week, and I'm not going to keep on going. I'm going to, if you need more information, you can ask me, or maybe Kathy can fill it in at this point. But let me close with an example. There's a lady I remember very, very well, actually a whole bunch of ladies that I remember when I was in the South that I met, and after they became Christians, I came to understand why a lot of the feminists were so upset. Because I met a lot of women in the South who had been just, it had just been driven into them, that they're not worth anything if they don't have some, if they're not on some big guy's arm. That they've got to have a man who thinks they're attractive. They've got to have a man who loves them. Otherwise, they're nothing. That's what I'm going to do it. You're going to see. And a lot of the... not on some big guy's arm. That they've got to have a man who thinks they're attractive. They've got to have a man who loves them. Otherwise, they're nothing. And a lot of these women, you know, if you sat down and said, well, what else do you want to do with your life? I mean, what do you want to be? What contribution do you want to make with society? And so on, they would say, but, you know, all they would do is they go from boyfriend to boyfriend or from husband to husband because what had, what happened was someone had taught them this and so they made a covenant, you might say, with a, it was a, it was a, it was a sex idolatry, but it was more than that. They needed to have some man think they were attractive. They needed to be the hood ornament of somebody. And therefore, when they would become a Christian, when they became Christians, of course they stopped sleeping around and of course they stopped a lot of that stuff. And yet the idolatry was still there. And I remember it was particularly with one woman, a man, that, that really thought she was great. And she was by herself and she had one, one child and she was by herself. And there was this guy really thought he was, she was great and didn't want to marry her or make any kind of commitment to her, but wanted her to move in with him and cook and clean and do all those things for him. And he, she'd been doing this all of her life. And I remember sitting down and she came to me at one point and she said, I think I'm ready to go. I know it's wrong. I know I'm not supposed to commit adultery and all that kind of stuff. See, she was thinking only in a way at the superficial level. She was saying, I repented so many times of my sexual immorality, but I just, I, I think I'm going to go anyway. I just, I'm so lonely. I'm so unhappy. He makes me feel so good when I'm around him. And I was just getting into this idolatry stuff. And I said, here's what's happening is your old idol. When, when he, when he's saying great things to you about how pretty you are, the idol is blessing you. The idol is saying to you, ah, yes, blessed art thou, my servant, because you are attractive. You know, you're serving me now. And I said, let's take a look at Colossians three. And Colossians three says, set your mind on things which are above Christ. Your life is hid with God in Christ. And when Christ appears, you will appear with him. And I said, look, you have to do this. You have to look at him and you have to say, you are not my righteousness. You are not my glory. You are not the thing that is going to be able to bless me. You are not my life. Christ is my life. My life is hid with God in Christ. Pleasing him, knowing him and serving him is the only way that I am going to find real happiness. In fact, at one point, I remember she wrote some things down and she said this. She says, I don't have to have a man love me to be real. Now, what she was doing was she was contradicting the idol. The idol was cursing her and saying, you're not even real. See, you don't have any identity. You don't have any reality to you unless you serve me. And she started to say, wait a minute, now that I'm a Christian, I know this. I'm accepted in Christ. Christ has already lived for me and he's died for me. I am clothed in his righteousness. I don't have to be spending all of my life hoping that I'm going to be good enough for him. He's accepted me. And therefore, I don't need, she said, I don't have to have this man love me to be real. The only person whose acceptance I must have, I've got. The most powerful and the most pure and the most wonderful person in the whole universe. I don't need to have my life controlled by this. I am not a slave to this. I am free. Do you think that's easy? Do you think that was easy for her to say? She did it that time and she continued to do it, but that's a struggle that may go on for a long time. You have to recognize what those idols are and say, hey, when I flagellate myself and lacerate myself over being bad and being awful and so on, I need to repent of that. I need to repent of flagellation. That's just one more way in which I'm serving my idol and trying to rest in my performance and trying to earn my own salvation and trying to be my own savior. See, there's one sin that if you repent of will get you out of all that, looking down at yourself and flagellating yourself and beating yourself. That one sin is to say, I'm serving an idol here. Identify the idols of your heart. Find your identity in Christ. Now, codependency, and if you are, and I know a little bit about it because I probably am, according to all the definitions. And not only that, my wife's, my wife's diagnosis. I'll tell you what you do. It's true that, look, at the one level, if you are addicted to something, you do have to stop it. You get, you get accountability structures around you until you stop it. And then the relationship level, you do have to set up boundaries and you do have to be careful about getting sucked into rescuing everybody and helping everybody. But at the most profound level, that's not going to work if at the most profound level, you don't recognize that ultimately what has made you what you are is not that you're a victim of people out there. It's just, it's just another way of blame shifting to say, my parents did it to me. Or my, or some people, my brain came was like, I want to take whatever when the first time was weak. There's nothing of them were really am做ed out as armed. The second time we agreed on when the third time was Ultimately, what has made you what you are is not that you're a victim of people out there. It's just another way of blame shifting to say my parents did it to me or some people, my brain chemistry did it to me. What I have to say is I've entered into a covenant with idols. I have got to break that. I've got to worship the only one that can fulfill me. Now, I'm going to have to see if my wife feels like there's anything that she needs to balance me off on and she can talk and then we'll have a good half hour for questions. Are you ready to say something? You've got a couple of things, don't you? There's a couple of things you wrote down. I wrote them down because when a question comes up, what I'm telling him is why don't we just let you ask questions because anything that needs to be balanced out will come out in a question better than me guessing it in your mind. You sure? Yeah. Honest. Okay. Okay, why don't you, that's right. I'm going to, I'll tell you what, why don't you start to ask some questions at this point about anything that we've said and you can go on, you can talk about last week because I know there's plenty of stuff from last week too. John, yes. I'm not sure that I don't disagree with the concept that being proven is necessarily a bad thing. I don't think that very many of the cravings that have happened to have been done by somebody who has been able to wait for a certain business. I said, well, I'm going to take a couple of months off now and we've knocked out too. Yes. Okay. Thank you.
