TITLE: Co-Dependency – The Biblical Guidelines
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Self Esteem Seminar
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/co-dependency-the-biblical-guidelines-2/

============================================================

You didn't really ask a question, John. You were just taking issue with saying that anything that drives you is necessarily bad, that an awful lot of the best of human achievement has come from driven people who had a passion that excluded anything else. That can be true. I mean, you may want to say that. We often work together. I'll shoot off my mouth while he thinks of something intelligent to say, so I'll talk first. And the vice can be versa, too. That can be true with many cases, John, but it's probably just as true that sin has driven an awful lot of the people, even though they've made great accomplishments, and the world is a better place in God's providence, that the motivation behind that was not, I have great gifts and I want to bless the world with those gifts. It's been, I don't think Alexander the Great conquered the world because he was saying, this will be so beneficial for history in the long run. It was, you know, this is going to be a great thing for me. I'm going to be king of the world. So, I mean, you do have to be, it's almost case by case, and I think we're mainly to look within ourselves rather than to point it out in other people, unless it's your spouse. Well, even George Whitefield, my husband's great, you know, mentor, if you can call someone who's been dead 200 years your mentor. The person he likes a lot, okay? George Whitefield is a great guy, and I recommend him to you all. Read his sermons, read his life. But he burned out for God. He thought it was a great thing to burn out for God, and he died when he was, what, 38, 42, something young, which I think is stupid. I mean, why not live to your 70 and preach a whole lot more than what he did? But, I mean, you're right, no one's immune to it. See, what I like about what John said, and what I agree with is that one of the things that bothered me a lot about the codependency books was the emphasis on pampering yourself and don't let anything, when they said don't let anything drive you, what I felt like, if Becky Pippert's right, that you are always driven by something, if the Bible's right, that you're always in covenant with something, so you are always driven by something. Therefore, I have a feeling what a lot of the books are saying is get driven by leisure, get driven by comfort, get driven by things like that. And I do agree that the most, many of the people that have accomplished the most have been driven, but now what by? George Whitefield was an interesting example, and many of you don't even know who he is, so he might not be as helpful for you for me to bring up, but he was a marvelous preacher, maybe the greatest preacher in history, and he was an Anglican minister, and he lived in the 1700s, and he preached on average of twice a day for about 30 years and then died of asthma. But, you know, I've read an awful lot about him and about his journals, and he did everything he could to purify his motives. He knew that there was a covenant in his life with approval. He was like a stage personality. He got high on the acclaim early on in his life, and he tried to transfer over into a real covenant with God, saying, I wanted to serve you. When he realized this guy's powers of preaching were such that it wasn't unusual spontaneously for 20,000 or 30,000 people to gather in any field that he was preaching at. He could preach for two hours at a time. He saw tons of conversions, and at one point, John, he made the decision to just simply say, I'm not going to take care of myself. I don't feel I'd be a good steward of the gift that God gave me. And he just, he preached himself into the ground. He basically did not have a family life, and he was very upfront about it. He said, I'm not going to do that. Tell them how he proposed to his wife. Yeah, well, he proposed to one woman. He proposed to his wife, and he said, I want you to realize I've decided to burn out for God, and if you're going to marry me, you need to basically realize that's what I'm going to do. He was very upfront about it. And I don't think there was anything wrong with what he did. But I'm trying to... Can you tell we have a difference of opinion over this? I didn't tell my wife that, so I'm bound. See, there is nothing wrong, since everybody's driven by something, there's nothing wrong by being driven in a covenant with God for excellence, by being driven in a... I've seen people who, in their covenant with God, are driven by their gift mix, which they have a great deal of compassion for broken people, or they have a great deal of compassion to see the gospel. things, and as a result, they're driven. But if you're driven by God, you're going to be obedient to everything God says. For example, your body belongs to him, not you, and therefore you're not supposed to run into the ground. Your family, if you've got a family, needs things as well. And therefore, I can see that what happened to George Whitfield early on was he was a driven man anyway, and when he moved over and he really abandoned his covenant with the idols of image and of acclaim and of fame and popularity, that he stayed driven, and he, as a result, actually he lived a pretty long time, and he was very honest with his family. Anyway, he decided that he was going to really do it that way and take it on the chin, and I think that people who are driven by God are going to be driven in a more balanced way, whereas when you say Alexander the Great, I mean, I don't know about Alexander the Great, but there's an awful lot of people that are workaholics that are driven, and listen, there's people in this city, right, who have worked with some of the great geniuses, especially artistic and musical geniuses. You know they're driven, and you've seen the incredible stuff that they produce, and yet you also know they're personalized, they're absolute disaster areas, that they can't get along with anybody, they're completely consumed by this need to create, and in many cases to be recognized. So I will agree, the codependency books are wrong in saying that you should never be driven. The question, and a lot of them are going to be driven by leisure and comfort. Do you want to add anything to that? I'll just add, you know, since we're doing personal confession, and you've already confessed that I'm not codependent in that sense, they can, those codependency kind of sermonettes about don't take care of people can really feed into the idolatry on the opposite end, which is my own, which is to say, as Tim pointed out, get out of my face. You know, if you want an excuse to dispense with ministry, to shut other people out of your life, to not be bothered, I mean, you have a built-in excuse right now that says don't let people take your time, don't let people get under your skin, don't let yourself get run down, and if you're looking for that kind of excuse, and some of us are, all of us aren't running around saying, spend me, you know, I'll do anything. Some of us are running around saying, I need a good excuse to tell people to get out of my life and be selfish. You know, it can be a trap. Laura, you have your hand up? I can see you. Yeah. You want to answer that? Well, restate it. Okay. The question, I think, correct me if I got it wrong, because I'm restating it so it can be on the tape. The question is, there's plenty of people who have said, oh, I've been so codependent that I have got to start taking care of myself. How does that fit into a marriage? Because in marriage, if you marry, you're promising to put the needs of someone else ahead of your own. That's in the marriage vows. I mean, I know, by the way, people who have rewritten the marriage vows so that they don't have to do that. Because the solutions that they've gotten to their codependency are that you should not be responsible for anyone else at all. But if you get married, you're actually saying, I'm not only responsible for you, but I put their needs ahead of my own. So how does codependency recovery jive with being, square with being married? Do you want to say something first, or should I? Oh, I'll leap in. I mean, I don't think it works very well at all. And I think the city is just as much, or any large city that has a large population of over 30 singles is living proof that people get afraid to trust themselves and be vulnerable. I mean, you get hurt when you're vulnerable. You do. There's no two ways about it. And when hurting people get in relationship with each other, they hurt each other even more. And how two people can approach commitment without Christ there to heal you both? If you go looking to another person to solve your problems and be the be-all and end-all, very clearly, just to speak personally, Laura, you probably already know this, but nobody else has heard this story. I can very clearly tell you that God did not let me get into a relationship with Tim until I was able to give up that idolatry of wanting to be married. I had come out of two really bad relationships in a row and then met Tim and said, okay, I'm not going to do this again. Do this again. And, you know, did it again. Just, you know, I want to be married so bad. And it was so clear as I prayed about that that God was saying to me, you're going to smother anyone you marry. You're going to drain, you know, like a little vampire. You are not yet content with me, so how can I trust you with anybody else? And that was a scary thing. I feel like I had to go through that. So, I'm going to do this. I'm going to be doing this. I am going to do this. I'm going to put you on the back. I'm going to be doing this. You are not yet content with me, so how can I trust you with anybody else? And that was a scary thing, I feel. I had to go through that. See, Laura, I really believe that the real problem to codependency is not that you don't love yourself enough. I think the problem is you love yourself too much. I feel like codependency comes from a desire to be in control, a desire to be, in a sense, be the Holy Spirit, a desire to really control your life and your world in a way that only God can. And I think the answer to codependency actually is to really serve people for the first time. Codependent people are not rescuing the people around them. Codependent people are rescuing themselves. See, codependent people have to rescue people so they feel good about themselves. When you become a Christian, you say, I no longer have to earn my salvation. And all along, I never have really been doing anything for anybody. I've been doing it out of a need, out of a desire, a drive to meet my own needs. I've been rescuing myself. Do you see that? Therefore, now that I'm serving the Lord, I can finally serve people. And I think the codependency books that say you have to stop serving people and being responsible for people, really what they do is they take a person who already, in a sense, was selfish and they make them more selfish. I think the answer is to not become more self-centered or more centered a self, which is, you know, jargon. But rather, the answer is to become self-forgetful. The answer, as we talked about this last week, the answer is to say, I no longer have got to earn my own salvation. I still say the real problem with a codependent person, and I mean, I don't want to trivialize it by saying I am. I just know that when I read all the books and the books seem to be helpful, they look at me, you know, they point to me. So maybe I can talk this way. I know the real problem has been that over the years, I have not really ever rescued people for themselves, for them. I never loved them. I was loving myself by rescuing them. I was trying to use them. In a way, I was using them. And that's the reason why when an alcoholic gets better and you, your meaning in life falls apart because you're not there to rescue, they don't need you to rescue them anymore, you never cared about them. If you cared about them, you'd be happy that they were better. You never were really rescuing them. You were really never actually giving out too much to people. The Time Magazine article says it's kind of ironic that the so-called greatest illness in the country, codependency, is the illness of trying to help people too much. I mean, what a great sin to repent of. I mean, it's a way of patting yourself on the back. Yes, my real problem is I didn't get love and now I love people too much. The answer is, all along, you've been earning your own salvation and you've been using people to gain your own righteousness. And for the first time, when you become a Christian, you're free to truly serve people. And for the first time, to really not use your spouse but actually love and serve your spouse. So that would be my answer. I know there are other people who want to ask questions, but I have an answer I'm not sure will fit in any better unless I sort of answer part of a question Laura didn't ask. Getting married is bad enough, but having children, if you're not free of your need to be loved from your idol by the time you have kids, being a parent is just a death trap. If, you know, you have an unmet love need that Christ is not meaning because parenting is sort of like natural codependency. It comes with the birth certificate. And the first time your teenager looks you in the eye and says, I hate you. You'd better have your self-image based on something else than having your children love you because, you know, otherwise, you're, you're, I sat on a public bus today and cried for 15 minutes just wiping the tears away because I'd taken my, well, he won't buy this tape. I'd taken my 12 year old out somewhere and had gotten, you know, this horrible feedback from him, spending money on him and my day on him and got a comment like that. And golly, and I think my self-image is pretty soundly based on the gospel. Yeah, it's a, it's a fine line because obviously if you love your child, your child says, I hate you, you're going to be very unhappy and discouraged. On the other hand, if you need your child to love you, if you, if you've actually got a covenant with a parenthood idolatry, then when your child says, I hate you, you'll lose all meaning in life. And you need to at some point recognize the fact that you have never really been serving your child. You've been serving yourself through your child. And that's, it's a fine line. It's a difficult line. Don't you see why Christianity is far less simplistic, far less of a pat answer than the other things? It's far more nuanced, far more multifarious, far more subtle. It takes years, as far as I know, every time you find yourself back in an old covenant, listening to the curses of the idol, you have to say like that woman did, I don't need you or I don't need your. and then I'll move down. Jonathan? You mean if they've really had, you know, you mean if somebody's really been so badly used as a little kid that they don't even remember, for example, what happened to them, and it has to be... If you're abused, as a result of that abuse, yourself would just say, well, this person's created by their own future. Right. Restate the question. The question is, what if a person is real down, kicks themselves all the time, because as a child they got major abuse, verbal abuse, sexual abuse, or something like that, would you still say that that person has to repent of their idol? Is that what you're asking? Well, look, I really do believe that we don't choose any of our idols, and yet we're still responsible to make the changes, and we're able to make the changes. One of the things that, of course, I tend to argue with friends of mine who, for example, say, homosexuality, in spite of what the Christian faith has always taught, homosexuality can't be long, because I didn't choose to be homosexual. But I say, well, the problem is, I don't know of anybody who chose any of their problems. I don't know anybody, for example, who chose to be a worrywart, I mean anxious. I don't know anybody who chose to be... If you've got an anger problem because your father hit you, and now you grow up and you hit people, did you choose that? One day did you say, oh, I think I'll have an uncontrollable temper? Now, on the other hand, you see, the point is to say... Now, by the way, I'm not trying to make a case for homosexuality being wrong on the basis of that. I'm trying to say you can't make a case for homosexuality being right because you didn't choose it. I'm trying to say that nobody chooses any of their dominant patterns, and that would prove too much. If that's true, then you couldn't say that child abuse is wrong. In other words, if you say homosexuality is okay because I didn't choose it, you'd have to say child abuse is okay because nobody chooses that either. There's all kinds of things that we didn't choose, but now that they're in our life, what you would be... Jonathan, it's not, in a sense, you're not responsible for the idol that you were given. You're responsible now to stop worshiping it. And I really think, therefore, that's a very subtle distinction. The Bible would never say, on the one hand, that a person who's a child abuser has simply chosen that. On the other hand, I don't think anybody would say that child abuse is all right. Don't most of you agree and know that most child abusers were abused, right? Therefore, can you say, hey, you're not responsible. You can't help it. You hit your kid. That's all right. You didn't choose that. No, the point is that there's an idolatry going on there. Now that it's been served to you, you have a responsibility to recognize it, to change it. And I wouldn't say, therefore, I would say actually a person who's had, you know, nasty parents is really in the same position with virtually everybody else. Underneath your question, Jonathan, I see a concern that we treat gently people who are already very badly hurt, that you don't come saying, repent. But I think you have to understand that Tim and I, when we use the word repent, it's not this grim, you know, all right, you filth, you just better admit it kind of thing. But it's a joyous thing. The repentance is a freeing thing. I can let go of it. I can say, I don't need to be this anymore. You know, Christ has already taken all of the penalty that it's due me, and I'm so sorry I haven't let that be enough. I've tried to add to that with my behavior, with my problem. And I don't think we want to be anything less than gentle with people who are already hurt. But sometimes applying medicine stings, you know, even when you're being as gentle as you can. And if that's underneath your question, I just wanted to address that, because it sounded like it might have been. Yeah, Jonathan, the one problem is you can't say everything. You know, you can't do a whole talk on what repentance is, and you can't do a whole talk on justification by faith. To some degree, I'm assuming that. And many of you may not have heard a lot of teaching on that subject, so some of the things I'm saying might ring a little bit less clear. But when I talk about repentance, I say the self-flagellation isn't the same thing, not a bit. And the Bible says that real repentance, there's a false kind of repentance, which is another form of works righteousness, where you're just beating yourself so that maybe God will listen to you. And the Bible says that's called false sorrow. It leads to regret. It leads to despair. It leads to sorrow. Real repentance always leads to freedom. It leads to a burden being lifted. It leads to the end of any kind of sense of guilt. And frankly, repented. If somebody tells me, I repent and all it does is make me feel worse, I know a priori from what the Bible says, you don't understand repentance. What you're doing is you're using repentance as one more idol, one more way of trying to become acceptable and rest in your performance. And if you understand repentance as finally saying, look, I'm going to come into the glorious release of the gospel, but I can't get into all that. I see a number of other hands and I want to be more concise in my answers. Down here. Sure. Go ahead. From what you've heard from books or people, would you define that more for me? I hope I can. I just promise to be more concise too. The question is that in a lot of codependency, I think that's where you're talking about. That's a leftover from Freudianism. There's a lot of Freud in codependency movement. Codependency movement talks about living in the gray area. You're not really able to be perfect, but you're not supposed to beat yourself about being perfect. You know, see, Freud taught that your deepest, basically the human heart is a seething cauldron of sex and aggression. It's called the id. And then the society comes and says, you cannot live like that. If you just let all your drives go out, we couldn't have a civilization. So you mustn't let your sexual and aggression drives out. And what Freud said, basically he defined two kinds of pathologies. A person whose id is too strong, so you have no control over your aggression and sexual desire, or a person who's too repressed and a person who's denying what's really there. In other words, if your superego is too strong, your id is too strong, you're messed up. And he defined a really decent, mature person as someone living in the gray area. He defined a mature person as someone who essentially has recognized your sex and aggression, has owned it, but also realizes you're never going to be happy and has just learned to live with it. And codependency, I still think the codependency people who talk about living in the gray area is a little bit like that, saying, look, you're never going to be happy really, but you've got to stop trying to be perfect. You're never going to be perfect. You're going to stop trying to be perfect. So in other words, lower your standards and realize that you're just never going to be everything you ought to be and say, that's okay. Now, you're right. The Bible doesn't talk like that. So here's what the Bible says, though. And this is what, to me, is one of the most wonderful things. The Bible says that when you become a Christian, there's two things that happen. On the one hand, the minute you become a Christian, you actually become as accepted by God as you ever will ever again. That means the righteousness of Christ is transferred into your account. And now God treats you as if you had done everything Jesus has done. And the Bible talks about an alien righteousness being transferred to you. So God loves you and accepts you and values you and treats you, gives you all the privileges of a perfect person. That's an extremely strong statement, but it's true. That's what the Scripture says. So legally, you are now perfect, and the Bible says there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. When you sin, which you still can do, that sin can harm you, and it can displease God, and it can make you feel a certain amount of dissatisfaction and regret. But you know that that sin can never take you out of your relationship with God. There's no condemnation. A sin can never damn you. So legally, you're completely, you might say, in the what? The white? You're completely perfect. But the Bible says, actually, you haven't changed. It actually says in Romans 4, now to him who worketh not, but who believes in him who justifies the ungodly, for him his faith is counted to him as righteousness. Which means the minute that you are made perfect legally and forensically, you are still just what you were with all of your mistakes, with all of your weaknesses, with all of your problems. And so, you know, this is what's amazing about the Scripture. It says, there's an already, you're already perfect, and yet you're not yet perfect. You know that in God's eyes you are, and yet you actually now have the Holy Spirit comes into your life, and bit by bit, gradually, in stages, but only in stages, you slowly, gradually become like Christ. You're legally perfect like him, but actually you slowly get there. The fact is, my dear friend, that is what the Bible calls the gray area. The gray area is that you now can live with your failures. You do not kill yourself of your failures for two reasons. A, I can live with my failures because I realize that actually it doesn't change my relationship with God. I am complete in him. You know, well may the accuser roar of sins that I have been. you know, well may the accuser roar of sins that I have been. I can live with my failures because I realize that actually it doesn't change my relationship with God. I am complete in Him. You know, well may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all and thousands more. Jehovah knoweth none. Lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in Him and Him alone, gloriously complete. I mean, we've been singing about it for thousands of years, and anyone who has ever had a dawn on their heart, their lives are revolutionized. They never, ever, ever find themselves hanging their heads again. They say the only person that I need to have love me, loves me and completely accepts me. On the other hand, when I also fall down and fail, I also realize I can see that over a period of time I'm getting better. It doesn't happen as often. It doesn't happen with the same intensity. Bit by bit I see that I'm making progress, and I realize that God's, you know, God's covered all of it anyway with the blood of Jesus Christ. So there is a gray area, and I can live when I fail. Before I was a Christian, for a while I was religious. In other words, I was very religious before I became a Christian, and I couldn't live with my failures. Because as far as I knew, that meant that I had failed God, and I had no idea whether God would answer my prayer, and I had no idea whether I would be acceptable, and I couldn't possibly live. Now I can live in that gray area, not by lowering my standards, but in a sense by raising my standards. Now, see, that's the doctrine of justification and sanctification. Justification is a once-and-done thing. I am justified perfectly, completely, once and for all. Sanctification is a process of growing more and more like Christ. And by looking at my justification and my sanctification, I find that I'm able to live with my failures. Do you want to add anything? I'll just tell you what Martin Luther said to summarize all that in his usual pithy way. He said, sin boldly, which I don't think we need to interpret as, go out and get them, you know. But recognize you're going to be a sinner, and don't let that daunt you, because you are forgiven in Christ. His forgiveness is greater than whatever you can do by way of sin. Martin Luther also said, a Christian is simul eustus et peccator. At the very same time, simul, simultaneously, absolutely righteous, and yet a sinner. That's the gray area. I'm able to live with my sin because I realize I'm changing, and I'm also completely accepted. There is no other religion that's got anything like that. Every other religion says, here's the standards. Try your very best to get there. If you fail, I got nothing to say to you. That's what every other religion basically says. Okay, some other questions. Some other hands. Yeah, sure. Brother's saying, this also, well, if this is brand new to you, it probably is fascinating, interesting, challenging, but it doesn't completely make sense. There's no way that what I've just, if you've never heard classic Christian soteriology, classic Christian understanding of what it means to be saved, then this is probably too much to digest all at once. But on the other hand, if you have, you'll really, I think, sympathize with our brother saying, he says, it's a wonderful system. It's a tremendous way of thinking about life, but it seems like it takes a long time for it to sink in. Absolutely. That lady, that lady who had to look at, you see, the fact was she looked at her life. She'd been a Christian for a year. She felt like the old idol was saying, you've got to go off with this guy because look at your life. Look at your nothing. What she was in a sense doing was she was remembering her justification. She was preaching the gospel to herself. She was saying, I do not need you to make me real, you guy. I don't need that. I am real. I am, you know, I have, the verdict is already in and all that. So she's talking to herself about justification. And that time it worked. You know, St. Augustine had, there's this great story about St. Augustine who was a whoremonger before he became a Christian. And he had, you know, he had his five or six ladies in every port. And after he became a bishop, you know, it was a little embarrassing sometimes because he'd come to town and out, they'd come out and say, Augustine. And at one point, some of you heard this story. At one point, they, one of the, one of his lady friends, you know, started talking to him. He was very polite to her, but just wasn't what she remembered him being. And she was, she, at one point she looked at him and she said, maybe you don't realize who I, Augustine, do you realize who I am? It's, it's me. And he says, yes, but it's not me. In other words, and what he was doing at that point is he was reminding himself of who he actually was. See, for example, I'm a son of the king. I'm not a frightened slave. If I wake up tomorrow and find out that something may go wrong today, something really major, I can say, all right, am I a frightened slave? Do I have to think of God as, as this horrible taskmaster and I have to please him and I have to grovel before? his family? Has he already promised me that he loves me and that he has adopted me and I'm his heir? In which case I know that whatever comes into my life today is going to be what is best for me. Am I going to act like a son? Am I going to act like a slave? I'm reminding myself of who I am. I'm practicing my identity. It takes time to sink in, just like anything else. Everything, you know. So anyway, did anybody see King Ralph yet? I didn't, but my children did. It took time for him to figure out, hey, I really am a king. It sinks in eventually. Okay, yes, Steve. I'm just trying to. Are you? I guess the question is, practically, you go home now and the way you were not a Christian and suddenly you're doing all these good works, then suddenly you become a Christian and you're looking at those same works. Why was I doing them right? Or should I still be doing them? Good, great. I'm glad somebody had asked that question. And Steve's saying, in light of this teaching, suddenly you begin to realize motives are everything. If your motives for helping someone are a way of, if the reason you're helping people is a way of validating yourself, that's the way the codependency people would say it. The way the Bible would say it is, if you're helping people as a system of works righteousness by earning your salvation, that's bad and you never really have loved those people anyway. You've actually been serving yourself. Now suddenly a Christian says, oh my word, you start looking at your motives. You know what you're going to see? I can tell you what you're going to see. You're going to see mixed motives. And that's where you look at your justification. See, a Christian has to be thinking not only about your sanctification, am I growing in grace? Are my motives more and more pure? Am I doing this out of the freedom of the gospel or am I being driven by my old idols? The fact is you're operating out of both disc drives. You're going to be operating out of both of them. The best thing for you to do is to try to comb as much of the old motives out, talk to yourself when you're doing it. But ultimately, you know, you don't have to be too upset because you remember God covers all of that. In other words, he's going to accept that impure offering through Jesus. When you do something great for somebody, you're saying, well, am I doing this out of love for God or out of love for myself or in need? And the answer is it's going to be a mixture. As you grow older and older in the Lord, it's going to get more and more of a pure mixture. But right now, it's a mixture. But the Bible says when you offer it up to God, Steve, God brings it through Jesus. He accepts it in him. And he says, look, of course it's mixed. But because of what Jesus, because he's your head and you belong to him, I'm accepting all of that because Jesus is covered. His blood is covered. All the impurities are gone. The reason I said that, Steve, about sin bully is that when you know that you're accepted by Christ, yeah, you do have to look at your motives. But we can't afford to allow that to be a trap that leads us to introspection and more self-centeredness than what we were before. There's a sense in which we can say, oh, the heck with my motives. That's the right thing to do. I'll do it. And God help me if it's the wrong motive. Forgive me. And next time, I'll hope to have a better motive. But we can afford to sort of stop always being introspective about things. You do have to have times of reflection. You do. But not so that you're paralyzed to keep you from doing everything. Lewis, to the effect that when you're introspective, it's like planting a plant and you dig it up every couple of days to see how the roots are doing. That's right. I did that once. I had a garden then. Those plants didn't do well. So the point is, in legalistic religions, you have to do that all the time. In the Christian religion, you have to be aware of your motives. You have to watch your motives. But you do not really have to purify your motives in order to offer up offerings to God because they're coming up through Jesus. Okay. One more. Let me just say one. Okay. Out there. Yeah. Thank you. That's less of a question, more of an affirmation of what we've said. I should close this way. I didn't talk about this subject, this passage, because those of you who come to the church, this church, have probably heard it too many times. But the passage in my book on Christian self-concept would be 1 Corinthians 4 verses 4 and 5. Someday look at it. In a nutshell, it says, it is a small thing whether I'm judged by you or any human court. Yea, I judge not even mine own self. My conscience is clear, but that does not make me innocent. It's God who judges me. And what that says so clearly is, number one, he doesn't care what people think of him. Oh, that sounds very healthy. But then number two, he says, I don't care what I say. about what other people think of you, just worry about what you think of you. Well, see, Paul realizes that that's too much of a pat answer. He says, my conscience is clear, that does not make me innocent. He says, you know, sometimes my conscience bothers me, and later on, ten years later, I realize I shouldn't have been guilty about that. And other times, he says, my conscience is clear, and ten years later, I find out I should have felt guilty about that. He says, my own standards are just always changing. And the codependency books that tell you just live for yourself and take care of yourself and live up to your own standards, he says, that's so shallow. He says, don't worry about what other people think, but don't even worry about what you think. It is God that judges me. And what God says is, you're my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased because of what Jesus has done for you. When you unite with him by faith, then it's not your past that's a determining factor in your relationship with God, it's his past. It's not your work, it's his work. And that's the bottom line. Now, the reason I didn't go and expound that passage tonight was because some of you heard me do that before, and it would probably be all old hat. But that is the answer, and only Christians can move into that third kind of self-image. The really messed up people can say, I care what you think. And then the less messed up people say, I only care what I think. That makes you less of a nuisance to society. But ultimately, the only way you can possibly finally get out of this whole conundrum, this whole rat race, is to say, all that matters is what God says about me, pleasing him. And even though I fail day in and day out, that's the gray area, nevertheless, I realize that in him, in the Lord, I'm pleased. I'm pleasing to him. I'm a pleasing aroma to him. What's the timetable for recovery? Well, the timetable for this meeting is up, unfortunately. Till God takes you home, Vic. Timetable for the time table of recovery. By the way, the word recovery, and there's a sense in which all Christians are in recovery from the main addiction, which is their idols. And if you have a nice, easy-to-identify chemical addiction, recovery can take months or a couple of years. But the fact is, the recovery from idols just keeps on going forever. Until, but what Paul says is this. He says, I know that the good work he began in you, he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ. Didn't say maybe. Okay, let me close in prayer. Our Father, we thank you that, we thank you that, we thank you that Christianity is such an amazing gift. We thank you that you sent Christ and you sent your word to us to teach us so much. We thank you, Lord, for really the codependency movement, which has enabled us to see a particular form of a particular pattern that some of us are definitely entrapped in. It's helpful. We also are so grateful, Lord, that the one- and two-dimensional solutions that the world can offer are just too flat, too simple. And when we realize the richness of actually both our sin and what makes us what we are, and the richness of your grace and of all the resources you've given us for recovery, we stand amazed. We thank you, Father, therefore, that we can, in a sense, spoil the Egyptians, taking the insights that we've learned from the codependency movement and recognizing that your Son, Jesus Christ, is the one who is not the pat answer, but he's the answer. In him, all the promises are yea and amen. He is the yes. He is the answer for every question. Now, Father, just give us the grace to understand how we can connect his yes to our questions, to our life's problems. And we pray that you will help us to do that, and we thank you for that final assurance that you will, that the good work you began in us, you will bring to completion on the day of Jesus. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
