TITLE: Coming to Christ (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 5:1-6
TOPICS: Justification Repentance Sin
SERIES: The Beatitudes
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/coming-to-christ-2/

============================================================

Let me read our scripture, which is Matthew chapter 5, and we'll read verses 1 through 6. Matthew 5, 1 through 6. Now when he saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside and sat down. His disciples came to him, and he began to teach them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. And blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be filled. Here ends the reading of God's holy word. We've begun to look at the Sermon on the Mount. These morning sermons for a while are going to look at the Sermon on the Mount, and we begin with the Beatitudes. We began with them last week. The Beatitudes are far and away the most famous part of the Sermon on the Mount. And we showed last week that the Beatitudes are not talking about eight different kinds of people, but rather it's talking about eight characteristics of one kind of people. Jesus is describing those who have entered the kingdom. Blessed are those poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom. Jesus Christ teaches us that being born again is a way of entering into the kingdom. John chapter 3, verse 3, he says you must be born again to see the kingdom. You must be born again to enter the kingdom. To be in God's kingdom means you become a citizen with all the rights and privileges. It means you belong to God. You're born again. How can you know if you're born again? That's what the Beatitudes are about, and that's what we've begun to look at. These are qualifications for entering the kingdom of God, criteria, characteristics of those who have entered. Very clear, very helpful. Now, last week we looked at the first three, and in a way we looked at them together because they're the negative qualifications. They're the things that have more of a negative cast to them. In order to be in the kingdom of God, you must be, A, poor in spirit, B, you have to mourn, and C, you have to be meek. And we explained that a little bit, and plenty of you were not here, and those of you who were here could use the review, so let's review. Very important to understand these first three. First, you cannot enter the kingdom of God or know the blessedness of the kingdom unless, first, you're poor in spirit. And to be poor in spirit means to admit that your problems are beyond you, to admit that you cannot deal with your own needs and problems. To be poor in spirit means to be bankrupt, in a sense, and to say, I do not have the resources with which to make good my debt. Now, I just was thinking of something this week. It occurs to me that the way the average American operates is like this. When we're children, and when we're adolescents, and even into college, we are taught by society that life is manageable. We're taught by it. We're taught life is manageable, and it's basically good, and if you're careful, you can avoid a lot of pain and trouble. And if we all just join hands and work together, we can solve the problems of life. And we tend to come into life with that approach. But as time goes on, our illusions are shattered. We begin to find that life is not manageable. We begin to find that no matter how hard we try, we find ourselves getting into all kinds of painful, discouraging situations. We begin to see how capable human beings are of rage, of jealousy, of selfishness, of fear. And worst of all, we begin to see how capable we are of those things. And at a certain point, we begin to really get disillusioned. Now, I'll tell you, that is something that happens to everybody eventually, who's at all awake and alert. And I've also noticed that it happens to women about ten years before it happens to men. Don't ask me why. It takes time, it takes time for us to become poor in spirit, to begin to say, my life is not manageable. I've been told by every advertisement in the New York Magazine, I've got to take control of my social life, I've got to take control of my body, I've got to take control of all these things. And I'm still not in control, and I'm out a lot of money. And then I go into therapy, and I say, I'm going to analyze it, and I'm going to exert willpower, and it makes it worse because you become more absorbed than ever, self-absorbed. And finally, hopefully, you'll say, my problems are beyond me, and that's what it means to be poor in spirit. And it's the first qualification, nobody can enter into the kingdom of God until you say that. But then, the second characteristic is you have to mourn. The second of the characteristics is you must mourn, which means you cannot just say, I've got problems, but you have to mourn. spiritual. You have to be willing to say I'm a sinner. You have to be willing to say that my problem is sin. As G.K. Chesterton said, we quoted it last week, the problem with the universe is me. You stop blaming everybody else, and you stop blaming society, and you stop blaming your genes, and you stop blaming your parents, and you begin to say, even though I'm a fairly decent person morally, I realize that I owe God everything if He created me, and I want to be master of myself. Sin is that claim that you've got to be in charge of your own life, to make yourself your own God, to put yourself in the center, instead of admitting that you need, above everything else, to know God, and to know His love, and to put Him in the center. That's what sin is. And until you come to admit that your problems are not just beyond you, but that your problems are sin, you can't enter the kingdom. And thirdly, we talked about meekness, and we said once you see your problems are beyond you, and that you see your problems are your own selfishness and sin, then you could despair or get angry, or you could go to God and say, Lord, I need your help, I need your solution, I need your provision, because I don't have any of my own. And that's where we stopped last week. And I'm surprised that I didn't get more complaints, because really, you see, that's the negative. That means that in order to be able to receive the blessedness of the kingdom, you have got to first turn from your self-sufficiency, and turn from your sin, and turn from selfishness, but to what? And the answer is in this fourth beatitude. And this is the heart of the Bible, this is the heart of the gospel, this is the keystone in the arch of all the beatitudes. It's smack dab in the center. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. And before we proceed, let me show you right here, right in the beginning, an unalterable law of the universe that a lot of us have better get straight. It does not say, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness. It says, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after something besides blessedness. It's a law of the universe that if you try to be happy, if that's the goal of your life, you never will be. Anything you center your life on except the kingdom, except God and His righteousness, anything you center your life on besides God, you will destroy, and it will destroy you. Not blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness, but blessed are those who hunger and thirst after something more than blessedness, righteousness. Aim at heaven, and you'll get earth thrown in. Aim at earth, and you'll get neither. There's many things that can only be byproducts. Some chemists will tell you that, right? You can't get things by finding them directly. Some things are produced as a byproduct of trying to get something else, and that's the way the Bible says, and that's the way you know in your heart blessedness comes. Well, then what is this righteousness? The heart of the gospel is that if you want to have the blessedness of the kingdom, if you want to be born again, you have to admit that you don't have a righteousness of your own, but that God alone can give you His righteousness, an outside righteousness, a righteousness not of your own making. And when you ask for that, you enter the kingdom of God. Now listen, some of you have done this but never thought of it like this. There's a very important test. This verse is a tremendous test, because if you have really built your life on this, if you really have entered the kingdom, then as I describe what this verse talks about, you will find a profound delight and satisfaction, and maybe it'll help you get your feet back on the ground and put your life back on the center, because this is the truth on which you must build your life. In fact, not just in general, but every day specifically, you have to get up and stand on the platform and say, this is where I am. I have a righteousness that is not my own. Every day you have to do that. So some of you are going to find a profound delight, but I believe some of you, as you listen, are going to realize, I never heard of this. I never thought of Christianity like that, in which case you're outside the kingdom. And I hope that today might be the day that you enter. Look, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness. Let's break this verse down so we understand. This is the door. First of all, if you want the blessedness of the kingdom, you've got a hunger and thirst. Secondly, if you want the blessedness of the kingdom, you have to hunger and thirst after perfect righteousness, a righteousness not of your own. And thirdly, if you want the blessedness of the kingdom, you have to be filled with that righteousness. You have to hunger and thirst after perfect righteousness and be filled. That's the three points of the outline that are in the bulletin. So why am I repeating myself? So let's go. Number one. Number two. Okay. America to understand how hard it is to be hungry. I'm not saying there's nobody in America that's hungry, but by and large, America is fairly rolling in restaurants. If you've ever actually been very hungry, if you've actually ever gotten into a place where you began to starve, you will know that the desire for food and drink eventually grows and grows until it becomes overwhelming. The Bible says people who get into the kingdom of God are people who have experienced a very deep drive for righteousness. Now, hungry and thirsting, desperation, struggling, wrestling for righteousness. Righteousness. Now, on the one hand, all people are struggling for righteousness, but on the other hand, believers, people who enter the kingdom, are struggling at a different level. So let me explain those two levels, okay? Listen, you can't drift. I'm afraid this is one of those sermons where you can't drift out and then drift back in and hope to figure it out later on, all right? I mean, everybody does some sermons like that. I do too, but this one isn't one of them. So listen, all right? At one level, the Bible tells us, and I hope you will see in a moment, all, all people wrestle and struggle for righteousness. The word righteousness in the Bible is actually a word that means to be approved. I don't know what you think of when you hear the word righteousness, but please focus in on this. The word righteousness means rightness, to be right with somebody, to be approved, to be acquitna, approved, that's another good word for it, to be received, you see, to be accepted. For example, what do these four situations have in common? You're going for a big audition, you musicians? A big audition. Or you're a big job interview for a big job, very important interview, interview. Okay? Or here, third, going out on a date with somebody you desperately want to like you. Okay? Or you're running for office, or something like that. What are these things all having on? Or you're having an interview to get into a school or a degree program that you desperately need to be in. You're waiting to hear back on an exam whether or not you're going to be able to stay in the program. What do they all have in common? Well, you say they're all tremendously nerve-wracking. They're tremendously anxiety-producing. Here's why. You're waiting for a verdict. Sure you are. You're waiting for a verdict. Will you be approved? Will you be received? Will you be acceptable? You're waiting for rightness. Will the person on the other side of the table say, the best performance we've ever heard? Or, incredible record, you've got the job. Or, of course, I'll go out with you again. You say, what you're waiting for is you're waiting for a verdict. And if that verdict comes in approving you, there's this tremendous fulfillment. And if the verdict comes in rejecting you, rejection will kill you. Now, the Bible tells us something that the psychologists tell us. The psychologists will tell us that every one of us struggles for that kind of sense of being acceptable. We all struggle for self-acceptance. And we all have different standards. Some of us say, my career, if I can just do well in my career. Others say, if I just have certain relationships. Others say, if I'm attracted to the opposite sex. Everybody has different standards and everybody has different authorities. But every one of us have got to live up to those standards. We're all struggling for rightness. We're all struggling to be acceptable. We cannot take rejection from the things and then the people and the authorities that are the most important to us. So, the psychologists say, we all build our self-image on something. We all get our identity from something. The psychologists say, we all have certain things that make us feel good about ourselves. And the Bible says, we all struggle for righteousness. And that's the same thing. What makes you feel good about yourself? What makes you feel acceptable? The Bible says, we all struggle for righteousness. We all, in a sense, hunger and thirst after righteousness. But before you come to Christ, the Bible tells us there's only two kinds of people. There's those who are overtly anxious because they know that they're rejected. They feel rejected. They have, quote, low self-esteem. And the other kind of person is not the person who's overtly anxious. You're covertly anxious because you fear you're not acceptable. There's only two kinds of people. The people who are temporarily feeling better about themselves until something comes in. But underneath, you're deeply insecure. You're anxious underneath because you're afraid somebody will see you for what you really are. We all struggle with self-acceptance. And none of us have received it. us are more anxious than others. And the reason for that, the Bible says, is Romans 3, no one is righteous, no, not one. And every one of us knows that at a deep level. We all struggle for righteousness, but those of us who enter the kingdom, those of us who enter the kingdom get to this place where they begin to hunger and thirst after righteousness, which means you admit that the real problem, the real reason we're always so anxious and not feeling that we're really acceptable is because we all know that we're not acceptable to God. We all know that underneath, but in order to enter the kingdom, you've got to consciously admit that the real problem is not verdicts and verdicts and verdicts, but God's verdict. That's the reason that we really feel anxious, is underneath it all, we know we're not acceptable to God. To know the blessedness of the kingdom, you have to admit that you are not righteous before God, that God is angry and displeased with you, angry and displeased. You cannot enter the kingdom of God unless you're hungering and thirsting, which means unless you desperately recognize the fact that you are not right with God, that He's angry and displeased with you. What somebody says? Oh no. This idea of God is going to lay a tremendous guilt trip on me. I don't even want to hear the rest of it. This is the old-fashioned kind of approach. The idea of an angry God, it's an unworthy idea. I thought God was a God of love. Listen, God is angry because He's a God of love. Have you ever loved an addicted person? Have you ever loved a person who was destroying him or herself? I think you have. And you know what happens? If you love that person, what happens? You get angry. Anybody who really loves someone who sees a lie or evil or something like that destroying that person? You get angry. You see them and you want to shake them and you want to say, don't you see what you're doing to yourself? Every time I see you, you're less of yourself. And there's this tremendous quote. I don't even know who this man is. There's a man named E.H. Gifford. I found this quote somewhere. I don't know where it's from. I don't know who the man is or where he wrote it or said it, but it's so startling. E.H. Gifford says, the more a man loves his son, the more he hates in his son, the liar, the drunkard, or the traitor. The opposite of love is not anger. No way. Real love entails anger. The opposite of love is indifference, which is the final form of hate. If you love somebody, you get angry at the evil. You get angry at that part of them that's evil. You get angry at the liar and the traitor that's in them. Real love is full of anger toward evil. And that's the reason why God gets angry at sin and must punish it. And whenever I think about God like this, I remember an officer in my church in Virginia, a man that I knew very, very many years. He's a marvelous man, one of the dearest men to my heart in the world. His youngest son was a mess, was in and out of trouble with the law. And many times I watched this man, I would visit this man at the jail when he was visiting his son. I would visit that man, I went with that man to court once when his son was up for trial. And in that man's heart, there were two things operating together. On the one hand, because he loved his son, he knew his son had to be punished. He knew there was no hope for his son if he wasn't punished. He knew that the judge had to punish him. He was guilty. He knew there was no hope for society if he wasn't punished. The law has to be paid. On the other hand, in that man's same heart was this desire, this tremendous desire for mercy for his son, to free his son. The love in his heart cried out for justice and mercy at the same time. It's not like there was a loving part of his heart that called out for mercy and a hating part of his heart that called out for justice. That's silly. Real love always produces anger at sin. God, listen, if we as human beings can feel that, how much more a morally perfect God, when he looks at us and he sees the liar and the traitor in you and me, how much more angry is he? Because how much more perfect is his love? To hunger and thirst after righteousness means you see that God is angry at sin and that sin has to be punished, and you cannot know the blessedness of the kingdom until you're willing to admit that. Do you admit that? Are you a person that says, well, I'm poor in spirit, and I know I'm a sinner, but I don't deserve to be punished for it, and I don't believe in a God who would punish me for it. of God. There it is in black and white. Have you hungered and thirsted? Then secondly, have you hungered and thirsted after righteousness? Now, it's pretty clear from this verse that the righteousness that we're hungering and thirsting after is something we don't have, right? You don't hunger and thirst after food you've got. You eat it. You get hungry and thirsty after food you don't have. In fact, this point is made so clear in the verse that this hunger, this righteousness is something other than what we have. It's an outside righteousness. It's an outside verdict. It's an outside record, and it's made very clear by the fact, by the way, that in the Greek, instead of a genitive, there's an accusative case used here. You see, a genitive case is the, well, in English, a genitive case is formed by the word of. If we say, I want a piece of bread, that's using bread in the genitive case. A piece of bread means some bread. A piece of cake means some cake. And ordinarily, you would say, I hunger and thirst after a genitive form of righteousness. I hunger and thirst after some righteousness. And yet, the accusative is used here. Very unusual usage, and it's almost Jesus' way of pointing to the fact that those who enter the kingdom are not just looking for some righteousness, but for righteousness itself, for a perfect righteousness, a full righteousness. Let me tell you the difference between a Christian and a moralist. What's the difference between a Christian and a religious person? On the outside, it's clear. A moralist is a person who's very, very moral, and very upright, and very religious, but also very smug, and very proud, and very self-righteous. They're not approachable at all. If you go to them with a problem, they'll look at you, and they'll say, pull yourself together. Hint, implied like I have. You go to a Christian, and you'll see something very strange. A Christian has a high view of truth, loves beauty, and will not excuse sin in himself or in you, has a tremendous passion for holiness and godliness, and yet is completely approachable. There's a humility and a peace about him. You find it easy to talk to him about problems. He will not put you down. What's the difference between a Christian and a moralist? And here it is. Here it is. Here it is. Moralists and Christians both repent for their sins. A lot of moralists are poor in spirit. A lot of moralistic people, religious people, mourn over their sin, and even are meek. The difference between a moralist and a Christian is that a moralist and Christians both repent of sins, but a Christian also repents of his righteousness. That means a moralist says, I've sinned, but look at all the good things I'm doing. Look how often I come to church. Look at how faithful a spouse I am. Look at what a great career I have. Look at this and that, and look at that, and this and that. And the Christian says, no, I even repent of that. I even give up that. I see that the only way Jesus Christ can receive me is if I completely rely on what he has done, not on anything that I have done. That's the difference between a Christian and a moralist. Or I'll put it this way. John Stott in one of his books said, if the essence of sin is man substituting himself for God, putting himself in God's place, trying to be in charge of his own life. If the essence of sin is man substituting himself for God, then the essence of salvation is God substituting himself for man. And that's Christianity in that sentence. Jesus Christ came and on the cross paid and did everything necessary. Our record is bad. Our record is wrong. Our record earns nothing. But he comes and he does everything on our behalf. He substitutes himself. His record of righteousness, his great life, his death on the cross, the minute you transfer your trust from yourself over to Jesus Christ, all that record becomes yours. And at that minute, you receive God's verdict. And God's verdict is, this is my beloved child, in whom I am totally and thoroughly well pleased. That is the difference between Christianity and moralism. And listen, do you know what that does to you? Don't you see how that changes everything? I'm going to give you an illustration in a second that's awfully radical, but let me just explain it briefly. That means that God's verdict and only God's verdict matters. When you go to an audition, you are completely a new person. When you go out on a date, you're a completely new person now. When you go for your interview with a job, you're a completely new person because these things are no longer where you get your identity. These things are no longer the things on which you build your life. These things are no longer your righteousness. This is not just... says this and this person says this about me, but whose verdict counts? Whose opinion counts? God says, this is my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased. That's the only verdict that will last. It's the only verdict that will really last. It'll last longer than the stars. I'm going to rule and reign with him. So what the heck? Who cares about the interview? I'm going to try my best and I'll be disappointed, but that's not my life. It's not my righteousness. Don't you see how that changes everything? Don't you realize that, for example, when you're successful, you're no longer puffed up because it's not the main thing. It's not the main driving force of your life anymore. And when you fail that interview, you're also not cast down, at least not all the way, not nearly as low as before, because no longer is that your righteousness. It means shyness is gone. Who cares what other people think, right? It means, on the other hand, bragging is gone, because you know what you really are in yourself, but you also know what you are in Jesus Christ. This is a radical truth. Let me use this illustration as a kind of closer. Becky Pippert's book, which every week I've been able to get a good illustration out of, it's called Hope Has Its Reasons. I've been reading it recently. She brought up an illustration that's kind of scary for me to use, but I'm going to use it anyway, because I'm afraid that some of you who literally identify with the woman in this illustration might think I'm singling you out, and I'm not. Becky Pippert is a speaker, a Christian speaker, and she was speaking, and after one of her talks, somebody, a woman came up to say, I need to talk to you, and she went into a back room, and this is what the woman said. She said, I was married recently, and she said she was a member of a very, very conservative evangelical church, and she was marrying a handsome young man who was also a member of that church. The two of them were considered leaders. They were considered shining lights in the church, and just about six months before they were to be married, they discovered that she was pregnant by him, and they suddenly realized what that would mean. They suddenly realized that they were going to have to show that very conservative evangelical church that what they were preaching, what they were practicing, were two different things. They realized the scandal, they realized the problems, and they decided that she would have an abortion. Now, I've never, ever said anything about abortion up here, and I don't have to yet, because, you know, no matter what your view of it is, no matter what your view of it is, everybody agrees that that is an inappropriate use. Because, you see, they're about to get married, right? And they wanted children, and they expected to have them. There was no reason in the world to get rid of the life that way, right? See, no matter what your view of abortion is, what she did was wrong, and she knew it. And as she walked down the aisle that day, she said, everybody was looking at her like the beaming bride, and she said to Becky, she says, what I was saying to myself in my heart was, I couldn't stop this voice that said, you murderer, all the way down the aisle. She said, you were so worried about showing these people what you really were, you were so afraid of being exposed, that you would murder this life just so you wouldn't look bad. I know what you are, the voice said, and God knows what you are. And she came to Becky, and she says, I have confessed this thing a thousand times, over and over and over again, and I'm just obsessed with it, I'm depressed, it's running me into the ground, I'm emotionally a wreck, I don't know what to do. How could God possibly forgive me? She says, I guess God's forgiven me, but I can't forgive myself. Now, Becky Pippert suddenly had an idea. She swallowed hard, she prayed, and she said this. She said, my dear friend, Jesus Christ had to die for all our sins, sins of the religious and the non-religious, sins of the Nazis and the victims, sins of the moral types and the immoral types. We are all responsible for the death of the only innocent man who ever lived. The sin that caused you to destroy this life was pride, and it was pride that destroyed Jesus Christ's life 2,000 years ago. As Luther said, we all carry around his very nails in our pockets. You were already a murderer before this happened, and it was all totally paid for long ago. Now, what happened to that woman? Did she suddenly say, you're making me feel worse? No, because she got the point, and she turned to Becky and she says, wait a minute, wait a minute. She says, you're right. I always in my head believed that I was a sinner and that my sins were responsible for the death of Jesus Christ. And now I see, I came to tell you I did the worst thing imaginable, and you told me I've done something worse than that. But if I'm the worst that I'm imagined, if I kill Jesus' son, and that can be forgiven, then anything else can. Why would you? did she say, I can't forgive myself? Because you see, all along where she thought she was a Christian, she thought she was a Christian, she intellectually believed Jesus died for her sins, but actually she was relying on her niceness for her salvation. She was saying, I'm sure God will accept me because look at what a great person I am in this church and how nice I am and how clean and how moral I am, and that was her righteousness. And when she did this, because she was still relying on her own righteousness, she couldn't forgive herself. Of course she couldn't forgive herself, because all during this time she was still relying on her own righteousness, and the day that Becky Pippert told her that she had done something worse and been forgiven, suddenly she realized and she began to hunger and thirst after Christ's righteousness. She said, wait a minute, all along that was my only hope. And she was freed, and you can be freed too. You can say, Lord Jesus Christ, I'm going to give myself to you and rely completely on your righteousness and your record and not on anything I've done, and the minute you do that, what will happen? You'll be filled. You notice it doesn't say, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness and who then do this, and then they'll be filled. It just says, blessed are those who hunger and thirst. You have to ask. At the end of Les Miserables, you've got Javert, who is given mercy, and he realizes that if he gives, if he accepts the mercy from Jean Valjean, who could have killed him but didn't, if Javert accepts the mercy, he will lose control of his life. He'll give Valjean control, and that's true. And one of the reasons why many of us don't want to accept this perfect charity is because we'll lose control of our lives. That's exactly right. Those of you who say, I can handle it, I can be good, I can do better, I'll clean my life up, you still haven't gotten the point, have you? You're still trying to stay in control of your own life, haven't you? That's the desire. No, no. Like this woman. Oh, the minute she saw that she was a worse sinner than she knew was the minute she saw that she was totally accepted, because the great secret of acceptance is this. You'll never feel accepted when people tell you, what a great audition that was, how beautiful you look, I think I want to go out, you know, a second date. You never really feel accepted because underneath you're always worrying, what if this person really saw everything? You can never feel accepted until you know you're accepted at your worst. On the cross, God tells us, I have seen you at your worst, and I accept you. I receive you. Put your faith in me as the only thing you need to do. And let me tell you, if you see yourself at your worst and know you're forgiven, nothing can stop you then. Do you know that? Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness? No. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. Listen, maybe you think, maybe somebody here thinks, what a dead end to be told, number one, I've got to believe my problems are beyond me, and then number two, that God is angry with me and that my sins have to be punished, and then number three, that Jesus Christ took it all himself on the cross. Number four, I've got to, I've got to rely completely on what he's done and not on anything I do. It looks like a dead end, doesn't it? It's the only place you can go that really will give you a new start. What looks like a dead end, the cross, is the place for the new start. Every great movie, isn't that right? Every great novel, every great story has the hero getting into what looks like a dead end, and then suddenly, the trap door. That's what makes for a great book, that's what makes for a great story, and that's what will make for a great story for you. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they alone, for they alone will be filled. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Thank you.
