TITLE: Coming to Christ (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 5:1-5
TOPICS: Sin
SERIES: The Beatitudes
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/coming-to-christ/

============================================================

The scripture reading this morning is found in Matthew, the fifth chapter, and we're going to read verses 1 through 5. Matthew 5, verses 1 through 5. Now when he saw the crowds, he went up on a mountainside and sat down. His disciples came to him, and he began to teach them, saying, Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they will be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they will inherit the earth. Here ends the reading of God's holy word. Familiar, the Beatitudes. We're starting a new series. We finish the Ten Commandments, and we're going to be looking at the Sermon on the Mount. The Sermon on the Mount is all about the kingdom of God. What's the kingdom? Jesus Christ spoke about it incessantly, and I think those of us who are believers need to adjust a bit. Because, you know, Jesus used the word kingdom, and he talked about the kingdom far more than we usually do. Jesus was always talking about it. In fact, you never see Jesus saying to somebody, Receive me as your personal Lord and Savior. You never see that. You only see him saying, Repent and enter the kingdom. In fact, in his most famous passage on being born again, when Jesus talks about the new birth in John chapter 3, when he's telling Nicodemus, You must be born again, he's telling him to be born again. And why? It's not an end in itself. He must be born again so that you can do what? Enter the kingdom. In fact, he says it twice. You must be born again if you were to see the kingdom of God. You must be born again if you were to enter the kingdom of God. So what is it? If it's the whole point of being born again, what is it? Now, the kingdom of God can best be understood if we think about what happens when anybody comes into power. When a new president or a new king or a new governor or a new mayor or a new CEO, when anyone comes into power, that person's new power is expressed through a new administration. And the new administration is a new set of priorities and a new set of policies and a new set of strategies. And if the policies and priorities and strategies are wise, if they meet the needs, what happens is there is, I guess the catch word today is, improved quality of life. And that's good. Jesus Christ, though, is the supernatural and ultimate king. And when he comes into power, his power is expressed through a new administration called the kingdom. A new set of priorities, a new set of powers, a new set of strategies. And the effects are far greater than anything we might call improved quality of life. The effects are more comprehensive and radical than we can imagine. When Jesus Christ comes into power over a heart or over a life or over a family or over a group or a community or an institution, there's total transformation in every dimension of the life of that entity. Therefore, the Sermon on the Mount is here to show us just how far reaching that transformation is. And the Beatitudes can only be understood in that context. The Beatitudes that we just began to read are very famous. Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, and so on. Now, you know, I, for years, without understanding that they were there in this Sermon on the Mount that explained the kingdom of God, it was hard to understand them. They look like beautiful proverbs, don't they? They just seem like wise sayings about certain kinds of people. So there's all these different classes of people. There's the mourners, and there's the meek, and there's the poor in spirit, and so on. And all of those interesting groups of people have these little wise sayings about them. And it sounds very wise and beautiful. But if you stop and think about it, none of them really make much sense. If you take them like that. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth. When? How? I mean, Leo de Rocher seemed to be more in touch with reality when he said, nice guy is finished last. And here's Jesus saying, meek shall inherit the earth. How? Where? When? But now if you understand what the Beatitudes are about, they begin to make sense. The beginning and the end of the Beatitudes both say, look, blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is what? The kingdom of heaven. At the end, blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is what? The kingdom of heaven. These are not eight different, well, it depends how you count the Beatitudes, eight or nine. or not, but these are not eight or nine different kinds of people we're talking about. These are all qualities and characteristics of people who are in the kingdom. These are all characteristics of one group of people. Jesus is describing what the people who have entered the kingdom of God are like. Now, this cannot be more practical. I hear people, and some of you are in this condition, I know that, wringing their hands, trying to figure out where you really stand with God. I've heard people say, well, I don't know if I'm a Christian or not. Typically, if I ask somebody, if I have the guts to ask somebody, are you a Christian? They look at me and they say, I hope so. I'm trying. And that's where most people are. And very often they're confused because they see such different varieties of experience. You might hear somebody say, I was born again. So you listen carefully and you say, well, what in the world does that mean? And it sounds like this person had this very emotional turnaround in his or her life. And you say, huh, I have never had that. I guess I'm not born again. But then you may hear somebody else say, I was born again, but there wasn't much in the way of an emotional change or emotional catharsis. And you begin to get very confused. The reason for that is you're looking at the form of Christianity and not the content. The form. There are so many different kinds of forms. There are so many different varieties of experience. But what Jesus does is he cuts through all of that here and he says crystal clear. It doesn't matter how it's happened to you or in what form your experiences come. Anyone who's in the kingdom of God has these characteristics. These things are true of you. And they set you apart from everybody else in the world. And there's nothing vague or general about these things. They are clear. In fact, the order is even important. The first four of these beatitudes tell us how somebody enters the kingdom. You enter the kingdom if you're poor in spirit, if you're mourning in spirit, if you are meek, and if you are hungering and thirsting after righteousness. The first four are very important in order. They are the way in which a person enters the kingdom of God. And that's what we're going to look at today and next week too. And then the last four talk about the new transformed relationship. Well, the new transformed life that anybody has who gets into the kingdom. Blessed are those who are merciful. All of your relationships now are transformed. You become a merciful person. Blessed are those who are pure in heart. You're intra-psychic, if I can use the word. Your internal life has been totally transformed. There's a sincerity, a simplicity of heart. Well, we'll get to that one of these Sundays. And even your whole life direction. Now you're a peacemaker. That's your goal in life. And you don't care whether you get persecuted for it. See, the last two beatitudes tell us your life direction has changed. That other beatitude tells you that your internal psychology has changed. Your relationships have changed. Everything has changed once you get into the kingdom. But who gets into the kingdom? And that's the issue. The first four beatitudes tell you how. And we're going to look at three of them now and one of them next week. And the three of them now have to do with how you look at your problems. Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are those who mourn. And blessed are the meek. Everybody, except a few, I'll explain that in a minute, understand that human existence is full of problems. Human existence is a problem. What makes the kingdom people different than the non-kingdom people is the kingdom people approach their problem in a particular way. Now, basically, it's summarized like this, and we'll go over it. Number one, you understand that your problems are beyond you. If you're poor in spirit, you realize your problems are beyond you. Secondly, you don't just stop there. You also realize your problem is sin. You give it a name. You don't just realize your problem is beyond you. You're poor in spirit. You also begin to mourn, which means you recognize that your problem is sin. And then thirdly, you go even beyond that to meekness. You don't just recognize your problems are beyond you, and you don't just recognize your problem is sin, but you also recognize your problem is you. That's what makes a kingdom person different than anybody else. That's what makes a Christian different than anybody else. You could summarize all three of them like this. Everybody knows that there's a human problem. Everybody knows that you're weighted down with problems, but a Christian goes at it the way G.K. Chester went at it. G.K. Chester was a marvelous man of letters, a great mind of the early 20th century, and he was an Englishman. And at one point, the Times Literary, no, the London Times did a series, and they asked great writers of the period to adjust. universe? How do you like that? What is the problem of the universe? Write about it in the London Times. G.K. Chesterton just simply wrote one line. That's all he would send into the London Times. Chesterton was a Christian. Chesterton was a kingdom person. Chesterton was poor in spirit. Chesterton mourned. Chesterton was meek. And as a result, he wrote one line, the problem with the universe is me. Signed, G.K. Chesterton. That is what makes a kingdom person different than anybody else. Now, can I break that down for a moment? Let's look at these three Beatitudes. A kingdom person is poor in spirit, mourns, and is meek. Number one, poor in spirit. What does it mean to be poor in spirit? To be poor in spirit, actually, we can break that down. Let's mean to be poor in spirit. When Jesus Christ says you must be poor in spirit, number one, first Beatitude, first requirement before we can get to anything else, you can't go anywhere in the Christian life unless you're poor in spirit. First of all, he's completely departing, parting company with the rest of our culture, that's for sure, because our culture, if nothing else, is a self-help do-it-yourself culture. Absolutely. Writers, everybody knows that there's a tremendous market for experts writing books telling lay people how to do without the experts. Haven't you noticed that? That is a huge market in America today. Experts writing books on how you don't need any more expertise than what I'm giving you in this book, so pay 12 bucks for this book, and then you're free. You can do it yourself. You can fix your own psyche. You know, you can take out your own appendix. I'm kidding on that one, but you can build your own car. You can build your own computer. Self-help. This is a self-help culture. Go into any bookstore. It's unbelievable, and Jesus Christ goes against that. The language of the self-help culture is very vivid. You know how the language goes. Believe in yourself. You've got what it takes. Love yourself. Actualize your potential. Stop listening to all those negative tapes that are going on down there. Stop listening to all those nagging doubts. Believe in yourself. You've got what it takes, and what is Jesus saying in his first beatitude? He says, no, wait. Listen to those nagging doubts. Listen to some of those negative things. Oh, he's not saying hate yourself. You know what he's saying? We'll get to that here. He is saying you're poor. Now, a poor person is someone who says, I don't have what it takes. My problems, I can't help myself with. I don't have the power to change. I don't have what it takes to change. I don't have what it takes to help myself or save myself. I am poor. I need to go to somebody who can help me. My problems are beyond me, and that's what Jesus Christ is saying. You have to, has to be the starting point. I'm poor. My problems are beyond me. I'm going to listen to those self-doubts for a minute, and that's what it means to be poor, but now look what it means to be poor in spirit. Being poor in spirit means not being poor in general. It means being poor spiritually. A person who is entering the kingdom has to realize that my problems are more than psychological, though they are at least psychological. They're more than social, though they're at least social. They're more than philosophical. They're spiritual. We talked a little bit about this last week. I knew a woman once who watched an older lady who she loved, a woman who lived a very full life, did not die a tragic death, being lowered into the grave in her casket. And she looked at that and she said, you know, when I saw that casket going down, I felt rage. It was wrong. It was unnatural. Death is unnatural, and it's wrong, and I hate it. Why would she say that? Why would Dylan Thomas say, we rage against the dying of the light? Why? If this world is all there is, if you're just made of molecules that are falling apart, and you're just, the only thing that there is is this world which is burning up slowly, but eventually it will, there shouldn't be anything unnatural about death, let alone wrong. But it is wrong. We know it's wrong because we know that our yearnings, our deepest yearnings cannot be fulfilled in anything here. And that's, the reason for that is because we're made for something bigger. We're made for something bigger than this world, bigger than this life. You cannot enter the kingdom unless you first, they're not just poor, but poor in spirit. You not only know that your problems are beyond you, but you know your problems ultimately are spiritual problems. You realize the problem goes beyond anything that a philosopher can help you with, or a psychologist can help you with, or a sociologist, or a therapist, and you realize that. And you say, I'm not here just to help myself. I can't help myself, and I also realize my problems are beyond me, and they're spiritual problems. Now, have to start there now before moving on let me just give you a word of warning some of you may think that that's very very unhealthy that's awful first of all what are you going to do with the 75 dollars worth of self-help books you bought last week and besides that it sounds somehow psychologically unhealthy for a minute let me just say this does anybody know here that the very most famous and successful support group for addicts in history has been alcoholics anonymous and not only does aa but every other group that's based on the principles of aa the first beatitude in aa is what the first principle the first step in all of those successful addiction programs is we are powerless over our problems now i happen to know that it's much more likely that aa got their insights from jesus than that jesus got them from aa where do you think that wisdom came from the first beatitude the first step out is the same my problems are beyond me jesus is saying it doesn't just work in this one little narrow section of your life it works cosmically and it's the reason we have to start with this is many people and maybe many people in this room approach christianity like it's a self-help thing in other words you come like this you say i'm running into a bad patch in my life and okay i'll clean my life up i'll do a few things i'll come to church i'll read some books i'll stop this and that then maybe i can have some of this power that people talk about i'll try it you cannot try the god of the universe you have to have poverty of spirit you can't say i'll clean my life up you have to say my problems are beyond me you can't say i'm suffering i'm having a bad patch i need a little boost you have to say i'm not coming to you oh lord because i need a boost i'm coming to you oh lord because i owe you everything and i owe you more than i can pay i'm poor in spirit i'm spiritually bankrupt my problems are beyond me and they're spiritual problems are you there that's the first step secondly blessed are those who mourn now ultimately the first as a foundational as the first thing is being poor in spirit is simply becoming aware and realistic about your symptoms the symptoms of your problem being aware of the symptoms of your problem now most thoughtful people understand how bad things are in the world most people understand how bad they are now there are such people i call adolescents that don't you know what an adolescent is an adolescence is a somebody who was born 16 years ago or less or b somebody who thinks like that because you see you're a spiritual adolescent if you believe that human existence is basically a happy one and essentially we can deal with our problems if we just all lock hands and really work together that's spiritual adolescence absolutely uh i was reading a book by a speaker a lady named uh uh becky pippert and she was saying that one day she was watching the news she was just and she was a you know cooking as she was watching the news and there on the news was a typical news story somebody in some far off land people killing each other blood running down heads and women weeping over bodies in the street and she just and she was putting the butter in the in the in the thing and out came her three-year-old daughter and her three-year-old daughter looked at it for a minute and she says mommy why are they so bad why are they so mad where's their mother and she ran up and she turned off the tv and at that moment becky suddenly realized something it took a fresh a fresh eye you know an objective truly fresh objective eye to see what we should all know and that is human existence is in an appalling condition and it's it's incredibly appalling but it's so appalling that we have gotten so used to it that we don't even blink at it we don't even realize how appalling it is we don't even want to admit how bad it is you know and she realized where is their mother we don't have one or we do maybe we do have a parent now you see thoughtful people have a tendency the most thoughtful people the artists and the poets they go crazy over this question why are we so bad huh why are we why why are we so bad to each other why are we so flawed why is there such havoc and and everybody has to find some reason some people blame the class struggle some people blame the evolutionary process some people say it's low self-esteem that's a reason that we treat each other so badly but where'd we get it well it's because you know you had parents with low self-esteem that treated that way where'd they get it where did it come from that's the problem you cannot in a facile way figure out what it is well a christian finally gets to the place where not only do they admit but the thoughtful people admit and that is things are bad but to be poor in spirit means you realize your problems are beyond you, but we're talking about symptoms. For example, my wife knows how bad I am at this. I hate it when she points out there's something wrong with our car. She says, don't you see the symptoms? What is that? Well, you notice that when you're trying to go from second to third gear, that it doesn't quite go in there yet. You also notice that when you turn the corner, you hear this clunking sound. What is that clunking sound? It's a pothole in the street. There's no potholes there. And my wife is always trying to get me to see how serious things are with the car because I don't want to admit it. I don't want to become poor in spirit. I don't want to get to the place where I say, this is beyond me. I don't understand what's going on. Finally, I get to the place where I realize this is too much for me. This is getting too bad. I've got to take it in. I've got to give the car to somebody else. But just because I'm full of the symptoms and I understand the symptoms doesn't mean I understand what's really wrong. It's not enough just to know about the symptoms. You've got to know what's wrong. It's not enough just to know your aches and pains. You've got to go to somebody who understands what's causing them. What's the disease? And the Bible says the disease is sin. Do you know that all the self-analysis in the world, all the looking at your aches and pains in the world will not really help you unless you can identify the disease, right? The Bible says it's sin. And it's very important that you admit that it's sin and not just simply say, well, it's bad self-esteem. Okay, it is bad self-esteem. Where did it come from? Class struggle. Okay, it is class struggle. But where did it come from? And the Bible says there's only one answer. And if you're unwilling to admit the answer, you're going to be like Tim Keller in his car, poor in spirit, but really not having any idea who to go to to find out what's wrong. What is the cause of all the knocks? What is the cause of all the bumps? What is the cause of all the slipping gears? There's a man named Otto Rank who was a Freudian, not a Christian, but at one point said something fascinating. He says, we suffer as much from a consciousness of sin as did our ancestors without believing in the conception of sin. There is, this is what makes a man neurotic. He feels he is a sinner without the belief for which he therefore needs a rational explanation. Can I listen? Let me repeat that. This is what makes a man neurotic. He feels he is a sinner without the belief in sin for which he therefore needs a rational explanation. What Rank is saying is, a neurotic person is a person who feels he's a sinner without the name for it. A person who knows he's sinning, but since he doesn't have the belief in sin, he's got to find some other rational explanation, and there is none. What is sin? Sin is doing your own thing. Isn't that awful to actually say that? Let me go back to children again. When a little kid is about to cross Park Avenue, and he's three years old, I said, I need to hold your hand. By the way, I don't have a three-year-old, so I'm not picking anyone out right now, but I used to have one. And he says to you, I can do it myself, and he darts out. He'll probably be killed. Why? Darting out was an awful thing. Being killed was an awful thing, but it's just a symptom. At heart, it was his unwillingness to admit, he needs to hold my hand. Listen, murder is terrible. Rape is terrible. Robbery is terrible. Bloodshed is terrible. But the Bible says underneath it all is this, the unwillingness to see that you're dependent. It's essentially saying to God what Billy Joel says, this is my life. Go ahead with your own life. Leave me alone. It says in Isaiah 56, all we like sheep have gone astray. We've turned everyone to our own way. Do you know what the essence of sin is? Is it murder, rape, and robbery? The essence of sin is saying, I just want to live my own life the way I want to live it. That's the essence of it. And until you're willing to admit that that is sin, you are not mourning. Being poor in spirit must mean that the next beatitude is the same, talking about the same realm. Mourning in spirit. The Bible talks about spiritual mourning as repentance over sin. Until you're willing to see not only that your problems are beyond you, but that your problems are sin. Your problems are sin. Until you admit that it's sin, you are in bondage. Do you think I'm being negative? I know a woman who hates her father, but her father is so wonderful. She hates her father because his father was so wonderful. He was always traveling around the world and never spending any time with her. She cannot admit that she hates him. How could she hate such a wonderful person who everybody else in the world thinks is great? Because she will not admit that she hates him, because she will not call it sin, as a result of that, all kinds of problems are showing up in her life, including in all of her relationships with men. If she could repent of it as her friends, then she can repent of it as a result of that, all those women just kill a woman. And this is We don't have to be given to the museum. It's looking for the Benefit of the hates them because she will not call it sin. As a result of that, all kinds of problems are showing up in her life, including in all of her relationships with men. If she could repent of it as sin, she'd be freed. I know not just one man, I know tons of men who have to be in charge so that whenever somebody disagrees with them, they don't hear it as disagreement, they hear it as disloyalty. And because they hear it as disloyalty, they cannot manage conflict. It all comes from a sin of pride. But because they won't admit that it's a sin of pride, because they just insist that everybody else is being disloyal to them, everybody else is trying to usurp their authority, they cannot handle conflict. And so what happens is they are, instead of going up the corporate ladder, they're going down the corporate ladder, they're getting more and more angry, they're feeling more and more unappreciated, therefore they can take, they can brook criticism less and less. If they would admit that at the heart of it, it was sin, not disloyalty, not something that you can blame on other people, not some sort of bad conflict management course that they took 10 years ago that didn't work for them, but sin, they'd be out of it. Is there something wrong with saying, this is sin? Is there something binding and chaining and discouraging about calling something sin? No, it's the beginning of freedom. It's the only way out. And Pascal at one point said, this doctrine of original sin is so rude and it offends us and it's the most incomprehensible of all the doctrines and yet without it, we become incomprehensible to ourselves. Blessed are those who mourn for they shall be comforted. If you don't mourn, you'll never be comforted because you'll be confused. You'll be confused. Blessed are the poor in spirit for theirs and only theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn over their sin for they and only they will be comforted. And lastly, and finally, I've got to go one step further and we can be real brief. It's possible, and some of you are thinking this, it's possible if you stop here that you could be crushed under a load of guilt. If you could say, in order to be a Christian, I've got to feel like my problems are beyond me and I'm just a horrible sinner. It doesn't sound like this trip into the kingdom is a very pleasant one. Well, no, but especially not if you stop in the middle. Frankly, any birth that stops in the middle is a pretty unpleasant thing. Meekness. When you begin to see that your problems are beyond you, and many of you have seen that, and when you have seen that your problems are not something you can blame on your lot in life or your genes or your parents, but on sin, what do you do then? You can say, yes, I see that my problems are beyond me and it galls me. I can see that I can't please God, but I ought to. And so I'm going to sit here and I'm going to kick myself and I'm going to feel bad and I'm going to be angry at the world for it. And the other approach is meekness. You can humble yourself when you see your sin and then you will not be discouraged. Do you understand that? If you truly humble yourself, you won't be discouraged. You see, when you first see your sin, the first response is always a selfish one. It's always to say, oh, what a mess I am. What a wreck I am. I'm a failure after all. I'm not going to be able to reach my goals. And you think that's repentance. You can sit down and you say, I'm going to repent. Oh God, I'm terrible. There is a big difference between repentance and self-pity. And until you understand the difference, you have not become meek and therefore you're not on your way into the kingdom. It's one thing to be angry and upset about the fact that you're a sinner. It's another thing to say, of course I'm a sinner. And instead of being sorry for myself and the mess it's gotten me into, I am sorry because my sin has hurt you. Oh Lord God, I have been a rebel against you. I have hurt you. You gave me gifts and you gave me talents and look how I've used them. Oh Lord God, I'm sorry. There's a kind of confession Paul tells us that leads to death. And there's a kind of confession that leads to life. Which kind are you having? I think the most important test is this. When I hear somebody or when you've said, I believe that God has forgiven me, but I can't forgive myself. You know you're into self-pity. You see, when you say that, what you really mean is, I'm just too bad for God's forgiveness. And what you mean is, I'm too proud and too angry that I have to have God's bleeding charity and I refuse to accept it. To be meek means to humble yourself. To be meek means to say, I take my mind off myself even as I confess. Not self-pity, not hurting myself and galling myself and flagellating myself, but instead, Lord, I see that what I've really done wrong is hurt you. I confess it and I say, oh Lord, come into my life. Be my Lord. Save me for Jesus' sake. Amen. That's where we come. Let me just say this. A meek person is not a weak person. In fact, the word meek is the Greek word praus, which means attainment. what a meek person really is like? When you really accept your sin, when you really owned up to it, do you realize how free you are? When good things happen to you, you say, well, I'm not going to get puffed up. I don't deserve this. And it might be gone tomorrow, and besides that, God loves me. And when bad things happen, you say, God can forgive me for this. You're not high up one day and low down the next day, because a meek person is somebody who's always saying, what did I do to deserve this? I've done everything to deserve this. And I'll never get what I deserve. I'm going to get only better. I'm going to get God's gifts, and God will never take his gifts away. A meek person is someone who is never able to feel sorry for himself again, or herself. A meek person is not looking at himself and standing on his own honor. A meek person is teachable. A meek person is free. Do you want to be healed? When anybody ever came to Jesus Christ to be healed, he always led them to repentance. You know what kind of physician he is? Some of you are sick and hurting and messed up and burdened, and you're saying, I want Jesus to heal me. But you know what kind of physician he is? He's a surgical physician. He's a surgeon. He cuts. He leads you to repentance. My friends, the hands of the king are healing hands, and such will the rightful king be known. We are only shadows of what we could be if we repented. There is no despair if you are poor in spirit, mourning over sin, and doing so meekly. None at all. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs and theirs alone is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are those who mourn, for they and they alone will be comforted. Blessed are the meek, for they and they alone will inherit the earth. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Thank you.
