TITLE: David’s Passion
SCRIPTURE: 2 Samuel 6:1-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: David: The Man of Prayer
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/davids-passion/

============================================================

A reading from 2 Samuel chapter 6, verses 1 through 23. David again brought together all the able young men of Israel, 30,000. He and all his men went to Bala and Judah to bring up from there the Ark of God, which is called by the name, the name of the Lord Almighty, who is enthroned between the cherubim on the Ark. They set the Ark of God on a new cart and brought it from the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill. Uzzah and Ahio, sons of Abinadab, were guiding the new cart with the Ark of God on it, and Ahio was walking in front of it. David and all Israel were celebrating with all their might before the Lord, with castanets, harps, lyres, timbrels, cistrums, and cymbals. When they came to the threshing floor of Nacon, Uzzah reached out and took hold of the Ark of God, because the oxen stumbled. The Lord's anger burned against Uzzah because of his irreverent act. Therefore, God struck him down, and he died there beside the Ark of God. Then David was angry because the Lord's wrath had broken out against Uzzah. And to this day, that place is called Perez-Uzzah. David was afraid of the Lord that day and said, How can the Ark of the Lord ever come to me? He was not willing to take the Ark of the Lord to be with him in the city of David. Instead, he took it to the house of Obed-Edom, the Gittite. The Ark of the Lord remained in the house of Obed-Edom, the Gittite, for three months. And the Lord blessed him and his entire household. Now, King David was told, The Lord has blessed the household of Obed-Edom and everything he has because of the Ark of God. So David went to bring up the Ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom to the city of David with rejoicing. When those who were carrying the Ark of the Lord had taken six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened calf. Wearing a linen ephod, David was dancing before the Lord with all his might, while he and all Israel were bringing up the Ark of the Lord with shouts and the sound of trumpets. As the Ark of the Lord was entering the city of David, Michael, daughter of Saul, watched from a window. And when she saw King David leaping and dancing before the Lord, she despised him in her heart. They brought the Ark of the Lord and set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it. And David sacrificed burnt offerings and fellowship offerings before the Lord. After he had finished sacrificing the burnt offerings and fellowship offerings, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord Almighty. Then he gave a loaf of bread, a cake of dates, and a cake of raisins to each person in the whole crowd of Israelites, both men and women. And all the people went to their homes. When David returned home to bless his household, Michael, daughter of Saul, came out to meet him and said, how the king of Israel has distinguished himself today, going around half naked in full view of the slave girls of his servants, as any vulgar fellow would. David said to Michael, it was before the Lord who chose me rather than your father or anyone from his house when he appointed me ruler over the Lord's people, Israel. I will celebrate before the Lord. I will become even more undignified than this. And I will be humiliated in my own eyes. But by these slave girls you spoke of, I will be held in honor. And Michael, daughter of Saul, had no children to the day of her death. The word of the Lord. So, we're looking at the life of David. And this episode is a strange one for modern readers. It's a strange one. And one of the very first things David does after he becomes king is he wants to bring the Ark of the Covenant to Jerusalem. The Ark of the Covenant was a wooden box plated with gold, with two gold angels over the top, cherubim. It was in the holy of holies. It was in the center of the tabernacle. God's presence was so connected to it that it says here, he was enthroned above the cherubim. You see that in verse 2? And we'll get back to that in a second. And so, to bring the Ark of the Covenant to the capital, to Jerusalem, was to put, in a sense, God's worship in the very center of the national life and in the very center of David's life. You notice in verse 9, he says, not just how will the Ark of the Covenant come to Jerusalem, but how will it come to me? So, that's what he wants to do. But two incidents, two fascinating incidents happen. One is... A man simply seems to reach out and try to keep the ark from falling off the cart, and he's struck dead, making David frightened and angry, thinking this God is more holy than I thought. And then the ark is given to Obed-Edom, the Gittite, and there the ark actually doesn't do anything but makes him prosper, showing that God is more gracious than he thought. And then finally he brings him, brings the ark of the covenant into Jerusalem, and when he does, he's a changed man. Now, as strange as this whole thing is, and you laughed as soon as I said, what a strange passage for us modern readers, and yet I would like to tell you that the message of this passage is as seminal and as central to the Bible as any other passage anywhere. This message here is as seminal and as central as you could find. So let's just notice those three things. A changed man. That David is a changed man when he gets the ark to Jerusalem. And secondly, and thirdly, the first thing that changes him and the second thing that changes him. He's a changed man. How? The first thing and the second thing that changes him. So first of all, let's just notice, let's start at the end, and let's avoid all the, some of the more strange parts and get to the end. And here's what we see, verse 16. As the ark of the Lord was entering the city of David, Michal, Michal, Michael. Actually, nobody ever quite knows how you pronounce ancient names. Michal, the daughter of Saul, watched from a window, and when she was, and when she saw King David leaping and dancing before the Lord, she despised him in her heart. They brought the ark of the Lord, set it in its place inside the tent that David had pitched for it, and David sacrificed burnt offerings and fellowships. After that, he finished sacrificing the burnt offerings. He blessed the people, which by the way, is the work of a priest, not a king, in the name of the Lord Almighty. Then he gave a loaf of bread, a cake of dates, and a cake of raisins to each person, and the whole crowd of Israelites, men and women, and all the people went to their homes. The commentators and Greek scholars, like, for example, Robert Alter, who is a Jewish expert on ancient Hebrew narrative, taught at Berkeley for years, Robert Alter says that we actually don't know how to exactly translate some of these. I mean, the cake of dates is almost a very difficult term. I'm not sure how to translate it, but here's what we know. David was giving delicacies out to everybody, not just the head of the home, you know, the man, you know, the head of the family, but to every man, every woman, giving all sorts of very, very exquisite and very expensive delicacies. He's out there mixing it up with the people, with the hoi polloi. He's blessing them. He's fraternizing with them, and then he sends them home. And when my cow, the daughter of Saul, sees that, here's where I, here's like, where I like to show you the change. She was the daughter of Saul. She was raised in a typical ancient Near Eastern royal family. She understood the normal way royalty and power operated in all of the cultures of the ancient Near East, in all the cultures of the world. And she looks at him, and boy, what sarcasm and sneering, how the king of Israel has distinguished himself today, going around half naked in full view of the slave girls of his servants as any vulgar fellow would. He was dancing with abandon. He was wearing his heart on his sleeve. He was letting his emotions go. And she looks at him, and she says, this is not how a king works. A king doesn't operate like this. It's beneath your dignity. And here's what she's saying. In shame and honor cultures, kings had to be remote and intimidating. Kings had to carry their dignity. And no one could, no one could even begin to trample a little bit on their dignity, or they were just killed. Because what was understood in those days was basically society would unravel unless strength was respected. So if anybody shows disrespect to the king, anyone shows any disrespect to the dignity of the king, just killed. And the king just, you know, holds himself back, is a little bit remote, kind of frightening, intimidating. That's how power works. That's how kings operate. And to a great degree, I think that's pretty much the way David was going until now. He comes into Jerusalem, a very different kind of king. I mean, it looks pretty attractive to us, but it's utterly different than the kind of kings that they had back then. And Michal is telling him about that. She doesn't get it. She doesn't understand. And his answer is wonderfully theological. He looks at David. David looks at her and says, it was before the Lord who chose me, rather than your father or anyone from this house, people of Israel. It's before the Lord I dance. Now, he's not saying something. This is not a proud statement. He is saying, I was chosen by grace. I was a shepherd boy. I don't have royal blood. I didn't fight my way up. God just chose me. I am simply a recipient of grace. How shall I not celebrate? But then he points out, I will celebrate before the Lord. I will become even more undignified than this, and I will be humiliated in my own eyes. And what he means is, okay, maybe I'm the king of Israel, and there's nobody above me in Israel, but God's above me. You can dance. You can open your heart before someone who's greater than you, and God is infinitely greater than him. And he says, I am not going to stand on my own dignity. You don't do that. That's inappropriate before God. He says, I will be, you know, she says, I'll do it again. I'll be humiliated and humiliated in my own eyes. But then he does point out, but these slave girls you spoke of, I will be held in honor. In other words, he's saying, they understand. If anything, they're going to respect me more as a king than if I was the kind of king you want me to be. If I was very strange when it says at the very end, and the daughter of Saul had no children to the day of her death. And actually, nobody quite knows what that means. This is good storytelling, actually. It doesn't say God struck her. It doesn't say David stayed away from her. What it really says is there was an alienation that went on there to the day of her death, and she was fruitless in the sense of what she was supposed to be doing. Now, that's sad, but we turn away and we point out that what she was irritated at, what she could not understand, is how David had become a changed man. And the reason he is a changed man was because he was worshiping. What do you think all that dancing was, all that joy was, all the sacrificing? He was worshiping. And I want you to know that is what changes you. David Foster Wallace, the famous novelist who's now gone, has a place where he says, there's a pretty famous section out of a speech he once gave. He basically says, everybody worships something. By the way, he was not a religious man from what we can tell. But he says, everybody worships something. Everybody adores something. Everybody lets something capture their imagination. And he says, whatever it is will control you. And here's what he says, worship. Everybody worships. If you worship money and things, if they are where you tap real meaning in life, then you will never have enough. Never feel you have enough. Worship your body and beauty and sexual allure, and you will always feel ugly. And when time and age start showing, you will die a million deaths. Worship power, and you will end up feeling weak and afraid. See? Go back and reread the biography of Saul, that king that stood on his own dignity. Worship power, and you will end up feeling weak and afraid. And you will need ever more power over others to numb you to your own fear. Worship your intellect. Being seen as smart, you will end up feeling stupid, a fraud, always on the verge of being found out. But the insidious thing about these forms of worship is they're unconscious. They're default settings. David changed what he, I don't know quite what he was worshiping before. When he changed what he was worshiped, he was liberated. Wasn't standing on his own dignity. Wasn't afraid of how he looked. Didn't need power. Huh? Isn't that something? That's how you change. That's what changed him. He worshiped. Well, how did he get there? How did this change happen? And the text tells us there were actually two incidents around two people. The first time he tried to bring up the Ark of the Covenant, and the second time. So let's take a look at each of them. Here are the two things that he learned. And you have to learn both of them. It's not like either one will change your life. Oh, no. It's together that these two lessons that he learned changed his life and will change yours. The first one is this. As he was bringing the Ark of the Covenant up, Uzzah, one of the men who was just walking along with the oxen cart. Now, you know, because the Ark of the Covenant was put on an oxen cart, you don't drive an oxen cart up on the cart the way you would drive a stagecoach. The oxen walk alongside, and you walk alongside, and you guide the oxen. And so these two men, Uzzah and Ahio, were walking along. And at one point, evidently, one of the oxen stumbled, you see. And the Ark started to fall off. The Ark of the Covenant. You know, this holy... holies about to fall off and so uh you know as it just reaches out just to steady it and just put it back and he's struck dead and right away we think that was a little excessive when that little excessive you know it's a really kills the parade i mean yeah and and and it does by the way it does kill parades when that happens um and of course so we've laughed but then you get irritated you say yeah this is this is the kind of stuff in the bible that you know why it just turns a lot of people off and why i'm kind of turned off too and actually i have heard this preached kathy reminded me on the way home this morning one time we heard a sermon on this in which uh we sat there we listened and the man's uh the the preacher's point was this he said well this teaches is you got to follow all the rules you got to follow them absolutely and if you don't follow all of god's rules he's going to get you so you better take him seriously now here's the question is that it was uzza struck because he broke the rules and the answer is yes but not really yes the rules are part of that but not really that wasn't the ultimate reason let me show you why in order to understand what happened to uzza and what happened to david you need to here's a couple of uh important things we have to keep in mind number one the rules around the ark of the covenant and the tabernacle you know there was a way in which you approached god the ark of the covenant was the god's holy presence dwelt over the tabernacle over the ark of the covenant in the holy of holies and all the rules about how you approached and how you did the sacrifices and and and how you what you did all the rules around the ark were not just the typical kind of technical rituals that every single religion you know uh developed i'm going to show you here in a second just so we could say well here here's how we're pleasing the deity no in deuteronomy four just before he died moses is speaking to his people about all these rules all these laws that god gave about how you worshiped him and how you came into the tabernacle and how you treated the ark and he says if you obey all these laws he doesn't say god will be okay with you and that he says then the world will know what a glorious god we have the world will understand who god is the world will understand and what that means is the ark of the covenant and actually the whole tabernacle worship but especially as we're going to see the ark of the covenant is a concrete sermon to the world it was god's way of telling the world who he is and how he must be approached and how he's going to save the world it's a concrete gospel presentation and you see why all the rules around the work of the ark were so crucial because they were part of the message to the world of who god is and if the rules are forgotten and the rules are disobeyed the message of god to the world about who he is and how he can be saved is lost you see what what is at stake here you say well what were those rules okay there was two basic things about the ark of the covenant and i'm going to give you one and then i'll tell you the next one under the last point the first thing that david learned was this inside the ark of the covenant was the ten commandments the actual stone tablets that moses brought down from mount sinai with thou shalt have no other gods before me thou shalt not you know all the rules all the ten commandments and they were actually inside the box it was a repository and you couldn't touch it you couldn't draw near and you couldn't touch it in fact whenever the uh ark of the covenant was moved because of course the children of israel were traveling through the wilderness when the ark of the covenant was moved here were the rules they had to be covered so nobody could see it and by the way it wasn't covered secondly it could not be put on any cart or anything by the way it was the way it was carried is only people had to put uh there were two poles you put through metal rings on both sides and it was just carried along it was not set on anything number three only levites could carry it only people whose entire life was set apart in order to handle uh the the worship of the tabernacle it was so important that the worship and how the ark of the covenant and how the altars and everything uh was done because it was the message of the gospel it was the message of who god is to the world and if it if it gets forgotten the message is gone and the levites were supposed to be the ones who did this so it was never supposed to be seen it was never supposed to be touched it was not supposed to be put on a cart it was only supposed to be transported by levites about if you say, well, he struck Isaiah down because he broke the rule. Well, the problem is they should have all been struck down already. God had been very patient. All the rules had been being broken. And most of all, David, David hadn't read the rule book either. He hadn't read the owner's manual. You know, don't drive the car without reading the owner's manual. And even David the king didn't seem to be aware of any of this stuff. Now, why is that so important? Here it is, rule one. The law of God is in that ark. The law of God is what we are supposed to be doing. It's how we're supposed to be living. And if you touch the ark, you die. And do you know what this means? It means this God is different than all other gods. This religion is different than all other religions in the world. Hey, every religion in the world, every nation, they all had their temples. And inside the temple, there were shrines and holy objects. And what did you do when you saw a shrine? You touched it. Everybody touched it. Have you ever seen any of these places? I mean, it's like they're worn away by people touching them and taking the handkerchief and kissing the handkerchief and then rubbing on it. And you rubbed up against it because you wanted the magic. And it was also a way of showing devotion. You touched it by saying, I'm devoted to you. And in every other religion, the deity is appeased by that. The deity is flattered by that. And why? Because in every other religion, the way you get your salvation is through your efforts, through your obeisance, through obeying the rituals, through flattering, and through appeasing the deity. But only biblical religion says, no. There's an infinite distance between you and the deity. Because the law of God condemns you. You touch that, you die. Why? Because no one is righteous. No, not one. No one. No one lives up to the Ten Commandments. None. There is an infinite chasm between you and God. And you cannot, your efforts will never traverse it. Your efforts can never bridge that chasm. If there's going to be any salvation, it's not going to come from you. There's nothing you can do. It's going to have to come from God. It's going to have to be supernatural. It's going to have to be this gracious intervention. And that's the first thing that David discovered. Because now do you see what was at stake when Uzzah? When it was falling over, here's two things that Uzzah was doing. Number one, Uzzah thought that the soil, I mean, if it hit the ground, oh, that's terrible, right? In other words, the soil would have defiled the Ark of the Covenant more than he would. Boy, that's bad theology. It's more than bad theology. It shows he has not the slightest idea of who this God is and who he is. Does he really think that the soil somehow is more defiling than he is? Listen, let me just tell you something about soil. God made the soil. And guess what? It's not fallen. The soil is everything God ever wanted it to be. It's doing its job. It's filled with nutrients. You plant things in it. They grow. It's wonderful. There's nothing wrong with the soil. The soil is everything God wants it to be. But you and I, we're not close to being what God created us to be. Not close. And so, Uzzah has no concept of how lost he is. No concept of how sinful he is. And, by the way, by putting the Ark back up, he's showing that he feels like maybe God occasionally needs our help. Because that's how all the other deities are in the world. God needs our help. You know, God makes these promises. We have to help him with the promises. God asks, you know, I've prayed to God, but I've got to help God answer my prayer. There's lots of ways of doing that, by the way. And besides that, I've got to help God because I've got to contribute to my salvation. I've got to do something. He'll do part. I'll do part. Uzzah, everything's on the line here. Everything's on the line. Because if Uzzah gets away with this, and David, the king, seemed to not see anything wrong with this, it showed that the gospel was ready to be lost. The uniqueness of this God, the uniqueness of this religion was completely lost. A religion of complete grace. It's a religion where God is so holy, he cannot brook any evil, any injustice. He can't overlook any sin. And we are so lost that nothing we do can traverse the chasm between us and him. It's the only religion in the world like that. And it was about to be lost. And God didn't let it get lost. Because God sent a message to David and to us. Because here we are, looking at it a few thousand years later. I am holy, he says. And David says, how will this ark ever come to me? This God is here. This God is here. he was. And that was the first step toward actually becoming a new man. But here's the second step. The incident with Uzzah showed David that he was more sinful than he ever dared believe. But the incident with Obed-Edom showed him at the same time that God wants his fellowship and it's possible to be loved. And it's possible for your sin to be dealt with. See, here's, this by the way, everybody, this is by the way the comical part of the story. Obed-Edom was a Gittite, which means he was a foreigner. He was not an Israelite. He was a person of a different race. So, okay, you know, the ark of the covenant just zapped somebody, killed someone. Here's David's. And what am I going to do with the ark of the covenant? Well, you know, there's this foreigner that lives right here. Fine, let him have it. It's a little bit like putting a toxic waste dump in the backyard of the neighborhood that can't, doesn't have the power to stop it. And here's almost certainly what they thought. My, God is a God of Israel, right? He's our God. And if God is so dangerous that even one of our Israelite people would be killed just by touching the ark, my goodness, what is going to happen to these foreigners? They'll probably all die within a day or so just by being in the neighborhood, you see? And immediately, God prospers and blesses them. Deliberately. These foreigners, these people who, you know, from what we know, they weren't believers in God at all. Well, we don't know, but God deliberately prospers them to try to get David to see, look, I'm also a God of grace. Or put it another way, he's really saying to David, David, don't you dare think that there are good people and bad people in the world, that there's some races that are good and some races and cultures that are bad, or that somehow some people, just by virtue of their pedigree, they've got a leg up on God and other people do not. He said, look, you're all sinners. No one is righteous, no, not one, but that also means anybody can be saved. Anybody can receive my grace. Biblical religion is the great leveler. It's the most democratic force in the world, always has been, always has been. And so David goes back and probably reads the manual. You know why? Notice what it says here in verse 13. And as he brings it back up, he says, when those who were carrying the ark of the Lord had taken six steps, he sacrificed a bull and a fattened calf, wearing a linen ephod. Okay, David was dancing before the Lord. Every six steps, they sacrificed a bull and a fattened calf. Where did he get that idea? Well, here's where he got it. If you go back to Exodus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, you go back into the temple worship and you really read what God says about the ark, here's what you do. It's true that the law of God is in the ark. Look, the law of God condemns us. The holiness of God is something that we cannot, you know, because we're a sinful man cannot, man and woman cannot approach a holy God. But one day a year, you may enter, the high priest may enter. First, the high priest goes by the altar of burnt offering out front where he sacrifices a bull, sacrifices a fattened calf, and then takes the blood and goes into the holy place. And over top, on the top of the ark of the covenant, over the law of God was a gold slab called the mercy seat. The helastrian is the Greek word. The place of propitiation. And if the high priest sprinkles the blood, sacrifice for atonement for sin, that shields the high priest from the demands of the law. And God says, I will speak to you over the mercy seat. Now, that's an astounding picture of the gospel. That though, no, of course you cannot approach a holy God in your own righteousness. But, if there is a sacrifice for sin, by grace, God can open the way and justify you. And David didn't understand. Of course, nobody in the Old Testament understood exactly how the blood of bulls and goats and fatted calves would atone for sin. But he did understand this, that this God was more holy than he thought, but also more gracious than he thought. And see, when he put those two things together, I am more lost. I am worse than I thought. But that means that the fact that God still wants to deal with me and have fellowship with me, that means his grace is greater than I thought. And that gave him the joy. That made him dance. That brought a change in his life. He didn't just believe in God. He was worshiping this God. And when he worshiped this God, as we saw, that's what changed. know a lot more about than he did. He saw through a glass darkly, did he not? But here's what we know from the book of Hebrews, talking about Jesus Christ. Book of Hebrews says, because it is impossible for the blood of bulls to take away sins. Therefore, when Christ came, he said, with burnt offerings and sin offerings, you were not pleased, O Lord, but a body you have prepared for me. Here I am. I have come to do your will, O God. And by that will of God, we have been made holy through the sacrifice of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Look, when Jesus Christ died on the cross, the veil in the temple was ripped from top to bottom and the ark became obsolete. Why? Because Jesus was the sacrifice and all sacrifices. His blood was the blood and all blood sacrifices. And what it means is when you say, Father, accept me because of what Jesus did, you go in and the ark of the covenant has been fulfilled in the gospel of Jesus Christ. And it's only when those two things go together. So there's that great hymn by John Newton to see the law by Christ fulfilled. I see the law and it's coming down on me to see the law by Christ fulfilled the mercy seat, to see the law by Christ fulfilled and hear his pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. Do you know the difference between doing something because your boss asks you to do it and you just don't want to lose your job versus doing something because the person that you're most in love with in the whole world wants you to do something and you do it like this because you can't wait to see the smile on his or her face. Because your greatest happiness now is to see the person you love happy and happy with you. There's no greater happiness and that's worship and that comes from the understanding of the gospel. Charles Spurgeon, great Baptist preacher, near the very end of his life said this, the love of God has been so overpoweringly experienced by me on some occasions that I've almost had to ask for a stay of this delight because I did not think I could endure anymore. He was getting so much love and so much joy in prayer that he actually had said to God, stop, I don't know that I can take this any longer. Now, by the way, he was, at that point, he was kind of crippled and yet he was dancing. He was dancing. And if you, see, if you're Uzzah, thinking you can manage God, thinking you can help God out, thinking you can contribute to your salvation, you'll just be a self-righteous person. There's not going to be any joy or dance about you. You're going to look down on other people. You're going to always be complaining because God's not actually giving you the life that you think he owes you. There's not going to be any dance. But if you understand the gospel, there'll be a joy, there'll be a dance about your life. And you know, if David could dance and he didn't even know about the cross, what should you and I be doing? Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us, thank you for giving us an insight as to how worship works. It's basically just believing the gospel. And Lord, every time we get a deeper insight into how lost we are, we can turn that. We're not afraid of that. We're not afraid of all these passages that talk about how holy you are and your judgment. No, because it just shows us that Jesus Christ took all that for us. And now your grace shines more brightly. Your love becomes more real to us. And we can dance. And we don't have to stand on our dignity. And we don't care what anybody thinks anymore because we're only worshiping you and nothing else. So let that be. Let that be. Let that be true in our lives. And would you show us how to worship you and be a worshiping people? We pray this in Jesus name. Amen.
