TITLE: David Prepares His People
SCRIPTURE: 1 Chronicles 29:1-20
TOPICS: Stewardship, Generosity and Money
SERIES: The Life of David 2009
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/david-prepares-his-people/

============================================================

The scripture tonight comes from 1 Chronicles chapter 29, verses 1 through 20. Then King David said to the whole assembly, My son Solomon, the one whom God has chosen, is young and inexperienced. The task is great because this palatial structure is not for man, but for the Lord God. With all my resources I have provided for the temple of my God, gold for the gold work, silver for the silver, bronze for the bronze, iron for the iron, and wood for the wood, as well as onyx for the settings, turquoise, stones of various colors, and all kinds of fine stone and marble, all of these in large quantities. Besides, in my devotion to the temple of my God, I now give my personal treasures of gold and silver for the temple of my God, over and above everything I have provided for this holy temple. Three thousand talents of gold, gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver for the overlaying of the walls of the buildings, for the gold work and the silver work, and for all the work to be done by the craftsmen. Now, who was willing to consecrate himself today to the Lord? Then the leaders of families, the officers of the tribes of Israel, the commanders of thousands, and commanders of hundreds, and the officials in charge of the king's work, gave willingly. They gave toward the work on the temple of God five thousand talents and ten thousand derricks of gold, ten thousand talents of silver, eighteen thousand talents of bronze, and a hundred thousand talents of iron. Any who had precious stones gave them to the treasury of the temple of the Lord in the custody of Jehiel the Gershonite. The people rejoiced at the willing response of their leaders, for they had given freely and wholeheartedly to the Lord. David the king also rejoiced greatly. David praised the Lord in the presence of the whole assembly, saying, Praise be to you, O Lord, God of our Father Israel, from everlasting to everlasting. Yours, O Lord, is the greatness and the power and the glory and the majesty and the splendor, for everything in heaven and earth is yours. Yours, O Lord, is the kingdom. You are exalted as head over all. Wealth and honor come from you. You are the ruler of all things. In your hands are strength and power to exalt and give strength to all. Now, our God, we give you thanks and praise your glorious name. But who am I and who are my people that we should be able to give as generously as this? Everything comes from you, and we have given you only what comes from your hand. We are aliens and strangers in your sight, as were all our forefathers. Our days on earth are like a shadow without hope. O Lord, our God, as for all this abundance that we have provided for building you a temple for your holy name, it comes from your hand, and all of it belongs to you. I know, my God, that you test the heart and are pleased with integrity. All these things have I given willingly and with honest intent. And now I have seen with joy how willingly your people who are here have given to you. O Lord, God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, keep this desire in our hearts of your people forever and keep their hearts loyal to you. And give my son Solomon the wholehearted devotion to keep your commands, requirements, and decrees, and to do everything to build the palatial structure for which I have provided. Then David said to the whole assembly, Praise the Lord, your God. So they all praised the Lord, the God of their fathers. They bowed low and fell prostrate before the Lord and the king. This is God's word. Let me, before getting into the sermon, let me just reemphasize one of the announcements. The, this fall is the Renew campaign on the 20th anniversary of the founding of Redeemer. And every so many years, we take a time as an entire church to renew our vision for what we are here to do, to go back and remember what it is that God's called us to do in the city, and then roll out some new initiatives to help us accomplish that. And that's what we're going to do this fall. Now, the best way to not only participate in that, that's what we're going to do now. Look at the end. Thank you, Charles. city, and then roll out some new initiatives to help us accomplish that, and that's what we're going to do this fall. Now, the best way to not only participate in that, but if you want to plug in more, meet more people, get more involved in Redeemer, the best way to do that is to sign up for those beta groups. They're seven weeks only. You can stay together if you want, but they're only seven weeks. You'll be talking every week about the sermon and the text of the sermon and the topic of the week. You can sign up through a kiosk here. You can sign up, you know, the bulletin will tell you to do it online, and if you say, well, I'm not even sure I even believe in Christianity, there actually are some groups for people who want to explore Christianity as well as talk about the subjects of the sermons, and therefore take a look at that. Please consider that. This is the last week we're going to look at the life of David, and there's so much material about David in the Bible because there's two whole biographies of him in the Bible. There's a biography of David written by the author of 1 and 2 Samuel, and then there's a biography written by the author of 1 and 2 Chronicles. And here is the end of the story of David's life. This is the last episode in the book of Chronicles. And there's a problem here. David's death or near death, impending death, creates a problem for Israel. David points his people to the presence of God, the temple, but that presence will only be realized through a practice and a promise. So if we're going to understand what this is about, we need to look at the problem and the presence and the practice and the promise. First of all, the problem. The problem is David's about to die, and Israel's never had a better experience of nationhood. Under David, there's more unity than there's ever been before. Under David, there's more prosperity and strength than ever before. And it's very clear that under David's kingship, God has been with them. And they're afraid to see David leave. And he comes right up and right out, and he confronts this, because right in verse 1, he says, this is what they're all afraid of. This is what's on everybody's mind. My son Solomon, that's his successor, is young and inexperienced. So he's confronting the fear right up front. The people are saying, look, God was with us when you were here, but I'm not sure this young kid's got what it takes. And they're scared. Now, the reason this is a problem is because almost nobody, whoever connects to God, anybody who seeks and actually connects to God, almost nobody does that on their own. There's almost always a human bridge. At least that's how you think of it. You know, we're seeking God, or we're trying to figure this out, and we feel a kind of gap. We feel, you know, a gap between us and God, and then you meet somebody, a man or a woman, a friend, a counselor, a guide, a leader. And this person knows more about God than you do, closer to God, and this person bridges the gap. And you begin to sense the reality of God's love and the reality of God's truth, and it's great. But what happens if that person moves away or dies? Otherwise, then you begin to get pretty anxious because you feel like, maybe I'm going to lose God. And see, therefore, it's a rather, it's a problem. By the way, I'm all for community. You know I'm always talking about community. You can't know God without community. But here we're talking about identifying particular people and saying, I don't know how God's going to work in my life if that person's not around. Robert Murray McShane, he was a Scottish minister in the early 19th century, he composed a sermon based on Hosea 14.8. The name of the sermon is taken from Hosea 14.8. What have I to do anymore with idols? What have I to do anymore with idols? And he looked at his congregation, and he started going down the list of their idols. And it's a great list. But then suddenly he got to the, he was saying, there's this idol, you have this idol. And then finally, then he gets to one item on the list, which he says he calls ministers. And there he says, you have good reason to love ministers. They love you and watch over your souls, but oh, do not make an idol of them. I wish this day, and that was a communion service day, I wish this day would bring you so near to Christ that you shall know more glory in man. And what he's saying, of course, he's just talking about ministers, but the principles here for David, the principles here. general. But when you identify particular people and say, that person, that's how God's working in my life. And if I lose that person, I don't see how God's going to be working in our midst anymore. That, McShangin says, is an idol. So there is the problem. What does David point to as to his people as the solution? He says, tells you right away, verses 1 and 2, with all my resources, I have provided for the temple of my God, the temple. And this whole passage is about the fact that when he dies, when he's gone, he wants, under Solomon, he wants the people of Israel to build a temple, the temple for God. Now, why? Superficially, you might think, well, he wants a monument. When I'm gone, I want a monument. Okay? The Egyptian pharaohs, they built pyramids. Okay? David wants to build, you know, a big temple with a big plaque, you know, in memory of our great King David. No. He's not after a nicer skyline for Jerusalem. In fact, his motivation is the opposite. And actually, this incident is not just chapter 29. This final episode is chapter 28 and 29. At the beginning of chapter 28, David originally calls the officials together and he says this. David summoned all the officials of Israel to assemble at Jerusalem and he said, I had it in my heart to build a house as a place of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord. And I've made plans to build it. Did you hear that? He says, what I want you to do is I want you to build a place of rest for the ark of the covenant. What he's saying here is this. I am not your bridge to God. You do not need me and you don't need a replacement for me. You need the presence of God himself in your midst. In the midst of your individual lives and in the midst of your society, your corporate life. That's what you need. I want you to go direct to God himself. I want you to go direct and get his presence in the center of your life. Now to understand what David is longing for here, you need to understand something about the history of the ark of the covenant. And actually, if you read the entire biography of David in either form in the Bible, the ark is a very major theme of his life. Now, originally, the ark was made by Moses under the direction of God. And the ark is a wooden box overlaid with gold. And on top of it is a slab of gold called the mercy seat. And overshadowing the mercy seat, facing this way are two angels, cherubims with wing. And this was the bridge because the ark of the covenant was the only object in the holy of holies of the tabernacle, the tent where people went to meet God. And the holy of holies was one place you couldn't go except the high priest, one day a year, Yom Kippur. And one day of the year, he went back and he took the blood of the sacrifice to atone for the sins of the people. And he spread it on the mercy seat, on the slab, over the ark. And above the slab, above the ark, then appeared the Shekinah, the glory of God, the holy, transcendent, immediate, royal, life-changing presence of God. Because the sins that were separating us, that's the gap. When the blood was sprinkled, God appeared. And therefore, the ark of the covenant is a sign of the presence of God. What David is after is not a monument. He says, I want you to know the presence of God. But the history goes on. Some of you know that the ark of the covenant, when Moses and Joshua were coming up from Egypt in the promised land, it was a very powerful object. If you touched it, you died because it was holy. And at one point, you might remember, you know the very famous battle of Jericho. You know the song, you know about it. And the Israelites fought Jericho and God knocked all the walls down so they could take Jericho. But do you remember, it was the ark of the covenant. They walked around the walls seven times, the ark of the covenant, praising God, and the walls fell down. Now, centuries later, the ark of the covenant is in the tabernacle, and the priest is Eli. And in the days of Eli the priest, Israel had become corrupt. It was a society in which it was corrupt from the top to the bottom. graft and corruption. At the bottom, the masses were filled with idolatry and immorality. It was a corrupt society. And they were fighting against the Philistines, and the battle was going badly. The war was going badly. And then somebody suddenly said, hey, how about getting the ark? Remember Jericho? No pagan, dirty, nasty pagan can touch the ark. Let's bring the ark. So they went and got the ark. And when they brought the ark into the camp of the Israelite soldiers, everybody cheered. And then they went out to meet the Philistines with the ark of the covenant. And they got slaughtered. 30,000 Israelite soldiers killed. And then the Philistines put their hands on the ark, and nothing happened to them. And the Philistines said, well, that proves our God is better than your God. But every place that the Philistines put the ark, every Philistine town where they put the ark as a trophy, was wiped out by a plague. You know, when they first touched it, it didn't hurt them at all. And then every place they put it, it was starting to devastate the whole nation. Finally, it's almost comical. They stuck it on a wagon with two cows and no driver and just sent it back. Now, when you read this history, okay, over here, you touch it, die. Over here, you touch it, nothing. Over here, you go into battle, win. Over here, you go, take it into battle, you lose. Let's ask a good New York question. What's up with that? Well, it doesn't seem to make any sense. Yes, it does. And here's what it means. It's a box, right? But you can't put God in a box. He is not a God at hand. God's presence is never tied to any object, to any person, or to any method. So that if you control the object, person, or method, then you've controlled God. But you cannot conjure God. You cannot control God. You cannot channel God. He's not a tame God. He's a sovereign God, and He's uncontrollable. And you know what that means? He's an uncontrollable God. What that means is, first of all, no sacrament or ritual automatically confers grace unless you've got faith in your heart. In other words, you can't tie the presence of God automatically to a process. No human person, no leader, no minister, no nothing, nobody can automatically confer God's grace on you. As McShane said, that's idolatry. Well, let's go a little further. No behavior. I don't know how often over the years I've had people say to me, I've pretty much given up on God. I've lived a good life. I've exercised self-control. I'm a good person. I've tried so hard to live a good life in a way that my siblings haven't, in a way my friends haven't, in a way my neighbors haven't. And I've asked God for this, and I've asked God for that, and it hasn't happened. This isn't right. This isn't right. I've tried so hard, and I asked God for something. And I don't ask God for a lot, but this was so important to me. He didn't give it to me. You know what you're saying? God is the genie of the lamp, and you're rubbing that lamp by being a good person, by being a good father or mother, by being a good family member, by being a good Christian. And you're rubbing that lamp, and now you deserve three wishes. But God is not a God in the box. His presence is never tied to any object or person or method because he cannot be controlled. He cannot be conjured. David Martin Lloyd-Jones is a British preacher, but he was a Welsh preacher. And when he was a pastor in Wales in the 1930s, there were many people in the churches that had become Christians through the Great Welsh Revival about 25 years before. During the Welsh Revival, God's presence was everywhere. It was present in Wales. It just changed society. There were just enormous numbers of people who became Christians. It changed the way everything operated. It's a great story. But 25 years later, those converts were tough to have in your church because they would say, well, pastor, we shouldn't sing these kinds of hymns. These are the hymns you have to sing if God's going to work. Those were the hymns that God blessed. Those are the hymns under which I became a Christian. Or pastor, people are preaching like this, but this is the way you've got to preach if you want to see God work. You know what they've done? They put God in a box. The hymns now are the bridge to God. See? The preacher said, when somebody becomes a Christian at Redeemer, and many, many people over the years have become Christians here, which always has an imprint, it imprints you, and when they go off to other places and they move away, usually my reports, the reports I hear is man, the people from Redeemer who've moved to our church, they're so important to us, they're so, they're great workers, but occasionally I hear that people who became Christians at Redeemer go to other towns, go to other churches, and they don't like anything. I said, that's not how we do it at Redeemer. That's how they don't, they don't preach like that. They don't, you know, they don't preach like that at Redeemer. They don't do the music like that at Redeemer. This is how God works. You know, one time you take the box out, success. One time you take the box out, failure. What's the matter with that? Because you can't put God in a box. God's presence is never tied to one method, one object, one person. God will not work at Redeemer 20 years from now the way He was working 20 years ago. And if you think it's got to be that way, what have you done? You're not really seeking the presence of God. You're not really seeking the presence of God. What you're doing is you're trying to turn objects, methods, people into the bridge when they're not. David is saying, stop looking to these things. Go get God yourself. Go after God himself. Get the presence of God himself in the middle of your life instead of working on all these other kind of mediators and mistaking them for the power and presence of God. However, having said that, now if we say God's really uncontrollable and He's really not somebody who can conjure and that He's completely untame and He's sovereign, does that mean if you want the presence of God in your life, does that mean if we want the presence of God in our midst, there's nothing to do? Of course not. There's definitely something to do. What is it? Now that's all through here. You know all this emphasis on money? And I'll get back to that in a second. All this emphasis on David has given so much money. And then the leaders have given so much money and then the people give so much money. What's all that about? Is it about money? Well, you can't build a temple without money. But look at the end of the first paragraph, verse 5. He says, I've given this money, I've given this money, I've given this money. Now who else is going to what? Give money? Well, yes. And yet that's not what he says. He says, now who is willing to consecrate himself to the Lord? Consecration. What's that? Absolute, unconditional self-giving. Or look at the very end, verse 219, and give my son Solomon the wholehearted devotion to keep your commands, requirements, and degrees. Or look at verse 17. I know, my God, you test the heart and are pleased only with integrity. Kierkegaard says, purity of heart is to will one thing. Now, God is uncontrollable. But what is this? Let's think back to what they did wrong. Remember we said the children of Israel brought the… the battle was going badly with the Philistines and they brought the ark in. They didn't change their lives. They were immoral, corrupt people, but they said, oh, I can get the box. We can bring the box. Now this is what we actually call magic. You know what magic is? Magic is seeking the power of God without giving your life. Magic is trying to get divine power without discipleship, without self-giving, without whole life commitment, unconditional surrender. That's magic. Then you're just trying to manipulate God and God will not be controlled. Put it like this. You say, well, if he's uncontrolled, there's nothing to do to invite his presence in. Yes, to stop trying to control him. If you try to control him, it negates the presence of God. And an absolute unwillingness to control him invites the presence of God. You say, well, how do I… what do you mean an unwillingness to control him? How do I not control him? Like this. You obey him. You serve him. You give your life to him without conditions. Without conditions. If you say, oh, Lord, I'd like to… I want to come to church. I want to obey you. I want to clean up my life. If you will just help me get into the college of my choice. Now, on the other side of the word if, oh, Lord, I'll do this, this, this, this, if. I'll serve you if you don't let this happen to me. I'll serve you if you let this happen to me. God, right? See, that's the non-negotiable. That's what I've got to have. Oh, I'll serve you if, meaning the you, the person you're talking to, I'll serve you if this happens. Friends, this is the non-negotiable. You're negotiable. This is the God. What are you? Unless you're willing to say, I'm going to obey whether I understand it or not. I'm going to serve no matter what. And it doesn't matter whether the circumstances of my life go well. It doesn't matter whether I get blessings. It doesn't matter whether I get answered prayer. I'm going to serve. Until you do that, you're into magic. Until you do that, until you drop your conditions, until you take your hands off your life, you're negating the presence of God. You're not inviting the presence of God in. Or let me put it another way. The other thing that you have to do to invite the presence of God, I said, is to serve Him without condition. Well, here's just another way to put it. You have to treat God personally instead of mechanically. So, for example, what if somebody came to you and said, I love you and I want to marry you. Would you marry me? And you say, why do you love me and want to marry me? And the person says, well, you know, your family's connections are going to open so many doors for me. Will you marry me? No. No. I love you. I want to marry you. Why do you love me and want to marry me? When I look at your trust fund, I get really excited. Will you marry me? No. Why not? You don't want me. I'm a commodity. You don't want me for me. You want me for something else. I'm a commodity. I've been objectified. I've been dehumanized. And what are you going to do to a person like that? You're going to withdraw your presence. You don't think God's going to do the same thing? He's a person. He's holy. He's infinite. He's transcendent. But He's a person. He's not a force to be conjured and channeled. He's a person. In other words, unless you say, I'm going to serve you without condition, what you're really saying is, I don't want you. I want the things you bring me. And only when you say, I drop my conditions, I serve you unconditionally, I take my hands off my life, only then are you saying, I want to serve you for you. I want to serve you to get you. I want your presence. Your presence isn't a means to some other end. It's the end. And until you want His presence as an end in itself, until you say, I want to serve God to get God, not to get blessings, not to get answers to prayer, not to get my agenda. Until you say, I want to serve God to get God, you don't really want His presence, and you're not going to get it. You're not going to get it. You have to want Him for Himself alone. That's wholehearted devotion. That's integrity of heart. That's consecration. And that invites the presence of God. But wait, wait a minute, we better stop there. If any of you are saying, well, I really better get to work. work. I'm not very consecrated. No, you're not. And by the way, I do want you to get to work, but I would like to add one last thing. How did Solomon do? Did he live a life of wholehearted devotion? Well, we're not going to go to Solomon's life. We're going to do something else after this week. But can I just tell you, you know, I'll just hate to tell you the end of the story. Spoiler alert, he doesn't. He doesn't. He doesn't live a whole life of wholehearted devotion. Well, does the temple get built? Yes. Does the glory of God come in? Yes. Are the people of God so wholeheartedly devotion that God's glory stays there? No. In fact, if you go to the book of Ezekiel, chapters 8 to 11, you will see that what God does is He gives Ezekiel, just as the Babylonians are coming and Nebuchadnezzar is coming to invade Israel, God gives Ezekiel a vision of the glory of God, the kiboth, the royal presence of God, leaving the temple for good. Because of the immorality, because of the idolatry, because the children of Israel said, well, we're going to do the rituals, we're going to do the sacrifice, we're going to do all this stuff, we're still going to live the way we want. Magic, controlling him, mechanical, see? And he left. And he was gone. And the Babylonians razed the temple to the ground. And when they came back from exile, when the Israelites came back from exile, they rebuilt the temple. in there. There was no ark in there. There was no Shekinah glory. Because guess what? We can't, we will not be totally consecrated. We cannot come up with what we need to really invite the presence of God into our lives. We really won't. Nobody is wholly devoted. Nobody completely consecrated. Nobody has a heart of pure integrity, willing just one thing. So are we stuck? Are we lost? Are we forever on this side of the gap? No one to bridge the gap between us and God? No. There's a promise in this passage. Well, not right here in the part that we have printed. But remember, I said back in chapter 28, when David first brings the people together and says, I want to build a place of rest for the ark of the covenant, listen to what else he says. I had it in my heart to build a house as a place of rest for the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and I made plans to build it. But God said to me, you are not going to build this, but you have a son who will be a man of peace and rest. He is the one who will build the house for my name. He will be my son. I will be his father, and I will establish the throne, his throne, forever. You say, well, I guess that's just, you know, kind of royal hyperbole. You know, those ancient kings talk like that. Oh, king, live forever. Nobody really expected him to live forever. Now, wait a minute. This is God. And God says, David, you are a man of war. You've got blood on your hands. I'm not going to let you build my temple. But your son, your descendant, he will be a man of peace. I will be his father. He will be my son, and he will build the temple for my name, and his throne will go on forever. His kingdom will last forever. Well, you say, that's God saying, well, is that hyperbole? No. There was a descendant who was a man of peace, who gave us the ultimate temple, and his throne will live forever. See, centuries later, a man showed up in the temple precincts, the empty temple. There was a building, no glory. And you know what he said? He pointed to himself, and he said, tear this temple down. In three days, I'll raise it up again. And he was talking about himself. It was Jesus Christ. And you know what that means? You know what he's saying? He's saying, I'm the axis mundi. I am the bridge between heaven and earth. I am the temple. I'm the bridge over the chasm. How could that be? Here's how. Jesus Christ came to earth, and he's the only man who ever loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind. He's the only human being who ever was totally devoted, wholehearted devotion, absolutely and completely consecrated. The only one. He's the only one that had what the book of Hebrews says, the holiness without which no one will see the Lord. He had it. And so he earned the presence of God. He's the only one whose life really earned and invited the presence of God in. But at the end of his life, what did he get? Did he get the presence of God? He got the absence of God. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He earned the presence. He got the absence. His blood was being shed. Why? His blood was essentially being shed and being put on the mercy seat so that the glory of God, the presence of God could come into our lives. God made him sin. Who knew no sin? That we might become the righteousness of God in him. What that means is he got the absence that you and I deserve for all of our manipulation, for all of our magic, for all of the ways in which we've used God. He got the absence we deserve so that when we believe in him, we get the presence of God that he deserves and he earned. And that's why Paul actually says, Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us. He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to the Gentiles through Christ Jesus so that by faith we might receive the spirit, the spirit, that's the glory. And when Jesus died, the veil of the temple was ripped from top to bottom. That glory now comes to us because that David here built a building temple at the cost of his wealth. But our ultimate king, our ultimate Davidic king, David's greater descendant, the man of peace, was himself a temple. And then when you believe in him, you become part of that temple. And the Holy Spirit and the glory of God comes into your life. And our David didn't just build it at the cost of his wealth, but build it at the cost of his life. And by the way, that's how you'll start to get wholehearted devotion, at least increasingly, because when Jesus took his hands off his life for you, and you see that, you'll start to be able to take your hands off your life. Unless you see him doing that, then any wholehearted devotion conjuring. But when you see what he did, you'll start to say, Lord, no condition. Hey, three things. Application, three things. One is, please notice what this passage says. It's possible to give your money away generously without giving yourself, but it's impossible to give yourself without giving away your money generously. Those two things are always together. You want consecration? You want the presence of God in your life? To some degree, it entails radical generosity. That's the first thing. The second thing is creativity. You know what's great about this idea, this teaching about the presence of God? When you look at the great revivals of history, and there have been some enormous revivals going on, huge. God's presence goes into whole countries, whole societies, changes them. It's happening today in some parts of the world. It always happens. But the only thing those revivals have in common is extraordinary prayer and the communication of the gospel. And everything else is different. The methods are different. The music is different. The preaching is different. It's all different. You can never get back into Narnia the same way twice. And that means be creative. God is not going to work in Redeemer the same way 20 years from now that he worked 20 years ago. Be creative. Thirdly, prayer. If it's really true that because of what Jesus has done, you actually have the very Shekinah glory of God in your life, you and I are settling for too little in prayer. There is a glory available. There is an intimacy available. There is a love available. Look at your anxiety. Look at our anxieties. Look at our discouragements. We pray and we feel a little bit better. That's nothing compared to what must be available. It must be. Go at it. Go for it. Seek it. In the end, when you look at Jesus and what he did for you, you'll be able to increasingly take your hands off your life and experience more and more the presence of God, singing, take my love, my Lord I pour at thy feet its treasure store. Take myself and I will be ever only all for thee. Let's pray. Thank you, Lord, for giving us yourself, consecrating yourself, pouring out your blood. Help us now to seek your presence through consecration. Help us now as a church to seek your presence in our midst and to secure it from year to year and to look to the future. But help us be creative. Help us to be people of prayer. And most of all, help us to know that if we have you, we have everything. Make us like your son. We pray in his name. Amen.
