TITLE: Dear Children
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 5:1, 2
TOPICS: Identity
SERIES: Christian Lifestyle
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/dear-children/

============================================================

And they say, what's wrong? What's been wrong with you? And you say, I don't know. I've been feeling like this for weeks. I've just been feeling trapped. Just trapped. And they say, trapped in what? And you say, trapped in Ephesians 4. I feel I can't get out. I just feel every week I try to get out. I try to get to Ephesians 5 and I'm back in Ephesians 4. This is the week that we spring you. We're looking at Ephesians chapter 5 and I'm just going to read verses 1 and 2 rather than read the long passage and tell you something about where it fits. We're going to look at Ephesians 5 tonight, verses 1 and 2, because we're looking at this appalling, audacious, grand statement of Paul in this first sentence of this chapter. Let's read it and then let's chew on it and digest it. This is Ephesians chapter 5 and let me read this. Verses 1 and 2. The imitators of God, therefore, as dearly loved children, and live a life of love just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God. The imitators of God, therefore, as dearly loved children, and live a life of love just as Christ loved us and gave himself up for us as a fragrant offering and sacrifice to God. This is God's Word. You know, something that in a way is obvious, but something we continually forget. The Bible was not written with chapters and verses. The Bible was written like anything else is written and especially things that were written by hand and copied by hand. It was written just in sentences. We know that there weren't even any paragraph markings. There certainly weren't chapters and verse divisions. Well-meaning monks and scholars in the Middle Ages put the Bible, or divided the Bible up into chapters and verses so you could quickly and easily refer to the part that you wanted to refer to. So you could learn it, so that you could talk about it. And therefore, when you come to a new chapter, you realize this is not this is not the way Paul wrote. Paul did not say, now we begin chapter 5. This is just the way in which a number of as I said, well-meaning and sincere Christian believers divided it up. And therefore, when you see a chapter division, or even a verse division, even a paragraph division, you have to understand that that's not a divinely inspired paragraph division. That's not a divinely inspired chapter division. That's an interpretation. It's been foisted on the text necessarily, just so we get some idea about how it breaks down. But it's an interpretation. And so whenever you, when you're studying yourself, you have to realize that the paragraphs and the chapters are suggestions. Why does it start here? The reason I'm bringing this up is because when you say, why is this sentence, the beginning of chapter 5, and the answer is because somebody a long time ago thought that this was a new thought, that this was a new section, that this is different than the section that we've been looking at. And I think that's wrong. And I think that what you have is from chapter 4, verse 25, all the way down to chapter 5, verse 14, you have one long section about Christian lifestyle. Because I've been so long-winded about this, let me try to remind you about the over, give you an overview again, and remind you of the big picture. In verses 22, 23, and 24, Paul lays down the beauty and genius of the Christian life. He says, you put off the old self, you're renewed in the spirit of your mind, and you put on the new self. Then in verse 25 and following, he begins to give us all sorts of what we might call ethical codes. He tells us how to work and how to communicate. He talks about honesty and about stealing and about work, and he talks about relationships and bitterness and forgiveness and so on. And that means that he is giving us the ethical systems, he's giving us codes of conduct. But it all flows out of those verses 22, 23, and 24 that we spent so much time on so long ago. What's unique about the Christian life is the Christian lifestyle flows out of a new self-understanding. That's what Paul's saying. There's a transformation inside, there's a revolution of the personality. You think of yourself in a new way. You can't live the Christian lifestyle externally unless you've put on the new self. You think of yourself in a new way. Put it this way, to the degree that you're controlled by what the Bible says you are, to the degree that your identity, that doesn't happen. truth, to the degree that you think of yourself as the Bible says you should think of yourself, tonight we're going to see, as a child of God, for example, as a priest and king, as a forgiven person. To the degree that you put that on, to the degree that you're governed by that new self-understanding, to that degree you can live this lifestyle, to that degree that you can tell the truth, you can forgive, you can live with clear communication and so on. That's what's so remarkable about the Christian life, because on the one hand, you're supposed to tell the truth. Why? Because the Bible says you have to tell the truth. And yet, the glory of Christian morality is it's not just Christian morality, or the glory of Christian morality is that a Christian is not just a moral person, but a person who's been changed inside so that there is a morality that flows out. Now, therefore, from verse 25 all the way to chapter 5, verse 14, from 425 to 514, we're continually being given lifestyle codes, codes of conduct. That's why we're reading, you must speak truth truthfully, we are all members. You must not sin in your anger and get rid of your anger. Why we have to not steal any longer. Why we have to work. Why we have to give to the poor. Why we have to not let unwholesome talk come out of our mouths. Why we have to get rid of all bitterness, rage, and anger, and brawling. Why we have to forgive each other. But then look, as you go down, verse 3 of chapter 5, why we have to flee from sexual immorality, which we'll talk about later. Why we have to flee from greed. Why we have to, why these are improper for people. Why it talks about obscenity, foolish talk, and coarse joking. Why it talks about idolatry, and talks about greed as idolatry, which we'll get all of that. Why we have to be very careful about these sorts of lifestyle issues, and we have to live in a way that's becoming a Christian. So all of this section is talking about how you're supposed to live, and yet, sprinkled into it, not sprinkled, right in the middle of all of this talk about how you're supposed to live, are these appeals, like verse 30 of chapter 4, and don't grieve the Spirit of God with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. And here, what we read tonight, be imitators of God because you're dearly loved children, and because Jesus Christ loved us and gave himself up for us. You see how organic, how wholesome the Christian life is. That when Paul is saying, do this, don't do this, do this, don't do this, don't lie, don't commit adultery, don't steal, help the poor, tell the truth, be pure. In the middle of all that, he will suddenly go into what we might call theology. He'll say, walk in love because Christ made himself an apt, complete sacrifice to you. Walk in this way because the Spirit of God lives in your midst, and the Spirit of God is not an it, he's a person, and he's grieved. See, what Paul is showing you is how a Christian lives. A Christian doesn't say, I can't be angry because I'm not supposed to be angry, because Christians don't get angry. I have to tell the truth. Why? Because it's very wrong not to tell to tell a lie. It's very wrong not to tell the truth. Why do I have to be impure? Because good people are pure. Bad people commit adultery. See, Paul does not go that way. Paul laid down the principle in verse 22, 23, and 24. Put on the new self. Put off the old self. Be made new in the spirit of your mind. Reprogram your self-understanding. Always make sure that your lifestyle flows out of this new way of thinking about the world, out of a renewed mind and a renewed heart. So, even when he goes through all of his codes of conduct, he's continually talking the way he talks to himself. You see, he doesn't say, don't lie, because you'll be a very bad person if you lie. Instead, he says, I have got the Spirit of God living in me, a person, a person of the most exquisite sensitivity, a person who's too pure to look upon evil. What a wonderful holy guest I have in the midst of my life. How am I going to treat him? How grateful I should be? How I should be learning from him rather than him seeing what he sees rather than him having to see what I see? Paul is thinking it out. And as a result, he's melted into honesty. He's melted into forgiveness. As the Puritans used to say, he's melted by spiritual understandings of the holy, glorious guest who lives in his midst. And now, here today, or tonight, we're talking about another aspect. Paul says, never forget that Christ died for you. We're actually going to look at that next time. But never forget that you are his dear children. And if you live as his dear children, if you remember and think that you are his children, you will be able to imitate God. So, Paul's always going They're going to make it a bigger thing. But I think he's doing it. And if you have that he's doing it. We, he's doing it. And we're doing it. And so, Paul's always going that you are his dear children. And if you live as his dear children, if you remember and think that you are his children, you will be able to imitate God. So Paul's always going from the macro to the micro. He's always talking about the big picture. He's always continually reprogramming his self-understanding, and then descending to the particulars and saying, in this situation, you mustn't steal. You must work. You must give to the poor. You must. Otherwise, Christianity is just another set of morality, but it's not. Here's the principle we want to look at tonight. Break it into two pieces. This is one of those things that Paul inserts here in the middle of this code. And if you insert it in the middle of your being, it will just do all kinds of great things. It's like putting a radioactive isotope in the middle of your being, and the rays that it sends out will shrink your tumors. You put it in there. Be imitators of God as dear children. Be imitators of God as dearly loved children. That's all I want to talk about tonight. I want you to just stick that in there so that all week it'll be shrinking your tumors. That's what Paul's doing. He inserts it in the middle of all this code, all right? First, be imitators of God. This word imitators, I don't know what your translations say. Some of you have modern translations that say be followers. What's great about this word is that the English word mimic comes directly from this Greek word. This Greek word literally says, mimic God. Mimic him. What's a mime? What's mimicry? It means to model yourself. It means to imitate. This is an audacious thing, is it not? There's a place in the movie Manhattan where Yale is saying to the Woody Allen character, you're so self-righteous. Who do you think you are? God? And Woody Allen says, well, I got to model myself after somebody. And what is he saying? You remember that spot? Well, what is he saying? Human beings have got to model themselves after somebody. And one thing I learned in the two or three child development courses I ever took is the most powerful apparatus in the human psyche that leads to learning is our ability to imitate. Not just our ability to imitate. Woody Allen's right. Our need to imitate. We have got to imitate somebody. And the message of this verse is, yes, of course, just to be a human being, to grow as a human being, you've got to have good models. That's true. That's true on all sorts of levels. But they've got to be penultimate models. And they even have to be, not just penultimate, but put it this way, the models that you have, the penultimate human models that you have, have got to be, in a sense, aiming you, putting you on a vector toward the ultimate model, which is God. You can imitate God. This is what it's saying. It's saying the imitation of God is ultimately what it means to be a Christian. Christians are not trying to be good for the sake of being good. Christians are not trying to be good. Christians never say, don't lie. Why? Because only very bad people lie. I mean, you might say that to your child, and that's a very bad thing to say. It really is, because it gives them the impression that we're out here for goodness, for goodness sake. You know, so be good for goodness sake. We sing about that every Christmas. No, the Bible says your job is to be like Christ. Your job is to be like God. You're aiming to be like Him. Goodness, for goodness sake, is not what we're after. Look, imitation means that it's a reference to what we saw in Ephesians 4, 24, and that is that we're built in the image of God. See up here in verse 24? It's another reference to that. It says, be made new in the attitude of your minds and put on the new self, created to be like God, created in the image of God, in true righteousness and holiness. Very important to understand imitation. A quick synopsis of what that means. The Bible says that human beings are made in the image of God. What does that mean? It means that we're built to reflect God. An image is a reflection of something else. Now, on the one hand, everything God's created reflects Him. It says in Psalm 19, the heavens are telling of the glory of God. The heavens declare the glory of God. When you walk in Central Park during the blossoms, does that tell you something? Does that reflect something of the grandeur and beauty of God? Sure. If you see the whole, you go to see the Grand Canyon, are you impressed with the wisdom of God and the greatness of God? Sure. But there's a difference between seeing your image in a highly polished countertop or seeing your image in a well-waxed hood of a car and seeing your image in a mirror. Why? Because the mirror is built to reflect your image almost perfectly, except in one way, which I'll mention in a minute. In other words, there's ways you can see your image in a kind of distorted way in certain sorts of highly polished obstacles. proportionately and clearly. So when the Bible says we're made in the image of God, the Bible is saying, unlike the Grand Canyon and unlike Central Park and even unlike the animals, God has made us in some way able to reflect his own nature uniquely and clearly. A mirror is something that has a capacity, not just a capacity, as a necessity to be whatever it's facing. A mirror will resemble whatever it's facing. A mirror has to imitate. The mirror has nothing in itself. The mirror has to imitate. It will imitate perfectly whatever it's facing. We're made personal. By the way, the theologians debate about this. What is there about us that makes us able to reflect God in a way the animals can't and Central Park can't and the Grand Canyon can't? Well, they talk about the fact that we're personal and we're rational, the fact that we have a conscience and a moral sense, the fact that we're creative, and all that's true, and there's probably a lot more to it than that. You have to be very careful about trying to define the image of God too narrowly. The fact is that animals are much more controlled by instinct. Human beings, more than anybody else, is controlled by this imitation apparatus. Children are controlled so much by their models. Why? We are made to be mirrors. A mirror must imitate. It must reflect whatever it's facing. But, here's the other thing about a mirror. A mirror only ever can reflect something two-dimensionally. When you look at the mirror, you say, that's a perfect image of me. Well, yes and no. It has only got two dimensions to it. It's got height and it's width, and it has apparent depth, but not really. So it's not a complete... I guess now, please, I'm using the illustration. Don't talk to me about holograms for a moment. Somebody's going to say, well, what about holograms? Let's talk about mirrors for now. Now, don't mess up my analogy. The point is, mirrors can only reflect me two-dimensionally, not three-dimensionally. What does it mean, then, to be in the image of God? It means, A, that we are built having to imitate something. We are built having to model. And whatever we face, we will reflect. In a sense, we'll be governed and controlled. We will be what we're facing. We will be what we're really attending to. But we can never perfectly be it. We can only do it two-dimensionally. See, for example, here's what the essence of sin is. The essence of sin is to want to be God instead of just to be the image of God. The essence of sin is, in a sense, wanting to be God in three dimensions instead of just in two dimensions. Wanting to be God instead of just being a reflection of God. The theologians say it this way. Theologians say that when you look at the attributes of God, you can break those attributes down into two broad categories. The communicable attributes of God and the incommunicable attributes. Those are big words, but they're words that we use. Because we use them in our modern lingo. We use those words when it comes to what? Talking about diseases. A communicable disease is one you can catch. An incommunicable disease is one you can't. And so, when the theologians look at the attributes of God in the Bible that we can catch and can't catch, they break it down like this. The incommunicable attributes of God include omnipotence. Big word that means to be completely powerful. All powerful. To do anything he wants to do. To have all power. See, to be omnipotent doesn't just mean that you're more powerful than any other power. It means that all power belongs to you. It means that anything that has any power has it on loan from him. It's derived from him. Then another attribute is omniscience. That means not just that he knows everything, but he knows everything immediately at once. Not just that he can recall it, but that at any given time he has all knowledge right before him. He knows it all. Another one of the incommunicable attributes of God is aseity. And aseity means his self-sufficiency. His self-existence. We talk about God as having no beginning and no ending. Why? Because if he had a beginning, something would have brought him into being. He's self-existent. He needs nothing. That's what aseity means. He needs nothing. He cannot change because what could change him? If he's perfect, then he couldn't possibly change. He has no beginning. He has no ending. Nothing could bring him to an end. Nothing could possibly bring about his beginning. Do you see? Because whatever that would be, would be self-sufficient. He needs nothing. So he's self-existent. He's omnipotent. He's omniscient. And we also talk about him being omnipresent. He's everywhere at once. We cannot ever become like that. The Bible says we can't. But then we have the communicable attributes. His love. And his joy. And his wisdom. And his patience. And yourами. Baby. His compassion, and His faithfulness, His integrity, and His forgiveness, and His goodness, and His holiness. Now, the communicable attributes are the things we can reflect. The incommunicable attributes are not. And when we try to be more than the image of God, we become less. When we try to be more than human, we become less than human. The thing that Yale was so upset about in the movie Manhattan, about Woody Allen, was not just that he was modeling himself after God, but that he was being self-righteous. And see, there's just a perfect example. Self-righteousness is where you're actually trying to take to yourself some of that third dimension that you're not supposed to have. You're not to be judge. You're not to be omnipotent. You're not to be self-existent. When you set yourself up to be God instead of to be an image of God. When you try for the incommunicable attributes as well as the communicable attributes, you fall. The image of God is your capacity to mimic. We must reflect something. We're completely controlled by. We completely reflect whatever we're facing. But when we face God, we have got to be willing to be the image of God. And therefore, the Bible teaches us that Christianity is actually a process by which we become the image of God. We've been turned away, the Bible tells us. We've turned away toward other things. So, our image is working against us. We're built to be mirrors. And when we are justified, when we become Christians, the Bible tells us the Holy Spirit turns us away from other things and sets us toward God. We've been modeling ourselves after other things. We've been facing other things. We've been seeking other gods. The Holy Spirit turns us toward God. And when He turns us toward God, that means we're facing Him. That's the beginning of the Christian walk. But our mirror is all kind of messed up. You know how you make a mirror, don't you? How do you make a mirror? What do you do? Do you build a mirror? Do you paint a mirror? How do you make a mirror? You grind a mirror. Uh-oh. And so, you see, whereas the process of justification turns us toward God, the process of sanctification turns us into a more beautiful, more clear, more polished, more smooth mirror. The process of trouble, the processes that take us to repentance, the processes that humble us, that's the sanctification process of grinding us down and turning us into someone, people who can reflect Him completely. You have got to imitate. And a great deal of being a Christian is to pretend, in a sense. A child, listen, a child grows only by pretending he or she is something that he's not. A little boy becomes a man by pretending he's a man, by seeing what men do. A little girl becomes a woman by seeing what women do and pretending she's a woman. And it's because she's pretending, it's because he's pretending that he becomes it. And it works the other way around, by the way. The whole image of Beauty and the Beast is you've got to kiss the beast as if he's handsome in order to make him handsome. If you wait till he's handsome before you kiss him, he won't ever become handsome. You've got to kiss him as handsome and he becomes handsome. And the Bible is saying a big, big part of growing in Christ is to actually imitate him, to say, I'm not like him, but I'm going to pretend. I'm going to dress up like him. Just like a little boy dresses up in his father's clothes in order to become a man. In the same way, we're supposed to be imitating. We're supposed to be dressing up. This is very important, by the way, because if you see it this way, you'll have a much more organic and wholesome understanding of Christianity. If you try it for a day or even a week, wake up in the morning and say, every time I'm about to do a deliberate action, every time I'm in a position where I can think about how I should react, I'll have to say to myself, what would Jesus do? You will find that there's all kinds of things that you'll feel like you should do and you shouldn't do that you can't find in any book of rules. You'll just know it. Being a Christian is more like painting a picture. It's more like painting a portrait than it really is like following a set of rules. Do you hear that? A lot of people seem to think that being a Christian is very much like getting out a book that tells you how to build a computer. But Christianity is much more like painting a portrait. It's much more like composing some music. It's much more like a work of art than it is following a set of rules. And you won't know that unless you understand this aspect of it. You are imitators. You must be imitators. There must be something that you set your heart on and say, I want to be that way. I want to pretend that I'm that way. I want to dress up as if I'm that way. The Bible's full of it. 2 Corinthians 3. It says, is freedom. And we're supposed to look and behold the beauty and glory of the Lord. And as we behold the glory of the Lord, we're transformed into His likeness from one degree of splendor to the next. What does that mean? That's imitation. You're built to imitate. Look at how you're doing it anyway. God has turned you toward Him. He is now grinding your mirror down. You're supposed to be constantly saying, what would I do if I were Jesus? What would Jesus do here? And that is a far better guide for becoming a Christian than it is to say, give me the rules. Give me the codes. Give me all the books of codes, and I'll make sure that I don't break any of the rules today. Being a Christian is much more like painting a picture than it is like following a set of rules. But, the dynamic. Why are you supposed to imitate God? And here, do you see the psychology here? You imitate God as dearly loved children. Now, Paul's saying a couple things. Please follow me. First of all, just as real children have to imitate their parents. Just as real children have to home in and imitate their parents. Why? Because they're built in the image of God. They're built to be mirrors. So, in the same way, you will be able to imitate God to the degree that you think of and recognize and really are adopted into His family. And by the way, this is one of the more beautiful things about the Christian faith. You know the reason why imitating God works? Do you know the reason why we should pretend we're Jesus? Say, what would it be like? If I were Jesus, what would Jesus do? You know the reason that works? It's because, and this is the beauty, that is actually what God's doing to you. You know what the doctrine of justification by faith is? Some of you may have never heard of that doctrine. I'll tell you, though, what it is if you ever run into it. The doctrine of justification by faith is that when you receive Christ as Savior, the Bible says, God now transfers all of Jesus' record into your account and He treats you as if you were Jesus. In other words, He's pretending. He's looking at you and He's treating you. He's pretending that you're Jesus. He is being as kind to you as He would be to Jesus. He is honoring you the way He would honor Jesus. Now, think about this. You say, well, that's ridiculous. That's silly. Oh, no. That's how you raise a child. Look, the child is one-year-old. What do you do to the child? The child is one-year-old. What is his vocabulary, Kathy? Usually about 12 words. Right. Do you say, well, my one-year-old has a vocabulary of 12 words. I must speak to him in a way that he understands. So, you make sure that everything you say uses his vocabulary. You don't treat him as if he's any older than that. Well, he'll never grow. What do you do with a little kid who's one-year-old? What do you do with a kid who's six months old? You talk to him. Do you want a piece of candy? Would you like to go bye-bye? Well, you know, you're talking to a six-month-old. What is a six-month-old going to say? Yeah, I can't wait. No. What does he do? He goes, you know, you treat him as if he's older than he is. You pretend that he's older than he is. You talk to him as if he's older than he is, and that's the only way he'll ever develop. You pretend. You always pretend your kid's older than he is. In other words, God is up there pretending that you're Jesus. That's the doctrine of justification. In other words, he's pretending you're beautiful, and that's how you get beautiful. He's pretending you're lovable, and that's how you become lovely. He's pretending that you're Jesus. He's giving you all the honor. That's the gospel. The gospel is God treats believing sinners as if they've done everything Jesus has ever done, and as if they suffered everything Jesus ever suffered. That's the gospel. He is pretending that you're Jesus, so you need to pretend that you're Jesus, too. You imitate God as dear children. Now, what does it mean when he talks about us being dear children? You know, some of you last week heard Jack Miller preach, and some of you went on a retreat, and Jack and Rosemary Miller, when Kathy and I went to their church, just plowed this into us. It's their main theme. It's the thing that God has given them to say to people, and that is this. You have got to think of yourself as a dearly loved child of God, or you're really not able to live the Christian life at all. Unless you are governed by the idea that you are a dearly loved child, you can't live. You were built for family love. You were built for it. You were built to have a loving father, a loving parent. You were built for it, and until you see that that's true of you, you can't live a life of imitation of God. You can't live a life at all. The doctrine the Bible's talk alluding to, Paul's alluding to here, is a doctrine of adoption. You've got to keep in mind that in the Roman world, adoption was a very, very important and formal kind of process. in the Roman world were adults. Usually, adoption went like this. You didn't adopt a little kid to raise the way we do. Usually, adoption operated like this. A man, usually, found he had no heirs, and he didn't want his property to be broken up. So, he would find a younger person that he admired and loved, and he would go to him and say, I'd like to adopt you as my son. That's usually how it was done. And then, what would happen is, if he adopted him, that meant that son got that man's money when he died. He got his estate when he died, and got his name now, and he got the privileges of sonship. It was a legal status. But the reason that it's so important to understand the Christian life, the reason that it's maybe the most fundamental way that you need to think about yourself and your relationship with God. Yes, I'm a sheep and he's a shepherd. Yes, I'm the vine and he's the vine dresser. Yes, I'm in the army and he's the captain. I mean, there's zillions of images. But when the Bible tells us that Jesus Christ told you how to pray, he said, start this way. Our creator, our shepherd, how are we supposed to start? Our father. This is the most fundamental way that you must think about yourself. And therefore, you have to think about yourself in this way, because to be an adopted child means so much more than just that you're forgiven. What does it mean to be a Christian? To be a believer? Yes, of course we believe. That's wonderful. To be forgiven? Yes, of course we're forgiven. No hope without that. To be born again? Yes, of course we're born again. How glorious it is. But you're born again, you're forgiven for what? To be his children. Because you see, adoption means not just the negative. So many people think of their salvation in terms of the negative. I've been forgiven. My sins are wiped away. Jesus died for me and his blood has washed away my sins. That's great. I'm not knocking any of that. It's wonderful. It's glorious. No hope without it. But adoption means not just that the past is wiped away, but you have all these tremendous privileges now as a child. What are the privileges? Let me list four as we finish up here. Four privileges, unless you can use these privileges as a test. These four privileges are a test to see whether or not you're thinking of yourself as a son or a daughter of the king. The thing that the Millers are always saying is, are you orphans or are you children? Yes, you can say, I accepted Christ. I signed a card. I went forward. I'm a card-carrying, evangelical, born-again Christian. And they say, that's not what I'm asking you. I want to know, are you living as an orphan or are you living as a son? They're always pressing that. Some of you heard him talk that way. Well, here's how you find out. Biblically, what are the privileges of being a child of God, of being adopted into the family? Number one, acceptance. An employee can be fired. A kid can't. It can fire your employee. You can't fire a child. I mean it. One of the things about parent love is how dogged it is. We make all kinds of jokes about it. He has a face that only a mother can love. We make jokes about that. Why? It's true. Because, you see, parents find their hearts absolutely knit to their children no matter what jerks they are. The last persons in the world to give up on somebody is their parents. Oh, not always, but you know that this is the general rule. You know this is the way it goes. You understand that. There's something tremendously dogged about parent love. And so, obviously, that fact reflects the heavenly parent love. What does it mean to be a son? What does it mean to be a daughter of God? It means that you're accepted. It means you can't be fired. It means you cannot. There's no condemnation for you. And you know what the test is? The test here is, do you live in freedom or are you constantly up and down depending on whether you feel like you've lived up to standards? Are you being whipped about emotionally depending on from day to day whether you feel like a success or a failure? Because if you are, then you're acting like an orphan. If you say, oh, I did it again. God's probably given up on me. He's ready to hit me. And then another day you feel like, ah, now maybe God will answer my prayers because look at the way in which I'm living. You're living like an orphan. You don't understand your sonship. You can never imitate God as dearly loved children. You don't think of yourself as a dearly loved child. You don't have it. You're not living out your adoption. The first privilege is acceptance. The second privilege is access. Again, let's think of the difference between an employee and a child. I've been contrasting an orphan and a child, but a lot of you, your relationship with God is as an employee. a child can't. That's acceptance. Alright? An employee's access is restricted. You might have a very, very, very good relationship with your boss. But you're not going to walk in on him at 2 a.m. and ask for a drink of water. Why not? You have restricted access. Your boss says, who do you think you are? We have a wonderful relationship, but I'm in my underwear. And you instinctively know that you don't have that kind of access. And a lot of you feel that way toward God, too. There was a man named Billy Bray. Lived in the 19th century. He had been a real rock-em-sock-em, fisticuff boxer. He'd been a tough guy, and he was converted, and he became an evangelist. He was one of those famous traveling evangelists in England. He had a great way of speaking. When somebody would talk to him about some problem, he would say, I have to talk to Father about this. And he was talking about God. You know, usually we talk about the Father, but he would say, I've got to talk to Father about this. And there are people that I am around that I realize use prayer in a way that I don't, are sure of God's interest in a way that I'm not. And to the degree that you know that, to the degree that you're a prayer warrior, to the degree that you're constantly availing yourself of that access, to that degree you're living as a dear child of God. Thirdly, acceptance is the first privilege. Access is the second privilege. The third privilege is protection. As you know, many of you know, parents have a lot of trouble avoiding the protecting and guiding of their children. A lot of you know that even though you're adults, it's very hard for your parents to keep their mitts off of you. Because it is absolutely essential to being a parent that you want to protect your child. And to the end of your life, any parent who isn't a terrible parent, and there are plenty of terrible parents, but the average parent, even the mediocre parent, your heart strings, you're so tied to your child that you can't be happy unless your child's happy. You can't be. You can't bear to see your child suffer. You can't stop worrying about them. You can't get your mitts off of them, at least emotionally. God's the same way. And that means, Romans 8, 28, all things work together for good to them that love God. That means, Hebrews 12, Hebrews 12 says that the troubles you're going through are chastening, they're disciplined, because fathers discipline their children. Here's the test. If you really think that your life is a tale told by an idiot full of sound and fury, signifying nothing, if you really feel that your life has no rhyme or reason to it, if you really feel that everything has gone wrong and God has forgotten you, you do not believe that you're a child. You're not living like a child because you're living like an orphan or you're living like an employee that thinks he's been fired. Parents cannot keep their mitts off their children. Parents cannot avoid protecting them. Parents cannot avoid guiding them. A real parent protects. If you look at life like a haunted house, what's going to get me next? Or if you say, I know that as hard as it is for me to understand, just as when I was a little child, my parents did things that I didn't understand but I see in hindsight were good for me, I know that the circumstances of my life are the arrangements of a loving Heavenly Father. Protection is the third. And the way you can tell whether you're living as an orphan or as a child is, can you really trust right now in the middle of all the things that are going on in your life that look like they have no rhyme and reason to them? Are you able to say all things are working together for good? I know this is there by God's appointment. My Father has got a purpose and a reason for this. I know I'm here under His care, for His time, you see, in His schedule, by His appointment. Do you have that attitude toward the circumstances of your life? If not, no wonder you're so scared. You're living like an orphan. Lastly is inheritance. This world is going to be yours. If you feel like a poor person, or as Jack and Rosemary Miller say, if you live a life of unending obligation, always feeling so poor, always feeling so obligated to everybody, always feeling like I owe everybody so much and I'm just under this crushing load of debt and obligation, you're not living as a child. A child is an heir and you have inherited all this. What are the privileges? Acceptance? You don't live a life of condemnation and guilt. Access? You're not alone and you go to Him all the time in prayer. Protection? You're not afraid and you know that He's working all things together for good. An heir? You're not crushed under obligation, but you're rich. You're not afraid of Him all the time in prayer. You're not afraid of Him all the time in prayer. and you go to Him all the time in prayer. Protection, you're not afraid, and you know that He's working all things together for good. An heir, you're not crushed under obligation, but you're rich, and you live like a rich person with the poise and the confidence. It says in John 1, 12, as many as received Him, He gave authority, He gave power to become children of God. Being a child means authority. Take a look at yourself, and remember this. You can't imitate God, you can't live this life of greatness, unless you see yourself as a dear child, dearly loved child. Are you? Do you? Are you governed? Is your thinking about yourself governed by the thought that you're His child? Look, last thing. You know, the great parable, the really great parable about the relationship to your Father in Heaven is still the prodigal son parable. And you know why you can be a child, an adopted child? Please listen to this. This is the last illustration. Very important. When you take a look at that parable, you will see that there was a younger brother and an older brother. And the younger brother asked for his part of the father's inheritance before the father died. It was very unusual, but it was possible. He says, look, father, when you die, the elder brother will get this much of the estate, and I will get this much. I want my part now. Sell off whatever part of land you've got, or draw out of the bank whatever assets you've got that you've given me. I want it now. Think about that. The father gave that to the younger son. The younger son goes off and lives it, and squanders it on wine, women, and song, and gambling, and that sort of thing. And as we all know, he comes back absolutely empty-handed, absolutely impoverished. What does the father do? The father comes back like any father. A father accepts. A father gives access. A father protects. And a father is wealthy and bestows his riches on the child. The son is on his way back, and he wants to confess his sin. The father won't even let him do it. The father sees him coming from afar. He cuts across the field. He pounces on him. He begins to kiss him. The son says, wait, let me confess. I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and I'm not worthy. And the father says, shut up. He says, come to his servants. Put my robe on his back. Put my ring on his finger. Kill the fatted calf. We're going to have a party. Now, my younger son I thought was dead, and now he's alive. That's the father's love. It's not conditioned on your perfection. It's conditioned on his perfection. It's an expression of his perfection. But here's the thing you've got to remember. When he gets back in, the elder brother is very angry. You know why? Because, you see, since the younger brother has squandered all of the wealth, everything the father is giving to the younger brother is whose? The elder brother's. See, the elder brother now owns every robe. The elder brother owns every ring. Every robe is mine, he says. Every ring is mine, and every fatted calf is mine. And look, I've worked my fingers to the bone, and what thanks do I get? But Jesus puts the elder brother in there when he's rebuking the Pharisees. And if you look at the context, you'll know that what Jesus is actually saying is this. I am the true elder brother. I am the real elder brother. What would a real elder brother have done? The real elder brother would have gone out there and found the younger brother in the pigsty and would have lifted him up and would have brought him home and said, little brother, here's my robe, here's my ring, here's my fatted calf. It's all at my expense, and I freely give it to you. Enter back into the joy of the father. Let's have a party. The elder brother, the true elder brother is Jesus. You know why you can enter into the fatherhood of God? Because Jesus brothered you. Jesus treated you as a brother. Jesus spent his wealth on you. Because he brothered you, God is now your father and not your boogeyman and not your creator. You were built for family love. Will you stop being so upset about the meanness of your family? It could never, listen, no human family could possibly meet the needs. No human family could possibly meet the needs. This is the family you've got to have. All other models are penultimate. Jesus Christ has brothered you so God, the creator, can father you. Come home to him. Say, Father, I have sinned. Go to him and say, I need your father love. And you'll get it because you got the brother love of the true elder brother. It's his robe on your back. It's his ring on your finger. And he says, I can't wait to have a party. You were built for this family love. Live as a dear child. Think of yourself that way and you'll be able to imitate him and live this life of greatness. Let's pray. Now, Father, we ask that you would help us to... to pretend to be Christ, but we don't have to pretend to be your children because we are your children. Behold what manner of love the Father has given unto us, that we should be called children of God. Help us to think that way, help us to live that way, help us to put on the privileges of sonship. Help us to see that our elder brother has brothered us, and at his own expense has brought us back from the pigsty, and has brought us into the welcome of the Father. Lord, help us to live this way, and then, and only then, will we be able to tell the truth, to be generous, to live lives of purity. Oh, Father, we are built for this love. Let us receive it. Let us feed on it. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
