TITLE: Decrees of the King
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:19-22
TOPICS: Doctrine The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) The Bible
SERIES: The King and the Kingdom
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/decrees-of-the-king/

============================================================

How many weeks have I been on Ephesians chapter 2? I'm not sure. But what we've been doing is looking at what the Bible says the church should be, what the church can be, what the church is. Ephesians 2, and I'm going to read verses 19 through 22. Ephesians 2, 19 through 22. Consequently, you are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household, built on the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him, the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord. And in him, you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his spirit. The word of the Lord. The last thing, the last thing I want to say in this series about what the church is, is about this phrase, that the church is built on the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, with Christ Jesus being the cornerstone. The foundation of the church, the foundation of all of our lives, is the apostles and the prophets. A lot of you know I live on Roosevelt Island. That's just 300 yards from Manhattan. And we live right around 74th Street. I think we can look up East 74th Street. What was happening one Saturday is I was noticing that you can go, did you know you can go East on 73rd Street from York Avenue. You can go East driving with a car. Obviously you can go East on foot anywhere on East 73rd. But you can drive with a car from York to the FDR Drive, which of course is the expressway down the eastern part of Manhattan. You can come out on 73rd, and as soon as you turn the corner, you get into a little chute. It's one lane, and it moves you for about two blocks. You go in front of 71st Street, and then you come right out onto the traffic, and you're gone. You're out. One day I noticed that there was a truck backing up at 71st Street, some kind of maintenance truck. And as a result, the chute was stopped. The people couldn't go by 71st Street, and the cars were stopped up all the way up the chute, all the way on to 73rd, and there was even a line of people on 73rd waiting to get into the chute. I could see with my binoculars that there were trucks. The truck was ready to back up. In fact, as the truck backed up, all the people in the chute started clearing out. Now, if you were at 73rd Street, and you hadn't turned the corner yet, and you were about to go into the chute, you could not see what was going on. You could see that it was backed up. But you could not see what the problem was or what the prospects were. And what intrigued me was as the chute emptied out, the first man at the top of 73rd Street who could not see hesitated. He didn't come on out. And I knew what he was saying to himself. He was saying, if I get out in that chute, and it's really stopped up in some way, you can't go backwards, you can't go forwards, you can't turn right or left. I'm dead. I'll be there for who knows how long. After all, this is New York. And so what he did was, even though the chute had cleared out, he began to back up. Now, there was tons of cars behind him. And there was at least a 15-minute mess as a result. He backed up, and other people started yelling and screaming. I was watching through the binoculars. It's great. A great show. So what intrigued me was that he got out, and he began to talk to the people about what he was doing. And instead of anybody else coming around him, he convinced them. They could have come around him and out, but instead he convinced them. He says, I don't know what he was saying, but he was saying, let's get out of here. You know, let's back up. And so there was at least a 15-minute pile-up, basically, of cars trying to back away and not going to that chute. They were this close to freedom. But they couldn't see it. You know why? What was the basis? What was the foundation for their decision? What was the basis for their course of action? Their foundation was their own perspective. You know, they could only see this far, and I guess they were going on their experience. They've probably all been stuck in chutes for two hours in New York City. And on the basis of their experience, on the basis of their perception, on the basis of their reason, they made their decision. It was a faulty foundation. What they needed was someone with transcendent knowledge. They needed somebody who was above and outside. It wasn't a driver. It wasn't someone on the highway, but somebody above and outside the highway who could see the whole picture, who could know what the best course of action was. A transcendent person, like me. looking at it. And if, you know, as he was backing away, if I had this great transmitter, what I could have done is I could have beamed into his car radio and I've said, don't do what you're doing. Don't follow your feelings. Don't follow your perceptions. Don't follow your experience. I know from my perspective that the right thing is for you to go straight down and into that chute. I know it seems like suicide. It's the only way out. See, what that man needed was revelation. Revelation means outside knowledge, knowledge outside of himself, knowledge outside even of his little world, which is the highway. Anyway, what God is saying here is that it is not a proper foundation for the church. It's not a proper foundation for any human life to only rely on your own experience, your own wisdom, anything less than the revelation that God has brought to us through apostles and prophets, which is in the Word of God. The only foundation, the only legitimate, the only worthy foundation for any life at all, the only appropriate bottom, is the Word of God. Now, everybody in this room has got a foundation for your decisions. What is it? I don't think you'll get out of here tonight until you know what it is. Now, if we're going to understand what our foundation is and what it should be, we have to look at the passage, and we're just looking at these little words right here in verse 20. We should be built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets with Christ Jesus himself as a cornerstone. Okay, let's examine that phrase by asking some questions. Number one, what is the foundation? And then number two, how can we be sure that we're laid on it? Okay, number one, what's the foundation? The apostles and the prophets were people through whom God spoke. And their revelations from God are written down in this word. Now, the most intriguing thing about the prophets and apostles is this, what to look to the human mind is an incredible incongruity. Because on the one hand, these men, these apostles and prophets were tremendously humble people. You have Paul saying, I am the chief of sinners, you see. Or if you look at the, if you read the Bible, you'll see that the people who wrote it were quite willing to tell all about the worst parts of their life, all about their flaws. You know, one of the most intriguing books to me is the book of Jonah, about Jonah, about how again and again and again, God called him to preach to Nineveh and he ran away. And then he's swallowed by a fish and he comes up and he goes to Nineveh. And he's angry when there's, when he has a revival and people start to turn to Christ and his, his racism comes out, you see. And he begins to say, this is what I was afraid of. My reason I didn't go to Nineveh the first time was I was afraid these people might get converted and I hate them and I want to see them as dust under my feet. Now, the only way we could possibly ever known what happened between Jonah and God, between Jonah and the whale, Jonah and all that stuff, is if Jonah told somebody. Who would have told anybody about that? You know, we've all got things in our lives where we were just absolute fools, but we'd never want to have it written down, let alone in a book that millions of people were going to read the rest of our, you know, the history of the world. And you see, the apostles were, and the prophets were like that. They were willing to say, this is what I am. You see, this is my weakness. This is what I am. And yet, when they were overshadowed by the Spirit of God, they knew that their words were not their words, but they were God's words. And they acted that way. They said, thus saith the Lord. You know, here's Paul, for example, who says, I am the chief of sinners. And yet when he writes, at the end of 1 Corinthians, at the end of 1 Thessalonians, he says, anyone who doesn't listen to these words have nothing to do with them because these words are the words of God. It doesn't seem right, because the people who act like that, they say, what I have said is the word of God. These are demagogues, you know, the people that we've met in the history that talk like that. They're demagogues. They're not humble people. They're not servants. On the other hand, humble servant people don't say, this is the word of God. But the reason is that the prophets and the apostles were godly people who knew that God was giving them a gift for all mankind, and that was the gift of his truth. Basically, again and again and again, these men say, thus saith the Lord, which means, this is not my idea, friends. You've got to listen. It's word of God is a fire in my bones, and I've got to get it out. They understood what was going on. Now, because the biblical writers knew that these were God's words, not their words, not their ideas about God, not their experiences of God, but God's words, As a result, they could talk about themselves as a foundation. Because, you see, a foundation is something that does not shift. It's something that does not change. It's something that is absolutely solid. It's absolute truth. And you must understand, if the Bible was just a record of a lot of godly people who had great experiences of God, and therefore they were able to tell us a lot of good things, and yet, like any other book, there's good things in here and there's bad things, if that's what the Bible is, it can't be a foundation, because a foundation can't have some good stones and others not. You can't build a house on, you know, if you have ten foundation stones and you say, Well, eight of them are, you know, will hold the house up. That's good enough. No, it isn't good enough. Every part of the foundation has to be solid and changeless. And this is how the Scripture writers thought of themselves. They said, We are a foundation. For example, Peter says this about Scripture. Peter, in 2 Peter 1, he says, No Scripture has come about by the prophet's own interpretation. Did you hear that? No Scripture has come about by the prophet's own interpretation for prophecy never had its origins in the will of man, but men spoke from God as they were carried along by the Holy Spirit. And this was not just the biblical writer's view of it. All of the church has always seen it that way. For example, Martin Luther. Luther says, A man's word is a little sound. It flies into the air and it's gone in a second. But the word of God is greater than heaven and earth. Yea, greater than heaven and hell. For it forms part of the power of God and it endures everlastingly. See? Foundation. Now, that means that anything the Bible says is true. Otherwise, we cannot talk about it being a foundation. Now, before we move on, and I want to talk about how do you make sure you lay on the foundation, I can't leave without a couple of words to people who doubt what I'm saying. You see, some people say, well, they say, I just don't buy that and most enlightened pastors and churches don't buy that anymore and what we believe is the Bible is one authority but, you know, there's certain things in the Bible we may not be able to accept anymore. And therefore, the Bible is an authority but we've also got other authorities. We've got the, you know, we've got cultural attitudes and the wisdom of modern research. We have a lot of authorities. So the Bible is just one authority. It's not the only authority. It's one part of the foundation. It's not the whole foundation. Does that make sense? It doesn't. You've misspoken, my friend. Because, you see, when you say the Bible is just one of our authorities but we might find things in it we can't accept, you've actually shifted to a whole new foundation because, you see, now the foundation is your own judgment. Do you see? When you say, well, the Bible is an authority but it's only one authority, what you mean is I'm the authority and I scan through the word of God and I decide on the basis of my own judgment and my own sagacity and my own wisdom which things look like they're great and which things look like they're a little weird and I don't know whether I can buy that. You see, it's a whole new foundation. Don't say the Bible is your foundation anymore. It's not even part of your foundation. Your own judgment is your foundation, you see. That's a very dangerous condition to be in. Very dangerous. Stop and think about it just for a moment. You know, when Job, in the middle of the book of Job, you know, Job begins to question God and he begins to say, God, I don't like the way things are going. In other words, he begins to find fault with God. God appears and what does he say? He says, Job, where were you when I stretched out the heavens? Where were you when I scared the stars? Where were you when I laid the foundation for the earth? In your three score in ten years, in your few years, have you become wiser than me? And let me apply that to our understanding of the word. If you believe, if you believe that there's any parts of the word of God that are shaky, that you can't accept, that you believe have got mistakes in them, if you believe that, don't you see what you've done is you've shifted completely to another foundation and look what your foundation is. You're on the ground. ago? Do you remember the stupid mistakes you made ten years ago? Do you remember how naive you were in this and that? Do you remember the things? Remember what a fool you were? You were. You know that. Anybody in this room that has any kind of normal adult maturation process going on, you'll look back at ten years ago and you say, I was an absolute idiot ten years ago. What do you think you're going to say about yourself ten years from now? You're a fool now. We're all fools now. You see? We're fools now. Yes, we are. And as you read through the Word of God and you say, you know, there's this thing that I just can't say. And this part of the Old Testament is awfully harsh. This part of what Paul says in the New Testament is sexist. I don't like this. See, ten years ago, you wouldn't have even known that. You know, it's maybe in the last ten years that you even came to these great conclusions that now put you in a position to be the foundation. To go through the Word of God and decide where, you know, he's right and where he's wrong. My friends, that's what God was saying to Job. Are you kidding me? Do you really, really believe that you're in a position to be a two-edged sword and to go through the Word of God and scan it and to say, I like this and to take other things out? My friends, the Word of God is a two-edged sword. It should be scanning through us. And it should be saying, this is what I affirm and this is what's wrong. I mean, this is role reversal of the worst kind. So you see, first of all, if you say, I'm a believer, I'm a Christian, but I cannot say that the Word of God is my absolute authority and the Word of God is the foundation of the church. Don't you see what a contradictory position you're in? Don't you see how arrogant it is? Well, I'll go one step further. And that is, if you don't believe that the Bible is an authority, if you instead your foundation is your own wisdom and your own feelings and your own discernment or your own modern research or cultural opinion or public opinion or whatever, I want you to see that you're in a state of eternal and utter vertigo. And I hope you will live with the consequences and be honest enough about it. Some years ago, my sister's husband, my brother-in-law Larry, who is a doctor, some years ago he was going through residence. This is a different brother-in-law than the one that watched the guy go through the windshield. Remember that one? Yes. Those of you who have been, those of you with your perfect attendance pins and have come to all the evening services will know all about my family. But the rest of you, have very spotty knowledge. Anyway, Larry was in his residence as a doctor, and at one point I guess he did psychiatric rounds. And he was working in a psychiatric unit of a hospital. And there was one man who he was consulting with the head resident, the teacher, the guy over him about. And this resident and Larry were talking, what are we going to do about this guy? Now, Larry knew that this resident just didn't like the guy. He was a psychiatric patient. But Larry realized that the doctor, the resident, didn't like him. That the man rubbed him the wrong way. In a discussion, Larry was sitting there and he says, well, here's what I think. I think in some ways it's hard but simple what we have to do. We have to convince this man that he actually is a worthwhile person. Just let him know that he's a valuable, valued, worthwhile person. That's what we have to do. And the doctor, the teaching doctor over Larry, looked at him and said, how do you know that? Larry just about went back. Now, Larry was a believer and as he was about to turn to this doctor, he suddenly realized something. He suddenly realized that whereas he could say, well, even though I don't like this young guy either, I have a foundation. I've got an authority that tells me he is, regardless of how I feel, regardless of how I perceive him, that he's a valuable human being. He's not just a piece of rock that's fallen to the bottom of the river and that I have to treat him that way. But he suddenly realized he couldn't appeal to that in this man because this man was his own foundation, you see. And don't you see that if every person is their own foundation and you just choose what you want to believe about what's right and wrong and you put your own religion together, fine, you have a right to do that, but never call anybody else, never call a country, never call a society, never call anybody else to moral behavior because you have no basis. Just like that guy said, how do you know he's worthwhile? In my estimation, he's nothing. In other words, what's right for you might be right for you, but what's right for me might be right for me. There's no basis. You don't have a basis for society. You certainly don't have a basis for calling other people to moral behavior. Larry realized at that moment what the consequences were of abandoning the foundation. Don't you see, friends, if you abandon the foundation, a church, you don't have any basis for life. You're in a state of utter vertigo, never, ever, ever being able to call people to moral behavior. You know, I see the placards out there that says, get your laws off my body. You don't have a right to tell me what to do with my own body. Well, I remember, listen, I spent 10 years in the South, and I know there are a lot of shop owners who really, really, really bristled under the anti-segregation laws. Why? They said, I built this shop, it's mine, it's private property, and if I don't want certain kind of people in here, get your laws off my shop. Get your laws off my body, basically, they said. Well, the New Yorkers say that, but that's different, that's racism, that's immoral. On whose basis? How are you going to call anything immoral if everybody has their own foundation, if there's no transcendent authority, if there's no revelation from God, you can forget about saying, well, racism is immoral. You can't say that. But if your foundation is the Word of God, if you believe in revelation and you accept revelation, then you have a basis for moving on. Then there's a bottom to life. You understand that? That's what the foundation is. Now, how can you be sure you're laid on it? How can you be sure? Well, if you're going to build on a foundation, you can't just put a wing of the house on the foundation and the rest somewhere else, the whole house. Everything's got to be on there. And let me just suggest to you that that could be a very long sermon if I try to take every part of us and put it on there, but let's just do three. Let's talk about our minds, our wills, and our emotions, or better yet, our hearts. Our minds, our wills, and our hearts. If you want to be built on the foundation, you have to have your mind, your will, and your heart built on it. Okay? First, mind. You know what that means? Maybe you think, well, that means I'm supposed to believe everything the Bible says. Well, of course. But it goes a lot deeper than that. If you're built on the foundation, you are thinking biblically about everything. You saturate your mind with the Word of God to the place where you're thinking biblically about all things. It's almost like you're taking the Word of God and you're making them like spectacles, you see, like glasses, and you put them on so everything you see, you're seeing through it. Now, somebody might be saying as they're talking, as they're hearing me say, talk. They're saying, you're saying, am I hearing you right up there? This sounds like I think I've come into a time machine, not a Presbyterian church. Do you honestly believe that you want modern New Yorkers to believe everything the Bible says, never question anything? Are you telling me I've got to check my brain at the door with the usher? Are you telling me that I've got to just accept everything you say dogmatically? What kind of Christians would this sort of view produce? Obviously, it would just be little people that walk along like robots and do everything they're told. You can have it. I don't want a religion like that. You completely misunderstand the ramifications of biblical authority, completely and utterly. First of all, my friends, to think biblically means you are now in a position finally to be creative and independent. Absolutely. Look, for example, suppose you become part of this church, and I come in and I say, well, this is how we do things in a Presbyterian church. Very politely now, you don't have to say, oh, well, hey, if that's the way Presbyterians do it, and I'm a Presbyterian, I guess I got... You have to say, would you please explain to me, is that the biblical way? Show me in the Bible. I don't care if you're Presbyterian. I don't care if Episcopalian. I don't care what you are. Show me in the Bible. That's my basis. You see, you're not gullible anymore. You're a law student, for example, and you're reading a legal textbook, and it's a philosophy of law. What do you say? You see, if you're not built on the foundation of the Word, you have to say, well, this man's an expert. This man is the leading thinker in the philosophy of law. Who am I to question him? But if you're built on the foundation, you can say, how does this square with the Word of God? Don't you see? It makes you extremely independent, because no longer are you a slave to tradition. You don't have to do things because that's the way they've done them anymore, because that's not the basis for your authority. No longer can you be intimidated by experts, you see. If you're not a Christian, or certainly if you're not built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, and you go to law school, and you read philosophy of law, what are you going to do? You've never worked out a philosophy of law. Who knows? You say, well, heck, I mean, you know, why should I question this? This person has studied for 50 years. But you see, the Word of God endures everlastingly. It's transcendent knowledge. And you can say, how does this square with the Word of God? No longer are you cowed by experts. No longer are you cowed by plants? No longer are you cowed. I'm cowed by experts. So I want. You know, I turn a word for doers everlastingly. It's transcendent knowledge. And you can say, how does this score with the Word of God? No longer are you cowed by experts. No longer are you cowed by preachers. No longer are you cowed by anybody. Tradition. It's the end of gullibility, friends. And finally, you can be creative. But on the other hand, here's what's so interesting. Even as it makes you so independent and much more open-minded than you've ever been before, to have this view of the Word of God to be, a biblical thinker, makes you humble too. Because you see, if you don't trust experts, you don't trust your own expertise either. If you're not going to listen to anything I say, unless you make sure that you believe that this is biblical, on the other hand, you've also got to say, hey, why should I even believe myself and my own prejudices, my own views? Let me check out whether I'm right on the foundation. You see, there's a humility that this view points out, because your expertise, your feelings, your opinions, your prejudices are no longer authoritative. What your parents told you is no longer authoritative. Nothing is but this. And you see, that gives incredible freedom. Now, before anybody says, great, fantastic, I believe that. I want to think biblically. I want to put myself, my mind, intellectually, cognitively, I want to be right on the Word of God. And that's where I stand. Or maybe some of you say, well, that's great. You're convincing me I want to try that. Let me warn you, it's not easy. Because what we have a tendency to do is to bring in the baggage of our ideologies. And unless you're constantly reforming your mind and we're constantly reforming our church according to the Word of God, we can just, without knowing it, bring the ideologies of the world in. You know what I mean? For example, Christians are always, Christians who are based on the Word of God are always creative and distinctive, and therefore, they stand apart. Let me give you a quick example. Catholic Bishop of New York, Mr. O'Connor, I was reading his position on AIDS. It's intriguing, because you see, there's a conservative ideology in this country, and I know a lot about it, because evangelical Christians, unfortunately, in many, many cases have bought into conservative ideology that says, well, you know, the people that get AIDS have gotten AIDS through homosexuality and through, you know, through drug abuse, and therefore, we never like those people anyway, so let them suffer. That's the conservative ideology. Oh, it's never, never, you know, put out there in print, but it's there, and it's thick in many parts of the country. And there's a liberal ideology that says, on the one hand, there's, listen, there is nothing wrong with this behavior, and we need to fight for these folks and really help these things, these people out. And then you have O'Connor, who has got a biblical position in this case, and therefore, is getting creamed by everybody. Because what he's saying is, he's saying, we have to do, we have to go all out, get all the, you know, open all the stops to get a cure for AIDS. We have to help AIDS victims against discrimination. We've got to advocate. We've got to be advocates for them. We've got to help them. We've got to, we've got to love them. We've got to do all that, but homosexuality is a sin. And he's getting creamed. Because, you see, anybody who's biblical steps outside of conservative and liberal ideologies and doesn't belong to either of them, you see. Now, are you going to tell me that this view of the Word of God, this view of Revelation, makes you, what, a mindless person? Does this mean that you just check your mind at the door? Well, my friends, finally, you're free. Finally, you're free. From parties, from party spirit, you see. From ideologies, from totalitarian philosophies, from demagogic Presbyterian ministers. Finally. You see that? Okay, but that's not enough. Not enough. It's not enough just to think biblically, get your mind on the foundation. Secondly, there's the will. The will. Oh, gee. Listen. Unconditional obedience. That's what it means to put yourself completely on the foundation of the Word of God. There's a big, big difference between 99% obedience and unconditional obedience. A huge difference. You see, many of us obey Christian principles most of the time. Why? Because most of the time it looks practical. Right? You know, you've heard since you were a little, honesty is the best policy. So most of the time you don't lie. Because when you do, if you feel bad, besides that you're afraid somebody might find you out. Most of the time you obey. Most of the time you obey. 98% of the time, most of the time you obey. But there are places where what the Word of God says, what Christian principles say, you delay your obedience. Why? Because it looks like it might not be practical. Let me give you an example. The Bible says only marry a believer. The Bible says a believer. sounds like a pretty impractical thing for a lot of people, doesn't it? They say, are you kidding me? Do you realize how that narrows the field which is already? Which is already looks like a bottleneck to me. Now, I just use that illustration because in a place like New York where everybody's single, it looks like suicide. It looks stupid. Now, I want you to know, all those other places where you're obeying doesn't tell you, all those other places doesn't tell you whether or not your will is built, your volition is built on the Word of God. It's at those places where it looks impractical that you can see what your real foundation is. Because you see, God came to Abraham several times. The first time he says, Abraham, get out and go to another land. And Abraham says, where? And God says, I'll tell you later. And then later on he says, Abraham, wait for a child to be born. Your whole life you must wait, put on hold until your child is born. And Abraham says, how? We're in our 90s. And God says, I'll show you later. And then after the child's born, God comes and says, Abraham, Abraham, take your son, your only son whom you love and kill him. And Abraham says, why? And God says, I'll tell you later. Now, at every one of those places, what if God had said to Abraham, Abraham, I want you to obey, but let me explain before you do this, all that I'm going to show you, all that's going to happen. You see, you're going to go up the hill and you're going to raise the dagger over Isaac, but at the last minute I'm going to say, no, you don't have to do it. Or, you know, when I told you to get out of Ur of the Chaldees, I could show you this great little suburb I've got all laid out for you. You know, again, he could have done that. He says, so I'll show you exactly how it'll work out, Abraham, and then you can obey. Why didn't God do that? Because it's impossible to do that and still have obedience. It's not obedience anymore. Because if your foundation, you see, is you, if you are in the position of deciding which of God's commands look practical and which ones don't, then the Bible is not part of your foundation. It's not your foundation at all. Your judgment again, your interest, your comfort, your goals, your schedule, your agenda for your life, that's the basis, and you're judging what God has to say. Don't you see that those of you who right now are disobeying God because you think to obey Him would hurt? Or those of you who are delaying obedience because you think that to go ahead and obey will be impractical, will be stupid, don't you see that your foundation isn't the word of God at all? Even though 98% of the rest of your life, you're in conformity with God's word, it's just an accident. Because the foundation is you. And as long as you find all these areas where it looks practical, yes, you'll obey, but my friends, you're not on the foundation. And I tell you, you are not a good foundation. All other ground is sinking sand. All other ground is sinking sand. Are you going to be like Abraham who obeyed the bare word of God? God's word and nothing else was enough to get obedience from him. And you know what? What's so lovely is in Romans 4, when it tells us that God, that Abraham listened to God and obeyed, it says in the King James, it doesn't use this phrase in the modern translations and oh, I long for it. It says he staggered not at the promise of God. Isn't that intriguing? Paul says Abraham staggered not at the promise. What promise? God said, take your son and kill him. But you see, every command is a promise. It's got this promise. Again and again and again, the Bible says in one way or another, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after what? Blessedness? No. Righteousness. Don't try to find blessedness. Do the right thing and you'll get all the blessedness you could possibly want. Seek first his kingdom and all these other things will be added unto you. Obey my word and you will know the truth and the truth will set you free. That's the promise. Friends, the reason we disobey is not because God's commands are too hard. It's because we're too cynical. We don't believe the promise. We don't believe when God says, obey me and you'll get what you need. We don't believe it. So don't you dare say, the reason I'm not standing on the foundation is because it's too hard. Oh no, my friends, it's because you don't believe God. You may believe in God, but do you believe God? A lot of you believe in God, but how many of you believe God? How many of us? And lastly, lastly, this is the end. You know, it's not enough to simply put your heart on the foundation. And by that I mean this. It says here that Jesus Christ is the chief cornerstone. Now, unfortunately today, cornerstones are almost what? Embellishments. They're like decoration. But in the good old days when the Bible was written, your cornerstone was very important because your cornerstone was the big stone in the house. And all the rest of the foundation stones were basically pushed up against it. If the cornerstone was left out or brought out, everything else would crumble. And that means that in a sense, the foundation is just an extension of the cornerstone. Now, let's draw that analogy out. If you know the Bible so well, if you've memorized the Bible so you could win every Bible test or Bible quiz in the world, and if you have been very diligent to know all those regulations and you're following them every day, what does that make you? Well, it's on the way. You're on the way. But if you stop there, you're a Pharisee. Because the Pharisees knew the Bible by heart. And the Pharisees did all these things. And yet Jesus comes to them and says, you know neither the scriptures nor the power of God. It's an amazing thing to say. You don't know the scriptures. How could he say that to the Pharisees? I'll tell you why. Because the purpose of the Bible is to bring you to put your faith in Christ as Savior and Lord. That's the purpose of all of the Bible. And if you just know a lot about the Bible, and if you're just trying to obey diligently, but you have missed the point of it, you haven't built on a foundation yet. The point of the foundation is the cornerstone. See? Look, after Jesus Christ had risen from the dead, there were one day two disciples, two followers of Jesus on the road to Emmaus. This is recorded at the end of the book of Luke. And Jesus Christ appears to them at one point, and when they do not recognize him, he begins to explain about the Messiah. And it says in Luke 24, 27. Here, listen to this. Beginning with Moses and all the prophets, he explained to them what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself. Did you hear that? And beginning with Moses and all the prophets, and every one of them, even Obadiah, he explained to them what was said in all the scriptures concerning himself. What this means is that every part of the Bible, one way or another, the purpose of it is to bring you to Christ. To bring you to put your faith in Christ as Savior and Lord. And if you haven't done that, you have not built on the foundation because Jesus isn't your cornerstone. He's not the thing that you've built on. Why is Jesus the cornerstone? Because if you are relying on your self-discipline or your thoughtful and cognizant spirit that you have, having lived in New York for so long and gone to all the literary cafes, you see, or on your moral record, or just on how true you are to your principles, if those things are your cornerstone, you still aren't on the foundation. What does it mean to make Jesus your cornerstone? Charles Spurgeon, a great Baptist preacher in London in the 19th century, tells us, he wrote this down of a conversation he had with a man who worked, he was a longshoreman, a man that worked on the dock. And this is the conversation, and this is a perfect example of what it means to make Jesus your cornerstone. Listen carefully. Spurgeon says to the longshoreman, do you, my friend, have a good hope that if you die, God will accept you? What's your hope? And the longshoreman says, well, sir, I do. I believe that I'm as good as most folk I know. Spurgeon, oh dear, oh dear, my friend, my friend, I'm very concerned for you. Is this the best you have to rely on? The longshoreman, now a little bit shaken, well, I'm also very, very charitable to the needy. Spurgeon, oh dear, oh dear, my friend, my friend, I'm concerned for you. Is this the best you have to rely on? And then he turns to the man and says, have you sinned? And the man says, yes. And he says, well, what gives you hope that you will be forgiven? And here's what he says. The longshoreman says, I am very, very sorry for my sins, and I have stopped them. And Spurgeon says, that's what you're relying on for forgiveness? Now, friend, suppose you get a debt to your grocer, and you go to her and you say, look, ma'am, I'm sorry I can't pay all these goods that I have bought, but I'll tell you what, I'm very sorry for all the debts, and I'll never get into debt anymore. Do you think that she would accept that? Of course not. Would you even try that with her? Of course not. And do you suppose that you can treat the great God that way, as you would never do to your own grocer? Now the longshoreman says, well, my dear pastor, what should I be as I could, how the Lord Jesus had taken the place of sinners, and how those who trusted in him and rested on his blood and righteousness would find pardon and peace. Cornerstone. You see, your heart's not built on the foundation if you just know a lot about the Bible. But have you transferred your trust from all these other cornerstones to him? Well, here's where we are at the end. My friends, let me just suggest this. The Bible, the scriptures, Jesus says, search the scriptures. And I'll just end with the two things that are there at the bottom of your outline anyway. Anyway, two final admonitions. Number one, search the scriptures. Do you know what that word means? Search the scriptures. Listen, a lot of you read the Bible like you walk down a path and you notice some flowers. That's scrolling. If you're searching, you're down on your hands and knees like you're looking for a lens, you know, a contact lens. That's how you're supposed to read the scripture. My life was changed forever 15 years ago when I went on a retreat. And a lady who was teaching the Bible said, tomorrow I want you all to study for 30 minutes one verse. One verse. Follow me and I will make you to become fishers of men, she said. And I don't want you to stop after five minutes. But for 30 minutes I want you to write down everything you see in that verse. Everything that you believe you can learn from that verse. And I want at least 100 things. And let me tell you something. I've never been the same because, you see, after five minutes you had four or five things down. And you said, this is ridiculous. 30 minutes. But after, you know, you pray and you look and you think and next thing you know they come and they come. And everybody came back that day with 100 things. And she started saying, okay, circle the one thing that was probably the most life-changing, the most thrilling, the most important thing that you learned from the verse. And we all circled it. How many of you then, she said, found that in the first five minutes? Nobody raised their hand. How many of you found it in the first 10 minutes? Nobody raised their hand. How many of you found it in the first 15 minutes? One or two. How many of you found it in the first 20, then 30, and almost everybody raised their hands, you see? Search the scriptures. Look at the diligence you put in to making a living. And yet, I think on the last day, a lot of our possessions are going to get up and they're going to speak to us and they're going to say, you broke your back for us and now we're rust and dust. And here was the word of God in which imperishable treasure lay and you hardly broke the cover. Remember, but don't just stop with that. Don't just search the scriptures. Let the scripture search you. Let it search you. One of the reasons we're so confused today is because we don't know the word of God. We don't let it search us. We don't find ourselves every day looking at it and saying, Lord, let it be a sword that comes through and does surgery on me. When Jesus vanished, remember from those two disciples who were on the road to Emmaus? Remember that? And he left. They turned to each other and they said, Didn't our hearts burn within us when he opened the scriptures to us? When's the last time your heart burned within you as you opened the scripture? Jesus will open the scripture. He'll speak to you. If you come to him and say, I want to be on the foundation. Heart, will, and mind. Every part of me. Are you ready to do that? Are you ready to put the time in that it takes? Or not? Let's pray. Father, We see that on the one hand, the gist of this passage is that there's much work that we can do. We need to put forth the effort to do the study. We need to put forth the effort to find the time. We need to be diligent in saturating our minds in the word of God and trusting it and believing it and obeying it. But we also see that it's your son who will come to us and open the scripture for us because we're too dense, oh, Father. We're fools. And yet, it's a promise. Father, we want our hearts to burn within us. We want our hearts to warm up and mountains of ice and snow melt because your son is teaching us the word. Father, we want that. And I pray that every person in this room will know this soon. But especially those here that need to make Jesus, you, oh Lord Jesus, their cornerstone. Enable us all to build on that foundation. For we pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
