TITLE: Religious Pluralism
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Defeaters (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/defeaters-2-religious-pluralism/

============================================================

Take a look at the handout. Now, I want to apologize right off the bat for the length of it. It needs to be tight, and if we put this into a curricula we're working on now, it will be tighter. But this is kind of a research paper for you, and yet I'm going to put a hedge around it of warnings. There's a lot of material in here. There's a lot of very theoretical and rational material in here, but right off the bat I want to talk to you about how to use it. I mentioned this two months ago when we first did this, and I've got to mention it again. There's more information in here rather than less. I threw everything I knew in here about this subject. So you'd have it, because you're leaders. You need to have resources. You need to have quotes. You need to have sources and so forth. Let me tell you what we're talking about. We're talking about something we've called defeaters. I've mentioned this before, but I'll say it again because not all of you are here every month, and this might be your first time. A defeater is a kind of cultural antibody against the Christian faith in any particular culture. Every culture's got antibodies. What I mean is there's no such thing as a Christian culture. A good example is traditional cultures really like the idea of a just and judging God, and the idea of sort of salvation by free grace. That just doesn't fit their culture. That's just obviously implausible to everybody. And you go into Western secular culture, and everybody kind of gets off on the God of love, but the idea of a God who needs atonement because of his justice is a problem because it just sounds implausible. Every culture's got antibodies. That means plausibility structures, common sense beliefs that everybody in that culture just assumes are true, even though they're totally different than what the other cultures think. And so when they hear Christianity, a defeater is a belief that renders Christianity implausible. So what I put down here at the top is a defeater is one belief that automatically makes another belief invalid. And we're looking at four big ones in our culture. I'm thinking about Manhattan, New York. There's four big ones that are just out there, and they make Christianity implausible. And you can't be a Christian in some ways in the city. You can't recommend your faith to anybody. In fact, as I'm going to try to show you, you can't even comfort people sometimes with God unless you have some facility with these four defeaters. And I call them the Freud-Marx-Nietzsche objection, which is Christian belief leads to repression and oppression. That's just a kind of given. Secondly, the historical criticism, which is a defeater, which is you can't trust the Bible. It's just not a trustworthy historical document. We now know that. Third one is what we're going to look at tonight, which is religious pluralism. And religious pluralism goes like this. There's many ways to God. They're all equally valid. Don't give me the idea that Jesus has got any privileged place. And the fourth defeater is the evil and suffering defeater that we looked at last time we met, which was the presence of appalling evil proves that there may be a good God or a powerful God, but the classic God of the Bible just can't exist. And unless you have some facility with each of these defeaters, you really just can't even move about. You can't communicate. But let me say for another 120 seconds what I said last time. It is the reason why it would be a terrible thing for any of you to see this other as the raw material. If any of you would say, ah, I have a logical kind of argument with which I can blast anybody out of the water, is because nobody has intellectual or theoretical objections to Christianity in the abstract. They're tightly intertwined with personal problems with Christianity. There's always a theoretical problem and a personal problem. For example, and we talked about this last week, but for example, a person who says, I don't believe Christianity is anything special. All religions are equally valid. They're all ways to God. Now, that's a intellectual objection. We're going to look at that. That's a theoretical objection. I mean, it's something that you can debate and discuss, but it's just as possible that underneath there's a personal problem. What if a person says to you, as we're going to see here in a second, it's arrogant for you to think that Christ is a way that people, that all people or most people should come to God. It's just arrogant for you to say that you need to be converted to Christianity. It's arrogant. Now, that's a theoretical statement, is it not? And we're going to show how that doesn't really hold water. But what if that person has been the recipient of arrogant Christian communication? Isn't that possible? Oh, it's very possible. What if that person's experienced exclusion, experienced that sort of thing? this as a completely theoretical issue, you're going to lose the person. I mean, are you after winning the argument? Or are you really after connecting to that person, caring for that person? So that's the reason why you have to always be extremely careful. Like last week we said, or last time we said, somebody says, I just don't believe that there could be a God because of all this evil and suffering. Now, remember I said last time, if you're talking to a freshman Columbia University student who's never suffered a bit in his or her life and has gone to Religion 101 and comes out and says, hey, I don't even have to go to church because I know, I read David Heumann and evil and suffering proves that there is no such thing as God. You can treat that as an intellectual. Bull session. You can go right after that person. You can have a nice, but if somebody, if the average person says, I don't believe that evil and suffering, I believe evil and suffering sort of disproves there is a God, that person might have actually experienced tragedy. And for you to treat it as an intellectual rather than a total problem, you're really going to be in trouble. When I say in trouble, I mean you're not really going to be helping the person. So, for example, look at the last part of the second paragraph. I put where it starts here. It says, at the other end of the spectrum, at one end of the spectrum, I'm saying there's people whose problems are all theoretical. At the other end of the spectrum, you may be speaking to someone whose hurt is very deep, who most needs a Christian to simply listen to their complaints with real respect and offer almost no retorts or arguments at all. Now, do you have the wisdom to know the difference? So, what I'd really just say is, you've got to keep this in mind. Here's what's so weird. Usually, the person's personal objections to Christianity are mainly right, and their intellectual objections to Christianity are mainly wrong, which means they're kind of a mixture. For example, if a person says, it's arrogant to ever convert anyone to your religion, to try to convert other people to your religion. At the theoretical level, that's, as we're going to see, mainly wrong. But at the personal level, it's mainly right, because arrogance is a bad thing. And arrogance and vilifying and demonizing people who have different beliefs than you is a huge source of problem in this world. So now, what are you going to do about that? The last line of the second paragraph is, so, you should almost never dump full, long arguments on people for their theoretical issues, but you should give parts and pieces of the theoretical issues. You should give parts and pieces in the context of a personal relationship that deals with the personal as well. Okay? So that was more than 120 seconds. But it's so important to say every time. There's no such thing as just getting armed with arguments. You need to have them so well, though, kind of absorbed and understood, that you can just throw out a little soundbite here or there that just sort of helps a person move away from going down a path of false reasoning into a better path. And then you put it out there, and you're having a relationship with that person. You don't have to dump everything on them. You shouldn't. You have to listen. Very often, their personal objections are mainly right. Their personal problems with Christianity are mainly right, and their intellectual problems with Christianity are mainly wrong. So you have to treat them as a kind of balance, not just a person who's in error. Okay? So, now, having said that, let's talk about our defeater for the night. Okay? Turn over to page three, where I talk about what we call the religious pluralism defeater. Now, I'm going to start off talking on the theoretical level and on the more personal level. So don't forget what I just said. Keep it in mind so you don't picture yourself lecturing somebody the way I'm lecturing you. Do you hear me? In other words, do not picture yourself lecturing somebody as I'm lecturing you because you're leaders and I'm just trying to give you the information. Now, what is the religious pluralism objection? Look at the spot in the middle of the page. Religious pluralism has a strong air of plausibility today in a world where, because of technology and relative peace, we have now multicultural cities, multicultural countries in a way that didn't used to work. What, Kath? Yeah? Did I say page three? Forgive me. See? You've got to have somebody in your life to tell you the truth. I mean, you've got to have somebody to tell you the truth. That's right. So, by the way, do you see how much easier it is to tell the person the unvarnished truth if you have a strong, deep personal relationship with them? There we go. Okay. When you have Hindus living across the hall in your building, the way that I am keeping you right behind. So, yes. It's not the same thing. It's, it's difference between, I mean, you know, the strength of the time is a good thing, right? I mean, it's a good thing. If you have a strong, deep, personal relationship with them, there we go. Okay. When you have Hindus living across the hall in your building, as we do, we've lived across the hall from a Hindu couple for what? The whole 12 years. It's a little hard to demonize, vilify, and caricature adherents of the other faith when they live on the same hall with you. And as a result, partly because so many people, whether you're Jews or Muslims or not Jewish, because Jews have always been minorities almost everywhere. But if you're Muslim and living in a Muslim culture, you're Christian living in a kind of Christianized culture and so on, it's just extremely easy to demonize, vilify, caricature people of adherents of other faith. And so in the last 30 years, when more and more of us have lived in these pluralistic situations, it's really actually disoriented people. They're disoriented because maybe if you're raised in Indiana, amongst nothing but sort of white Anglo evangelical Christians, and you move off to New York City, and you say, gosh, these people are so wise and smart and nice. Now, if that overthrows you and says, well, maybe Christianity isn't true, that's because you've got a bad version of Christianity, of which there isn't any bad versions of Christianity in Indiana, are there? No. But, I mean, what happens is if you live in homogeneous situations, there is a tendency just to make fun of the other side. And they aren't human to you. You meet them, and then you question your whole faith. And that's really what has happened to a great degree. So a lot of people, when they meet people of other religions, say, hey, they're all the same. What's going on here? And this is the religious pluralistic objection. The religious pluralism objection is, if there are any ways to find God or ways of salvation, by the way, I wrote this so an atheist or a theist could say this, if there are any ways to find God or ways of salvation, then Christianity is only one among many valid ones. You should not try to convert others or insist that your beliefs are true or theirs are not. That's it. Now, in other words, if there are many ways to God, if there is a God, there are many ways to God, and Jesus should not be privileged as the main one or a better one or one for everyone or one for most people. Now, there's a lot of very, very intelligent people who put this out in sort of more learned books and tomes and all that. Come on in. Just sit out somewhere. That's okay. But I'm not going to, you know, and I have them cited here. But now can you turn over to page three? Now we can turn over to page three. Let's talk about the personal as well as the theoretical. It is extremely important for Christians to understand that the reason so many folks are insistent that all religions are equally valid, Christianity is not a better one, you mustn't try to convert people to Christ, mustn't say they have to come to God through Christ, is they've got very, very valid reasons for saying these things. The first one is a concern for human unity. If you know anything about 17th century European history, and I don't know why you should, but if you do, you realize that the intelligentsia were almost pushed into the Enlightenment by the religious wars of the 16th century. I put down here that so many intelligent people in Europe at that time concluded that we had to defang religion if we were ever to have peace in the world. And they began to say this, something like this, you may hold your particular beliefs, but you must not do so ever in such a way to delegitimize the truths of other religions, faiths, and cultures. And the concern for human unity is huge. Look at the second half of this quote from Leslie Newbigin. This is a perfect example of the concern behind religious pluralism, which is a good one. See where it says, to maintain? See this long quote? It's halfway through. Newbigin, he's trying to give us the religious pluralism objection. To maintain the old missionary attitude is positively dangerous. In a world threatened with nuclear war, global ecological crisis, a world more and more closely bound together in its cultural and economic life, the paramount need is for unity. And an aggressive claim on the part of one of the world's religions to have the truth for all can only be regarded as treason against the human race. I mean, that's a pretty potent and eloquent thing to say. And when you hear a person like that, even if you disagree with them, you have to say, well, yeah, but that's a really good point. The second personal thing behind the religious pluralism objection is not just a concern for human unity, but the second one is this experience of exclusion. See, on the other hand, this concern can have a personal aspect to it. An awful lot of people are very sensitive today to what is called power relations. Now, what is power relations? Let's really bring it down to the practical. In a given body of people, who gets to lead and who must follow? Who can interrupt and who has to be quiet? Whose ideas are taken seriously immediately and who has to go get another person to legitimize them? Those are power relations questions. We're going with it. Thank you. by professing Christians. Many people have come into ostensibly Christian organizations and seen power exercised there in the same old way as out in the world, even though Jesus says, you know that the rulers of the pagans lorded over them, not so with you. Instead, whoever wants to be great among you must be your servant. Therefore, if a person who's a skeptic or a seeker or not a Christian or not sure what they are, if in a conversation with a Christian they experience the Christian being disdainful and dismissive during a dialogue with a non-believing person, even watching them have dialogue with somebody else, that attitude, that disdainfulness, that dismissiveness only confirms the fears of religious pluralists that we're never going to experience a coherent, tolerant, welcoming society until the religious pluralist view is adopted by everybody. This is the reason there's enormous antipathy toward evangelism and the effort to try to convert others to your faith. Doesn't that make sense? You see, those are very valid. I'm trying to bring out the personal reasons. If, when you're talking to somebody, you ignore those very valid personal problems and you go after the theoretical weaknesses in their argument, which certainly, by the way, I'm hoping God doesn't strike me with lightning if I'm talking to you about this. I certainly have done this. To sort of, the personal objections are valid, the theoretical objections are weak, go after the theoretical objections, you're losing what you really want, which is what? The relationship. Or the recommendation of Christianity as something that's a good thing. So, as I put down here, look at this second paragraph. Actually, it does happen a lot. It happens, in fact, it's hard to avoid when you're doing what you call evangelism, when you're trying to share your faith with somebody. If you're a Christian and you're talking to somebody and you're just perceived by them as not really listening to them at all, you're out of accord with the spirit of the one who came not to be served but to serve and who is so tender that he will not quarrel or cry out, a bruised reed he will not break, a smoldering wick he will not snuff out. Jesus was gentle. So, you've got to keep that in mind. Having said that, having said that, let me talk to you about the fact that of all the objections to the Christian faith, not evil and suffering, not the Freud-Marx problem, and not the historical criticism, all those are really pretty legitimate. But I want you to know that just logically, just theoretically, the idea that all religions are equally valid and nobody should try to convert anybody to their faith but just sort of live and let live, is theoretically very weak. Extremely weak. So weak that when you talk to somebody in this situation, you may be seduced into thinking, this is such a ridiculous position that surely I can just do this and this and this and it's going to fall apart. But no. Look here under a theoretical problem. The religious pluralism position that I've been articulating to you is almost common sense today. I put it down here. It's easy to articulate. Its popular form is heard on hundreds of college campuses absolutely every day. It goes like this. Who can know who is right? Nobody can know whose religion is right. So don't insist your religious beliefs are righter than somebody else's because who's to say? We've all got our different beliefs. Live and let live. Don't try to convert me. It's easy to articulate. And as a result, it's almost, I put down here, it's become common sense which means that people are very, very, they haven't thought out why they believe it and if you question it, they're very impatient with you. They won't sit and listen to a lot of reasoning. For example, democracy is better than dictatorship. In America, what is that? Common sense. Do you think the average student, the average person has thought out the reason? Do you think the average person can say, here are 10 reasons why dictatorship actually has some advantages over democracy but 20 reasons why democracy really is better than dictatorship. They haven't thought it out. Why? Because it's just a given. Nobody doubts this. And if you try to even question their position, they're going to say, please, let's get on with it. And therefore, in this situation, you very often find that it's such common sense that people will not be very interested in going, don't be seduced into thinking you can argue people through this. You have to be very gentle. You have to have a relationship. You've got to talk to them. You've got to know them. But let me talk to you about why it's so weak. Look down here at the fatal flaw. Okay? See where it says fatal flaw? The fatal flaw in all forms of the religious pluralism objection is, and it's in italics, the religious pluralism objection is a religious belief claiming to be more true than opposing beliefs and as such is subject to all the criticisms as well. flaw. The religious pluralism objection to religious beliefs is itself a religious belief. It's claiming to be more true than opposing beliefs and as such they're doing the very thing they're telling other people they can't do and as such it deconstructs itself. Now right off the bat almost nobody says oh I see that but it's hard to deny. Look at the next paragraph. Let me show you why I just think it's impossible. There's no reasonable way to deny what I just said. First of all the religious pluralism view is a belief. It's a belief. It's not an empirically verifiable hypothesis. It's not something that can be proved in the laboratory. There's no way to prove it. It's a belief. Number one. Number two it's a religious belief. It is a belief about the nature of spiritual reality and it is really quite a detailed description of that reality as you're going to show you in a minute. It asserts certain things. Now look up here for a second. The average person if you say well now wait a minute I have a religious belief and I think it's right. Righter than yours. But you have a religious belief and you think it's righter than mine. What's the difference here? Almost immediately what they're going to say. Look at the footnote on page four. Almost immediately the person will say I'm not saying anything specific about God. You're wrong. This is not a religious belief. I'm not saying anything specific about God. I'm only saying that we can't know for sure what he is or what he's like. I'm not being religious. I'm not giving you a religious belief. I'm just saying nobody can be sure. Nobody can know. But the Christian view of God is that God has revealed himself in Christ so we can know him. The religious pluralist objector is saying God is not like that. He's like this. He's not a revealer through Christ. He's a non-revealer or he's a revealer in other ways. In other words you can't get out from under it. You can't say nobody knows whose religion is right without saying something very specific about God. It's a belief. It's a doctrine. It's a religious belief. It's not empirically, it's not an empirical thing. It's exactly like the thing they're objecting to. And then number three, go back up into the last paragraph. Third, religious pluralism proponents are trying to persuade those opposing them. They hold the religious pluralism position on spiritual reality rather than traditional Christianity, for example. If this is not the case, why are they writing books about it? And they are trying to persuade us that their view of God is better than our view of God. In other words, they're trying to say, leave your position and come over to our position. And if they don't feel that, why are they urging us to change our view? They're saying, we're not urging you to change your view. But they are. They're saying, we're not urging you to change your view. We're just saying, don't convert people. And what they will not see is that's assuming all kinds of things about the nature of God that we don't believe that they do. And therefore, the fatal flaw, of course, is that they are doing exactly what they're saying we shouldn't do. And in some ways they're worse because at least a Muslim is admitting what he's doing. The Buddhist is admitting what he's doing. The Christian is admitting what he's doing and might even work on their heart to do it in a kind of non-coercive and loving way. But the religious pluralist objector will not admit what they're doing and therefore is sort of out of touch with reality, even emotionally, doesn't know what's happening. And that's the fatal flaw. Now, let me just show you a couple of, there's different forms of this view, and I should at least give you examples. Let me just show you. Turn over to page five. Here's the first example. Now, what I mean by example is this comes in different forms. I mean, almost nobody says, I'm a religious pluralist objector. Have you ever heard it? You say, is that like a conscientious objector? You couldn't go to, you know, no. Nobody uses the term. Religious pluralism is a philosophical, by the way, it is used in philosophical circles. Everybody knows what it means. But it's a catch-all for different kinds of problems. And here's three forms of it. Now, I'm going to give you the weakest form and then the stronger form and then the most sophisticated form. There's three ways to do this. The first form of this goes like this. It's the all-obsane objection. All religions are basically the same. So don't claim that your religious beliefs are righter than anybody else's, okay? They're all the same. Now, there's, and take a look at this first paragraph. What they're really saying is this. Most true proponents of the religious pluralist objection are not atheists. They are very happy to agree that people can have genuine experience. what we would call doctrinal inessentiality. What they're saying is, it doesn't matter what you believe, the doctrines are not that important. You say Jesus is the Son of God, you say he's not the Son of God, but that's not the important thing. That's not the critical thing. They would say something more along the lines of, what religions all believe in, they believe that we have to be taken out of our selfishness into unselfish living, and we have to have meaning in life, and we have to have connection with the divine. All religions are basically like that, which means most of the doctrines are essentially inessential. The important thing is to move. By the way, I'm not taking this from my experience, I'm taking from the good books on this, like John Hicks book, and all the William Cantwell Smith, and these people who are very intelligent and very articulate, proponents of this view, that's what they say. The doctrines are inessential. Here's the problem with this view, and it's severe. Number one, oh, by the way, before I give you the problems, I have to say something. If you refuse to grant the wisdom in other religions, this is the second paragraph under all the same objection, you've got to acknowledge and agree with the personal practical issue behind this theoretical problem. There's an awful lot of people who have this objection, who were raised in a Christian environment, where other religions were demonized, and when they found riches in other faiths, they immediately said, hey, hey, I was not given, you know, I wasn't told how neat this was. I wasn't told how wise Buddhism is, and so forth. And if you respond like, if you respond in the way their parents or their teachers responded to other religions, if you act as if there's no wisdom in other religions and there's nothing good in other religions, it'll just aggravate the real problem they have. If you maintain ignorance of, no appreciation of other faiths. So having said that, though, here's two huge problems with this view that all religions are the same. Number one, it's illiberal. Look at the last paragraph on the page of number five. This is very weak. Ironically, it is oppressive and exclusive. First, this most liberal-sounding statement is one of the most illiberal possible positions because it refuses to listen to the religious person's actual voice. It insists on papering over enormous differences. Pardon me. That's obviously a typo. And the example, don't look down here, look up here. You may have heard me say it. I remember some years ago I was speaking on a panel with a Muslim cleric, an imam, to a group of students at Cooper Union. Were you there? No, it was before you were there. Anyway, and at one point, you know, one guy just insisted, you know, basically Islam and Christianity are the same. You're really saying the same thing. And both of us, I was very happy when I said, that's not true. And the cleric said, oh, that's not true. I was very glad. He said, I would have really been out on a limb. And we both went on and said, you're really misunderstanding. We both explained why we're really not the same in some very, very central ways. And the guy looked at us and said, no, no, no, no, no, no. After about 10 minutes of both trying to explain torturously and I thought fairly articulately, including him, he's just as good as I hope what I said, what happened was the kid says, no, you're just basically the same. And boy, we felt like, I mean, listen, if one of you says, look, I am Hispanic and somebody says, no, I don't think so. You know, I don't like to, I'd like to think of you as Korean or something like that. You say, you're not listening to me. And it's very, it was very illiberal to say our religion is the same. What you're really saying is, I don't want to hear what you have to say at all. Turn over to page six. That's number one. But let me look down here a little further. Number two, look at fatal flaw spotting. The religious pluralist position is that loggerheads with most, if not all, world religions, I said most only because there might be somebody going to tell me about one, this view that all religions are the same, there is no religion that says that at all. The top of page six, don't look at it, I'll give you a summary of it. The top of page six talks about the fact that the Dalai Lama, for example, at one point said, if you're a compassionate Christian, you don't need to become a Buddhist. Just live a life as a really compassionate Christian, and you will eventually get to salvation. Now, everybody says, wow, that's it. There it is. That's all we believe. We religious pluralist, that's what we believe. That's not true. The Dalai Lama believes in the doctrine of sunyata, and the doctrine of sunyata is the doctrine of emptiness, the truth that the physical world is an illusion, and until you believe that, you cannot be released from the cycle of karma and reincarnation. It's not until you get nirvana. I'm reading a biography of Buddha. It's not until you get to nirvana, and nirvana means to believe that doctrine, the doctrine of sunyata. If you don't believe that, you'll never get to enlightenment. But what they also believe is, if you live a compassionate life, even if you haven't hit nirvana, and you can't hit nirvana through Christianity, but if you live a compassionate life, you'll have a better incarnation next time. And it's because of their view of reincarnation, and their view of the doctrine of enlightenment, sunyata, is the reason why he's able to say what he said. And therefore, it's not at all like what the religious pluralists say. He is not in any way saying, it doesn't matter what you believe, as long as you're living a loving life. They're just refusing to listen. There is no religion that says that. And therefore, going back to the text, which is under fatal flaw spotting, on page 6, the religious pluralist objection to say all religions are basically the same is at complete loggerheads. It's refusing to listen to any of the world religions. They all have sharply different views of reality. They believe that those beliefs are non-negotiable. They all are that way. I mean, the Dalai Lama is not saying, oh, it doesn't matter whether you believe sunyata, and as long as you live a compassionate life, that's not what he's saying. So the religious pluralists are not a tolerant attitude toward all religions. It's a new religion itself that demands every other faith remake itself in its image. It's unbelievably illiberal to say all religions are the same. Ironically, it refuses to admit the diversity of world religions. It doesn't believe in diversity. You see, a Muslim believes in diversity. The religious pluralist does not. And therefore, it's essentially proselyizing, as it tells the other religions not to proselyize. Now, let's go on to the second version of it, which is verse 7. Part of verse 7? Page 7. Chapter. That's really thinking a little too highly of my handout, don't you think? Would you please turn to my handout? Chapter 8, verse 3. Let's exegete it. Okay, the second version of this, on the top of page 7, is the arrogance objection. This is a much more serious objection, because it's personally and psychologically true. Theoretically, it's problematic. And the arrogance objection goes like this. Lots of good people and intelligent people differ with you in your faith, you know, in your beliefs. So it's arrogant to claim that your religious beliefs are righter than theirs. It's arrogant for you to say that you're right and they're wrong. Look at all these good people that disagree with you. Now, you all know what the problem is with this. Christian philosophers in the last 10 years have really taken this one apart in a very good way. And of course, here's what it is. Look under fatal flaw spotting again. The most damaged, this is at the bottom of page 7, the most damaging at all, pardon me, that should be of all, the most damaging of all to the arrogance objection is how it boomerangs on the user, because you are intellectually obliged to apply it to any assertions about religious or spiritual reality, not just those that are institutionally or formally religious. If you say it is arrogant to ever try to say your religious beliefs are righter than some other person, you have to apply that to what you're saying right there. Just because you don't have a formal religious pluralist church with its own 501c3 doesn't mean that what you're just saying at that point isn't a religious statement. And it doesn't mean that you're not trying to persuade us that your take on religious reality is more right than the others. You're doing it. And that's why just tons and tons of very smart Christian philosophers in the last few years have been saying, you know, you can't escape your own statement, and it deconstructs itself. So look at the very bottom of page 7. Here's a quote from one. Peter Van Inwagen is a very respected philosopher, I think he's at Syracuse. He says, Believing the principle of arrogance in the face of informed disagreement, as a pluralist does, violates the very principle. Pluralism has no way of escape from the charge of arrogance with regard to beliefs about God. The arrogance objection deconstructs itself. And then lastly, now I'll be quick here. By far the most sophisticated version of the religious pluralist objection is the issue of knowledge. What they say is, look, okay, a person can easily back away and say, I'm not saying they're all the same. Okay? And they can back away a little further and say, I'm not saying it's arrogant to ever try to persuade that one version of religion is better than another. So they can back away from that because it really is an impossible place to stand. But they can say, all I'm saying is, and here's the last version, the best version, nobody can know whose religion is right. We have no way of proving it. We have no way in society of proving who's right. So since nobody can know whose religion is right, don't claim your religious beliefs are righter than others. If it's right for you and you've sensed the rightness in yourself, fine, but there's no way you're going to be able to prove this to everybody else, so just shut up. Nobody can know. Now, some of you have heard me do this because it's just too delicious not to do it, but some of you have not. So go to the bottom. of it. Thank you. but actually it's from a guy named Michael Polanyi, who was a very, very interesting and important 20th century philosopher. He takes the quintessential religious pluralist illustration. And the quintessential religious pluralist illustration is, look at the first full paragraph, in the famous story of the blind man and the elephant, so often quoted in the interest of religious agnosticism, the real point of the story is constantly overlooked. Now, look up here. You know how that illustration goes? All the religions of the world are like these blind men who come up to the elephant, they touch a different part of the elephant, they describe what the elephant is like. And each one is sort of making the mistake of thinking that the way they're part of the elephant is, is how the whole elephant is. So the blind man who has the trunk is saying, elephants are like snakes. They're, you know, they're very, very, they're long and slithery. And another elephant has got the tail, says, no, no, no, the elephant's more like a wand. And, and, and of course, the idea is that they all only have part of the elephant, nobody sees the whole elephant. You've heard that, surely. Well, look at what Michael Plonny says. The real problem, or the real point of the story is constantly overlooked. The story is told from the viewpoint of someone who is not blind, but can see what the blind men are unable to grasp the full reality of the elephant and are only able to get whole part of the truth. The story is constantly told to neutralize the affirmations of the great religions and to suggest that they learn humility and recognize that none of them can know. But the story is told by one who claims to see the full truth, which all the world's religions are groping after. There is an appearance of humility and the protestation that the truth is much greater than any one of us can grasp. But if this is used to invalidate all claims to discern the truth, it is in fact an arrogant claim to a kind of knowledge which is superior to all the others. And we have to ask the religious pluralist, what is the vantage point, what is the vantage ground from which you claim to be able to relativize all the absolute claims which these different scriptures make? Now you see what he is saying? You can't know that all the men are blind and don't see the whole elephant unless you see the whole elephant. You can't know that no one can know unless you are assuming a level of knowledge beyond what all the other religions claim. How can you know no one can know? If no one can know, you can't know. That, I mean, that is not just a little trick. I've had people, I've heard people do it and say, you just played a trick on me. And you know what? At that level, it is a trick and it's really not, it's not kind. But the illustration of the elephant is a better way to say that you can't say no one can know without assuming a tremendous amount of religious certainty, the very certainty you say that the religion, other religions can't have. So let's summarize, okay? And make one last point about the personal side. Let me summarize. If someone says all are the same, what they're really saying is, you know, they're just refusing to listen to everybody's voice, okay? If everybody says it's arrogant, then you're really saying, but except for me. If they say no one can know, it assumes the very knowledge that they say no one can have. And this is the reason why it falls apart fairly easily. If anybody will stay thinking it out, if somebody will sustain the analysis, it disintegrates. But very few people will do that. It's because they're just as impatient with you as if you said dictatorship is fine. I think it's better democracy. They say, give me a break. Well, give me 10 minutes and I can prove it to you. Give me a break. And off they go. So you have to be very careful and kind and have a relationship because you never get all this out. However, here's something else you need to know, though. Turn on over to page 10. Hmm, maybe not. Let's go over to page 11. Yeah, here we go. Now, I've shown you some of this is too much like a trick to some degree. So, for example, Alvin Plantinga has a place where he says, somebody came up to him once and said, this is just silly for you to think that Christianity is true or truer than any other place. Just silly. He says, if you were born in Madagascar, you'd be a Muslim. And therefore, Christianity can't be the truth. And he looked at him and said, if you were born in Madagascar, you wouldn't be a relativist. Does that mean your position isn't true? See, the fatal flaw thing goes like this. Religious pluralism, if it is willing to use on itself what it's trying to do to everybody else falls apart as actually more disingenuous, more filled. other religions. It's actually a very poor excuse for a religion, but it is a religion. However, last thing and then we're done. Under personally, the most effective way to answer the concern is to model relationships and attitudes in which your belief in the gospel makes you less haughty and more respectful of people with whom you differ deeply. And I think I got a second or two here just to sort of pause and wait for you to realize this. You know what we talk about at Redeemer all the time. We say, if you believe you're a sinner saved by grace, that means you have the only salvation soteriology system. I mean, see, every religion is a system of salvation. The last words of Buddha, I'm reading this, I went to the end. You shouldn't do that, should you? I went to the end of the biography because I know he dies, so it's not like I'm ruining the story. But I went to the very end and his last words are, strive without ceasing. That's his last words. He says, strive without ceasing and you'll find enlightenment. In other words, work and, you know, work for the enlightenment and fast and pray and meditate and be compassionate. Strive without that. Incredible. And every other religion, that's essentially, it's a soteriological system, which means if you are saved in whatever definition that religion has, you find somebody who's not saved in that definition, you can't help but feel superior to them. Christianity is different and it's hard. Christianity is the one religion that says you're not saved by being better than other people, you're saved by admitting you're worse, you know, in some ways. You're saved by sheer grace, which means you have the only salvation system that means a Christian, if you understand it, looks at people who don't believe and you realize these people could easily be, and very often are, better people than me. Because I'm not saved by being a better person, I'm not saved by being more disciplined, I'm not saved by praying more, I'm not saved by being more compassionate, I'm saved by grace. And that's the key to the religious pluralist problem, is not the arguments I just gave you. I told you, you need to know these things so that you don't get overthrown by them. But basically, you must never fantasize lecturing people the way I just lectured you. The most effective way to handle the personal problems people have is to model how the gospel changes us so that we are more respectful of people with whom we differ deeply. And the gospel should be making us more respectful of people who disbelieve in us. Conservatives, how can they respect liberals? Liberals, how can they respect conservatives? Muslims, how can they respect nominalists? I don't know how. If Christians are just the way everybody else is, emotionally, then the religious pluralists are going to stay where they are. But if the gospel is what we say it is, then the gospel should really mean that we are very different toward people that differ with us. We shouldn't, we're the light and you're the darkness. So the point is, the only way to deal with this more than any other, it's your behavior, it's your relationships, it's modeling relationships and attitudes with which your belief in the gospel makes you less haughty and more respectful of people with whom you differ deeply. Let me just finish this out and then we're done. The fact is that anyone's main identity factor, anyone's main identity factor, that which gives them a sense of significance, can be a basis for exclusion. If you say, I'm more open-minded and liberal than anyone else, you can be very exclusive to people you perceive as bigoted. If you're a traditional moral values person, you're going to be very, very, you're going to exclude people that you think, you know, aren't living up to our moral standards. And I put it down like this, overt absolutists say, what makes me special is I have the truth. And that leads you to feel superior to those who don't have your truth. Covert absolutists, which is what most Manhattanites are, say, what makes me special is I know that there is no absolute truth and everybody else is free to be who they choose to be. I'm not like these bigots over here. But this is naturally to feel superior to act exclusively to people who think there's a truth. People who think they have the truth act superior to people who don't have their truth. People who say there is no truth act superior to people who think there is. The gospel shouldn't do either of those things. Then there's the gospel absolutist who says, I have the truth, but the truth is a suffering God, a lamb that was slain, the one who came not to be served, but to serve and give his life a ransom for many. That should just utterly change the way you, it should even change the way you look at people when you're talking to them. It should change, you know, the stance, the glance, everything. And if they don't see a difference in you, then, you know, you can just throw the first 11 pages of this away. The gospel of salvation by sheer grace leads us to expect to find non-Christian people who are nicer, kinder, wiser, and better than us. If you don't expect that, you haven't heard the gospel. The gospel of salvation by my God. Then under- is the only way is not because we're right and they're wrong. It's because we believe salvation is by grace. So the ultimate reason that Christians believe that Jesus is the only way to God is not pride but humility. Here's how it works. It sounds very open-minded to say, I believe that any good person can find God, not just Christians. But what is the premise behind that statement? The premise is that good people find God and bad people don't. See, whenever somebody says, I don't think only Christians can find God. I believe all good people can find God. What about us bad people, I say? And they think I'm making a joke. I say, you know, in the interest of being more open-minded, you just left me out because in that view of the world, I'm not a good person. They say, oh, you're a minister and all that. I say, well, you don't know who I am. Go talk to my wife. The premise behind what looks to be very open-minded to say, I think any good person can find God. The glory of Christianity is to say, why should we only have good people finding God? Why can't we have the bad people? Why can't we have the messed up people? Why can't we have the good and bad people? Why can't we have, you know, people who just simply want God and find him by grace? And the answer is, you can only do that if somebody paid the debt. So the only reason we say you've got to come to Jesus is not because we know exactly what happens to the people who were born in Tibet in the 13th century and then heard about Jesus Christ. I don't know what God's going to do with them. All I know is if I don't offer Jesus to everybody, I'm really saying it's the good people who get in and the bad people who are left out, which is exclusive. What I want to say, it's the humble people, the people who admit that they're sinners, and the proud people who are out. And that's the gospel way, which is also a form of exclusivity, but it's the more inclusive exclusivity. The Jesus way doctrine means the humble are in and the proud are out, and Christianity is the only religion that even claims justification by grace alone. So, you really probably can heal people of their objection in this area by your behavior much more than by talking, but unless you understand some of these things, you're going to be overthrown. Let me pray for a minute, and then we're going to say how we do the next part of our meeting tonight. Okay, let me pray for a second. Gracious Father, we really do, and I certainly sense that every time I speak to my brothers and sisters here in leadership in the church about these things, there is a truth. There is such a thing as truth. Jesus is the word. You've expressed yourself in words. There's truth. There's falsehood, and we do have to insist on truth, and we have to know how to proclaim it, and we need to tear down obstacles to your truth. And yet, we need to embody the truth, not just speak it out. We need to be the gospel, not just preach the gospel. And so, show us how, in a very, very, very difficult and wonderful place to be a Christian, Manhattan. We can find that great balance. Show us really how to be a sign of the kingdom. In other words, what we want, we want to be witnesses, but we want by our lives as well as by our words to make people just passionately yearn for the love and joy and greatness that comes through the gospel. So, we ask that you'd help us know how to do that as leaders and as a Christian community at Redeemer. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
