TITLE: Discipline
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 42:1-9; 45:1-9
TOPICS: God the Father Redemption God's Love
SERIES: The Gospel According to Joseph
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/discipline/

============================================================

The scripture is taken from Genesis chapter 42 verses 1 through 9 and chapter 45 verse through 9 found on page 8 of your bulletin. When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, Why do you just keep looking at each other? He continued, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Go down there and buy some for us so that we may live and not die. Then ten of Joseph's brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt, but Jacob did not send Benjamin, Joseph's brother, with the others, because he was afraid that harm might come to him. So Israel's sons were among those who went to buy grain, for the famine was in the land of Canaan also. Now Joseph was the governor of the land, the one who sold grain to all his people. So when Joseph's brother arrived, they bowed down to him with their faces to the ground. As soon as Joseph saw his brothers, he recognized them, but he pretended to be a stranger and spoke harshly to them. Where do you come from? he asked. From the land of Canaan, they replied, to buy food. Although Joseph recognized his brothers, they did not recognize him. Then he remembered his dreams about them and said to them, You are spies. You have come to see where our land is unprotected. Then Joseph could no longer control himself before all his attendants, and he cried out, Have everyone leave my presence. So there was no one with Joseph when he made himself known to his brothers, and he wept so loudly that the Egyptians heard him, and Pharaoh's household heard about it. Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph. Is my father still living? But his brothers were not able to answer him because they were terrified at his presence. Then Joseph said to his brothers, Come close to me. When they had done so, he said, I am your brother Joseph, the one you sold into Egypt. And now do not be distressed, and do not be angry with yourselves for selling me here, because it was to save lives that God sent me ahead of you. For two years now there has been famine in the land, and for the next five years there will not be plowing and reaping. But God sent me ahead of you to preserve you for a remnant on earth and to save your lives by a great deliverance. So then it was not you who sent me here, but God. He made me father to Pharaoh, lord of his entire household and ruler of all Egypt. Now hurry back to my father and say to him, This is what your son Joseph said. God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come to me, and don't delay. This is the word of the Lord. We're looking at the story of Joseph at the end of the book of Genesis, and we actually, all month of June, and actually we come to the climactic event in the narrative, but it's such a long event. It stretches over so many chapters, we couldn't print them all out and read them all to you. So let me give you a summary. What was printed there and what was just read to you was the beginning and the end of it. But here's the story as it goes. Joseph was sold into slavery in Egypt through the betrayal of his brothers, and he was sold into, or he was actually put into prison through the betrayal of his master's wife, Potiphar's wife. But because of that, in prison, he met members of the king's court, and they discerned his spiritual insight and his wisdom. This eventually led to him being promoted to being the very prime minister of Egypt after he was able to interpret a dream of Pharaoh, and he foresaw a great famine coming, and he was able, through his administrative skills, to prepare the nation for a great famine so that instead of death and starvation, there is now food and life all through Egypt. Now Jacob and his remaining sons in Canaan are facing starvation too. And, you know, the narrator so skillfully shows us right here in the beginning of the story with just a couple of strokes that the family dynamics are still in the tank. When Jacob learned that there was grain in Egypt, he said to his sons, why do you just keep looking at each other? Go get some food so we don't die. But Jacob does not send Benjamin because he doesn't trust them. So the ten brothers go to Egypt, and there they stand before Joseph, and they do not recognize him, though Joseph recognizes them, which makes sense because when they last saw him, Joseph was a teenager. And Joseph remembers the dream. which we'll get back to in a minute. And he says, you are spies. You are sent here from a hostile country to spy out the land. And they say, no, no, we are brothers. We are brothers. they lose hope. And then he brings them out of prison, and he says, I'm a fair man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do. I'm going to give you the grain, and you can go home, but I'll keep one of you as a hostage so that when you come back for grain, if you bring this last son, this youngest brother that you say exists, if you bring him back and I see that he exists, then I'll know you're telling the truth. So they go home. They tell Jacob. Jacob says, I will never give you Benjamin to take back. But after their food is gone, as the years go by, a couple years go by, and they're desperate again, Jacob finally relents in great agony. He gives them Benjamin. Benjamin goes with them, and they go back to Egypt. They come before Pharaoh, before Joseph. Joseph gives them the grain, but as they're on their way home, as they're on their way home, suddenly a messenger from Joseph's court comes and overtakes them and says, someone stole the royal silver cup. And they open everyone's bags, and they find in the grain, the sack of grain of Benjamin, the silver cup. And they come back to Joseph, and they fall on their feet, and they say, we are your slaves. And Joseph says, no, no, no, no. I just need one of you, the guy in whose sack we found the cup. Benjamin, him. He has to stay. He must be a slave forever. The rest of you can go free. And at that moment, Judah, of all the brothers, Judah steps forward and makes an offer that we're going to get back to in a minute. And it's so astounding, and it is so electrifying, that finally, the climax, the climax, and Joseph cannot stand it anymore. And he sends all the other Egyptians away from his presence. And when he was alone with his brothers, he said, it's me. It's Joseph. Joseph is father well. And they are absolutely speechless. Now, that's the story. But what's it mean? What's the story mean? Joseph says to them what the story means. He says, you know, you were doing all these things. You were selling me, and I was falling. I was being betrayed, and I was going. But underneath all the other things that happened, God was doing something. Underneath everything, behind everything else that you were doing, and that I was doing, and that we were doing, God was doing something. God was at work. God was doing something. Well, what is God doing? That's a great question to ask. Let's study this passage by asking three questions. What is God doing? How is God doing it? And why can God do it? What is he doing? How does he do it? And why can he do it? So, first of all, what's he doing? What is it that Joseph says he's doing? Let me tell you. I think it's mind-boggling. What is Joseph's problem? What was the brother's problem? If you can think back on the whole story, it was this. Jacob, their father, had really ruined their lives through terrible fathering. Jacob, if you remember, had taken Joseph, and he doted on him. He just adored him. He just built his entire life on him. And as a result, on the one hand, Joseph had become haughty and deceptive and dishonest and superior, and his brothers had become mean and had become bitter and become jealous and become angry and so on. In other words, terrible fathering was ruining their lives. Their character was flawed. They were on roads to being terrible people. Well, what's happened here? What was God doing? God has intervened because God has come in to become the father that they never had. You see, how is Joseph going to become wise and good so that his gifts are released to save people? How are the brothers going to become wise and good so that they can become the basis for the community of God's people in the world? That's what God had appointed these guys to do and to be, but their father had basically ruined them. Terrible parenting had ruined them. What does God do? He comes in, and he becomes the father behind their father, the father above, beyond their father. He becomes the father they never had. Now, what do I mean by that? Here's what I mean. If you want to understand the story of Joseph, you have to understand the passage in the New Testament in the book of Hebrews chapter 12. The claim in this chapter is basically just worked out in a case study of Joseph, and here's what the chapter 12 of Hebrews says. Do not regard lightly the discipline of the Lord, nor lose courage when you are reproved by him. you are left without discipline, you are orphans. All discipline for the moment seems painful rather than pleasant, but later it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it. Our fathers disciplined us for a short time at their pleasure, but God disciplines us for our good that we may share in His holiness. Now, all through this passage, it talks about God's discipline. Now, the trouble with that English word is the word discipline means almost only punishment. But the Greek word that's being translated there is the word paideia. And the word paideia, from which we get our word pediatrics, is a word that actually means the oversight of the entire environment of a child so that the child receives whatever he or she needs to grow up strong and mature. But the reason they translate this as discipline is that paideia has got teeth in it. Paideia is child nurture, but it's nurture with teeth in it because you must, you definitely must, bring consequences into a child's life. You must bring sharply unpleasant things into a child's life. If the child lies, if the child's selfish, if the child's cruel, if there's no consequences, that child is in for a terrible life. But there is a very, very large distinction, very large difference between nurturing discipline and retribution. There's a big difference between nurture, paideia, and retribution. See, what retribution is, is somebody does something wrong and they just get what they deserve. You pay them back, tit for tat, quid pro quo. Now, in child rearing, parents, teachers, caretakers often fall into payback. The child upsets you, the child insults you, the child hurts you, the child, you know, frustrates you, and you pay them back. You make them cry, you punish them, you just pay them back. And it's almost impossible with children not to occasionally fall into payback. I did it at least twice a day for years. But real paideia, real paideia is not love. It's not justice. It's an exercise of love. It's not justice. You bring into the child's life just enough unpleasantness, and not a iota more, just enough unpleasantness to change the child, to help the child escape becoming a liar, to help the child escape becoming cruel and selfish. You bring, yes, you definitely bring consequences. You bring sharp unpleasantness, but just enough to lovingly change, mature, and grow the child into something good. That's what paideia is. That is nurturing discipline. Well, you say, well, that's hard to do. That's really tough to do. It's more than that. It's impossible to do. There's not a human being on the face of the earth that can do it, and that's the point. Because no matter who you are, you need God's paideia because you've never gotten it from anybody else perfectly. See, when the Hebrews writer says God is disciplining you, you have to understand the context. This letter, the book of Hebrews, is written to a group of people who are facing persecution. They're facing imminent death. And this man has the audacity to talk about God's paideia, God's nurturing discipline through the things that are coming into their life. And here's what he's saying. Every person on the face of the earth is living in a broken world. You are going to face betrayals. You are going to face disappointments. People are going to stab you in the back. There's going to be tragedies. There's going to be troubles. Inevitable, right? Every one of you, every single person on the face of the earth is living in a broken world. Secondly, though, every person on the face of the earth has a broken soul. There's things very wrong with you and me. There's in your soul foolishness. There's blindness to who you are and who others are. There's cowardice and fear. There's selfishness. Right? But what is paideia? This is the claim. This is the claim. Nothing less than this. If you trust God, if you turn to God, if you enter into a relationship with God, God becomes your father in this sense. God begins to do nurturing discipline. What does this mean? He will bring the external brokenness of the world. your life in just such a way that it teaches you, wakes you up, strengthens you, heals you. In other words, every one of us has got all kinds of sharp unpleasantnesses. Every one of us is living in a world of external brokenness. But if you enter into a relationship with God, this is the promise. God will bring the external brokenness of the world into a relationship with the internal brokenness of your life just in the right way, just at the right times, just in the right proportions to make you something great, to make you something good. Which means if you had good parents or bad parents, if you had terrible parents, it doesn't matter. You have to have a father beyond all fathers. You have to have the parent behind all parents. As the book of Hebrews writer says, you need to be subject to the father of your spirit and live. And by the way, if this is true, and it is, Christians have better start thinking about Romans 8 28 a little differently. See, Romans 8 28, everybody loves Romans 8 28 because it says, all things work together for good for those who love God. Now, the reason I sit in a little sing song like that is because I think people trivialize it. This is how they do it. They say, oh, that means that if a bad thing happens, God will somehow bring good out of it. And you're thinking of historical circumstances. You look outside and you say, wonder what God's going to do? Because you hear stories. You hear stories like, yes, I broke my leg, so I missed the exam and I flunked the exam and therefore I flunked out of school. But at the hospital, I met a doctor and we got married. It's wonderful. Okay? So you hear stories like that and you say, oh, so that's how Romans 8 28 works. And you know what? Here's the point is probably that's true, but you'll never know. You'll not know one percent of the historical reasons. I have a great, great grandfather who had four wives. The first three died on him. He married four times. He had four wives. And from those four wives, he had 17 children. And I am descended from the 17th child of the fourth wife. And I every so often imagine my great, great grandfather digging the grave of his third wife, his third wife, saying, what is God doing? What is God up to? Why would this be happening? What is God up to? And I just, I just imagine getting into a little time portal and jumping out as he's saying, what is God doing? And saying, well, for one thing, me. Yeah. But, you know, that's, of course, very self-centered for you and me because that's the only one we know. See, that's the only reason we know. And we think, well, of course, then it makes it all worth it. All those poor women dying in childbirth and that sort of thing. You see, there's probably thousands of reasons why those women died younger rather than older. There's, listen, I'm sure there are historical reasons why some bad things happen, but you'll never find out about it. And don't waste your energy trying to do it. Don't look outside when something bad happens. Look inside. Because the thing that always, the good that always will come out of bad is that you must look inside and say, God is making this a vehicle to turn me into the image of his son, to make me the glorious, beautiful, unique person that he's designed me to be. He's here to, he's going to use this to make me into something great, even if it's a small direction. More patience. See, look at what God did with Joseph. Here's a perfect example of bringing the external brokenness into relationship with internal brokenness. How did he do it? He was betrayed by Potiphar's wife. That was evil. God didn't create that. It happened. He was betrayed by his brothers. God didn't create that evil. It happened. But God used those things to move Joseph from foolishness into wisdom, from cowardice into courage, from blindness to who he was into self-knowledge and discovery, from selfishness into compassion and generosity. He did it. God does it. That's all, that's the good that's always happening in the bad things of your life. Don't look outside. Look inside. So that's the first thing we learn. What is he doing? What is God doing? Fatherly, nurturing discipline in our lives. That's what he's doing. Secondly, how is he doing it? Not just what is he doing, but how is he doing it? How is he doing it? There's a method through which he turned Jacob, Joseph, from a spoiled brat into a great man. And now through Joseph, the very same method is God is doing and using in the brothers' lives through this process that Joseph puts his brother in. is this? And here, it's the best place I've ever read that summarizes what Joseph is doing with his brothers. It's a very difficult process to understand. Why is he fooling them? Why doesn't he come right out and say who he is? Why is he putting them through all this? Derek Kidner, who wrote a little commentary on Genesis many years ago, puts it perfectly. In the commentary, he says this, at first sight, the rough handling of Joseph of his brothers has the look of vengefulness, but nothing could be further from the truth. Behind the harsh pose was deep, almost uncontrollable affection seen in Joseph's continually running out of the house, running out of the room to weep. And after the ordeal is over, there is nothing but overwhelming kindness and tenderness. Joseph's enigmatic treatment of them was a kinder and more searching test. Just how well judged was his policy can be seen in the growth of new attitudes in the brothers as the alternating sun and frost broke them open to God. That's the method perfectly put by Derek Kidner. The alternating sun and frost, broke them open to God. Now that's a fascinating image. Because if things get really hot and then really cold, really cold and really hot, it breaks things. It breaks the ground. The ground cracks. Stones can crack. Now this is exactly what happened to Joseph. Do you remember? He was up. He was down. He was up. He was down. You see? He's sold into slavery. Now he's on the top. Now he's down in the prison. Now he's on the top. Joseph does the very same thing to his brothers. Do you see what he's doing? Truth and love. Frost and sun. Convicting them and humbling them and graciously encouraging them back and forth. This incredible mixture of truth and love is what he's doing. And if you think about, since we're talking about parenting here, this is how Jacob screwed up his family. With Joseph, all love and all affection. Remember? But no boundaries. With his brothers, lots of boundaries and rules, but no affection. Truth without love, love without truth, does not change people. But truth and love in perfect mixture, in perfect proportion, applied, that's what actually changes people. This is what Joseph is doing. Sun and frost. First of all, he's actually very sunny in a way because he is not paying them back. When you read this story, almost always the first response of the reader is that Joseph's being kind of vindictive here. Why doesn't he just come right out and say who he is? Why is he toying with them? But he is not doing justice, friends, because let me tell you what justice would be. What is just desserts? What is just retribution for having been put into slavery and prison for years? Slavery and prison for years. In other words, if Joseph was really paying him back, he would have just put him into prison for years. So on the one hand, he has forgiven them, but on the other hand, he hasn't just forgiven them. Now listen carefully. You see, if Joseph had said, if Joseph had only won a justice, he would have said right away, right off the top, it's me, Joseph, first time they met, in the slammer. So if he was only a man giving them justice and truth, he would have said immediately, it's me, Joseph, in the slammer. On the other hand, if he was only giving them forgiveness, if he was only giving them pardon, he would have immediately said, it's me, Joseph, and I've forgiven you, so let bygones be bygones. But think about it. If he had said, it's me, Joseph, in the slammer and given them only justice, would that have ever changed them? No. And on the other hand, if he'd immediately said, it's me, Joseph, I forgive you, everything's fine, would that have changed them? No. But by alternating sun and frost, see, love and then truth, convicting them of their sin, but on the other hand, giving them a taste of retribution, a taste of retribution, but at the same time, not going all the way, he finally brought them into this amazing spot. He finally brought them into this amazing spot. And here's what this amazing spot was. He brings them to the place, and this is a stroke of genius on Joseph's part. They fall before him. They say, we are your slaves. And Joseph says, oh, really? No. I only want one of you. Just Benjamin. The rest of you can go free. Do you know what Joseph has done? He set up the exact same situation that happened years before. A new betrayal, and they save their skin. All they got to do is abandon Benjamin, and they go free. And so Joseph is giving them the very same situation in order to... here's what we learn. This is the climax of the whole story. Judah, of all people, steps forward at this point. Now, of the brothers, Judah was the one, originally, who was the ringleader of the betrayal. He was the most cold-hearted one. He was the ringleader. He was the one that even suggested, let's sell Joseph into slavery. And now Judah steps forward, and in an amazingly moving speech, says this to Joseph, though he doesn't know it's Joseph. He says, if the boy, Benjamin, is not with us when we go back, our father's life is bound up with the boy's life, and he will die. Now then, please, let me remain here. Let me become the slave in place of the boy, and let the boy return. Do not let me see the misery that would come on to my father. I will bear the blame. Judah, instead of sacrificing his brother for his own self-interest, which is what he did before, he now sacrifices himself for his brother. And at that point, Joseph can say, now let me tell you what's happening. Because the sun, the frost, the truth, the love, over and over and over again had broken them open to God. Just justice would never have changed them, and just pardon wouldn't have changed them. But now think about this. Joseph is not, why is he doing all this? Why is he messing with their lives? Why is he messing with their heads? In spite of the fact he forgave them? No, because he forgave them. Because if you really love somebody, you don't want to just give them pardon. You don't want to just forgive them. These brothers, because of their anger, because of their pride, because of their cruelty, they need to be forgiven for their anger, pride, and cruelty. But more than that, they need to be healed of it. They don't only need to be forgiven of it, they need to be forgiven of it, of course. But they don't need to only be forgiven of it, they need to be healed of it, they need to be restored. The reason why Joseph will not only pardon them is because he loves them. he messes with them. He goes after them. He forgives them, so he's not giving them justice, but he doesn't only forgive them. He goes beyond justice and beyond mere pardon, messing with them, engaging with them, truth and love, truth and love, until they're broken open to God. Isn't that amazing? He doesn't do it in spite of the fact he's forgiven them and loves them, but because he's forgiven them and loves them, and God's the same way with you. See, listen, have you ever heard anybody say to you, hey, I love this Christian gospel stuff. You're saved by grace. You can just say, forgive me for my sin, and God forgives you, and you can go on doing it. That's not the God of the Bible. Oh, the God of the Bible absolutely forgives you. He absolutely accepts you, but because he's forgiven you and because he's accepted you, he will never just let you be. As long as there's foolishness in your heart, as long as there's blindness in your heart, as long as there's fear in your heart, as long as there's selfishness in your heart, he's going to be bringing the external brokenness of the world into a relationship with the internal brokenness of your heart until you're something great. He's designed you to be something great. He's designed you to save lives. If you could only get your life enough together like Joseph, if you could find your foolishness and your cowardice and your selfishness and your blindness and all these things being restored and healed, not just forgiven, but restored and healed through the sun and the frost, through the truth and the love of God's involvement in your life, think of what you could be. God will not let you alone. He will come after you because he's forgiven you. So that's what he's doing, fatherly, nurturing care, and that's how he's doing it with the mixture of truth and love. But then we have one more question we have to deal with. Why can he do this? We have said that if you turn to God, God comes into your life as a father, and he does paideia, which is not paying you for your sins, but only bringing enough into your life of unpleasantness to change you. Well, how can God do that? Isn't he a God of justice? Surely, if he's a God of justice, what about all the evil people in the world? All they have to do is ask him, oh, please come into my life as your father, and he comes on in, and so there's no justice? He just throws justice away? No, not at all. Here's how he can come into your life as a father. Here's why he can come into your life as a father. Look at the story. Joseph wants to reveal himself, doesn't he? He's constantly crying. He can't wait. He can bear it no longer. He wants to reveal it because he wants to reconcile with his brothers. He wants to reconcile with his family. But he can't until Judah does what he does. And what does Judah do? He offers a substitution. what he never listened to. And he said, this is just going to be a great he was with his brothers. He wants to reconcile with his family. But he can't until Judah does what he does. And what does Judah do? He offers a substitutionary sacrifice. When Judah steps forth and says, let me bear the blame. Let me pay the penalty. Let me substitute for my brother. I will bear the blame. And when he offers a vicarious atonement, when he offers a substitutionary sacrifice, that's the point at which Joseph says, now I can reveal myself. You have changed. You've broken open to God. Now we can be reconciled. So Judah's substitutionary sacrifice was necessary for the reconciliation of the family. But Jesus' substitutionary sacrifice is necessary for you and I to be reconciled to God. Because Judah, by the way, who was Judah's descendant? Jesus. Jesus was not descended from Reuben or from Simeon or from Benjamin or even from Joseph. Jesus was descended from Judah. And Judah, without knowing it, is walking in the shoes of his greater son. Because you see, Judah steps forward and he offers his life and that reconciles his family. But Jesus lost his life and that reconciled us. Because you see, if you ask the question, how can God come into our lives as a father and not as a judge? Does he just throw justice away? No, he just throws justice into Jesus' heart. Because on the cross, Jesus Christ lost his relationship with God. He was punished. He took the penalty we deserved. And Jesus Christ, in a sense, it says to you, in my suffering, I lost my father's smile. I lost my relationship with God. So that when you suffer, you can know you have your father's love. I lost my father's love in my suffering. So you can know you have the father's love in your suffering because I paid the penalty. Do you not see that the gospel is the ultimate sun and frost that will break you open to God and nothing else will? The gospel. Because of the cross, God can be absolutely holy and absolutely loving with us at the same time. Religion says this. Religion says this. If you live a good enough life, God will be pleased with you and he will take you to heaven. Right? And that means this. If you live a good enough life so you are sure that you're going to heaven, that will harden your spirit. It'll just make you superior, like Joseph was. And if you fail to live a good enough life in the religious, if you're a religious person and you live a good enough life, it'll harden your spirit. If you're a religious person and you fail to live up to your standards, it'll break your spirit. You'll hate yourself. You'll be down in the dumps. You'll be like Joseph's brothers. But the gospel is you're more wicked than you ever dared believe and you're more loved than you ever dared hope at the same time because though you're a sinner, because of what Jesus has done, you're accepted sheerly by grace. That means you're so bad that he had to die for you. That's a lot of frost. But you're so absolutely loved that he was glad to die for you. That's a lot of sun. So the gospel gives you far more frost and far more sun. It convicts you far more deeply and assures you far more unconditionally. And therefore, it's only the gospel that will really break you open and turn you into something great. Religion will not do it. Trying to be your own savior in the Lord will not do it. The gospel is the ultimate truth and love, the ultimate frost and sun that will break you open to God in a way that nothing else will. Everything else will either harden your spirit or break your spirit, but this will break you open to God and make you something great. Now, if this is all true, and it is, how should we live? Three practical applications for you. If this is all true, here's what I want you to keep in mind. When troubles come upon you, and they are, and they will, and maybe you're right in the middle of it right now, suffering, troubles, unpleasantness, brokenness, three things to do, okay? The first thing, remember that what feels like weakening is really strengthening. Remember, what feels like weakening is really strengthening. The Hebrews writer, in the middle of the passage I read you in the beginning, says this, all discipline for the moment seems painful rather than pleasant. Later, it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it, and the word trained here is the word gymnasdo, from which we get our word gymnasium, and that is incredibly important. In other words, the Hebrews writer is mixing in a metaphor, an image, to help you understand something about how God strengthens you. Go into a gymnasium and start to do bicep curls, and as you're doing bicep curls, okay, with weights, do you feel like this? You say, with every curl, I feel my arms getting stronger and stronger and stronger. No, what happens? With every bicep curl, you feel your arms getting weaker and weaker and weaker, and so you say, you know, imagine that you don't know anything about how the human body works, and you start to do it. You say, this is awful. I need to leave the gymnasium. I should never do any exercise. All exercise does is make you weaker and weaker and weaker. This is terrible. Let me tell you something. If you come out of two hours in the gymnasium and you feel great, you've done something wrong. And that means that when suffering hits you and you are in a relationship with God, so they have all these assurances that this is God's fatherly, nurturing discipline, you need to realize that though you feel like your faith is getting weaker, your patience is getting weaker, your character is wearing down, that you feel like you're getting weaker and weaker and weaker, you're not. Not if you hold on, not if you keep going, not if you stay in the gymnasium, not if you say, forget this. If you stick with it, and if you have a good coach that's not overtaxing you, and of course you have a perfect coach in the Lord, don't you realize what appears like weakening will really be strengthening? Please keep that in mind. That's number one. Number two, as we said before, when troubles happen, don't look outside. What is God doing? Look inside. Let me tell you what God is doing. He's after your idols. One of the main things that happens in suffering is this. God puts his finger on things in your life that are so important to you, they're more a source of hope than he is, they're more a source of joy than he is, they're more a source of identity than he is. And as a result, you are in an amazing amount of instability. As long as you are basing your joy and hope and your identity on anything than God, do you realize how fragile you are? Do you realize how vulnerable? Do you realize how unstable you are? Anything can come along and go after those created things that you have built your life on, and then you're duck soup. In suffering, one of the things God is doing is he's putting his finger on that, on those things, and saying, you've got to make a shift into me. And even though you're getting weaker and weaker during suffering, that's very often what's happening, that shift. The best illustration I know of it goes like this. There was a man who was a lumberjack, and he knew that next week he was going to cut all these trees down. So he comes to the grove, and he's looking at it, and next week he's going to cut these trees down, and oh my goodness, he sees a little bird, a mother bird, building a nest in one of the trees, where she's going to lay her eggs. And he says, this is terrible. You know, the mother bird's going to die, and maybe the little babies are going to die. So he goes over to the tree where she's building her nest, and he whacks it with a side of an axe, and shakes the tree, and the poor bird's up there getting whiplash, and looks down and says, what in the world is this man doing to me? He's making my life miserable. So she flits over to another tree and begins to build a nest. So he goes over to that tree, and he begins smacking that tree and smacking that tree, until she's practically got whiplash again. And so she goes to the next tree and starts to build a nest. And he whacks that tree, until finally she flies to a high rock and begins to build her nest there. And then he goes home. And of course, she looks down and says, why did that man make my life so miserable? What was wrong with him? But you see, in this life, don't you understand, every single tree is coming down. You've got to build your nest in the rock. And one of the things, one of the main things that God does in troubles is that. This is the reason why John Newton at one point says, everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing can be necessary that he withholds. So weakening is really strengthening. Look inside and look for your false trusts and idols when you get in the gymnasium. But here's one last thing. Please be assured that God has a dream for your future, a dream to use you in other people's lives, a dream for your greatness. And even the greatest assaults on that dream can only fulfill it. God will fulfill his purpose to you, for you, in you, of you. And even the greatest assaults on his dream for you will only fulfill it. That's one of the main points of this whole passage. Don't you remember how the dream started? Little Joseph had a dream. And he says, I have a dream. Someday you're going to bow down to me. I'm going to be your savior. And you know what the brothers do? They say, let's kill that dream. Let's sell them into slavery. Oh, great job. By trying to kill the dream, they fulfilled the dream. Do you not realize that the worst things that can happen to you, the greatest assaults on you, can only fulfill God's dream for you. That's what paideia, that's what this means. That's what the discipline of the Heavenly Father means. In C.S. Lewis's biography, Surprised by Joy, he has a chapter in which he talks about the Great Knock. He was, when he was a schoolboy, he went to a boarding school, and his favorite teacher in C.S. rest of his life, was a man named Kirk. But the nickname that they gave him was the Great Knock. And he tells the story of how he met the Great Knock. The Great Knock actually came to pick him up from the train station and take him back to school. And in the autobiography, C.S. Lewis says, this is what happened the very first time they met. They were driving back, and he says, I looked around, and I saw, looking at the scenery, and so I said, I was surprised at the scenery of Surrey. It was much wilder than I had expected. Stop, shouted Kirk. What do you mean by wildness, and what grounds had you for not expecting it? I don't remember exactly what I replied, but as answer after answer was torn to shreds, it at last dawned on me that he really wanted to know. I was stung into attempting a real answer. He soon showed me I had no clear and distinct idea corresponding to the word wildness. Do you not see, then, concluded the Great Knock, that your remark was meaningless. I assumed the subject would now be dropped. Never was I more mistaken. Having analyzed my terms, Kirk now proceeded to deal with my paraposition as a whole. On what had I based my expectations about the flora and geography of Surrey? Did I base my expectations on maps? Was it photographs, or was it books? I could produce nothing. It had, heaven helped me, never occurred to me before that what I called my thoughts needed to be based on anything. So Kirk concluded, do you not see, then, that you had no right to have any opinion whatever on this subject? This set the tone that was preserved without a break during all the years I spent at Bookham. If ever a man came near to being a purely logical entity, that man was Kirk. Kirk. Some boys would not have liked it. To me, it was red beef and strong beer. Now, you know what's interesting about this? I'll tell you what's interesting about this. The Great Knock was an incredibly logical man, and never let you talk, say a word without making sure you defended your proposition, make sure, you know, your argument was exactly right, it was empirically and rationally nothing wrong with what you were saying. He was a logical machine, and he turned C.S. Lewis into a logical machine, and he also turned Lewis into an atheist, because the Great Knock was an atheist. He was an ardent, strident atheist, and he turned C.S. Lewis into an atheist. But here's what's so interesting. When Lewis became a Christian, he was the most, he was the best debater, he was the most incredible logical machine, and as a result, God used the Atheist Great Knock to turn C.S. Lewis into the greatest evangelist and apologist to intellectual and intelligent people, educated people in the 20th century. This proves two things. One is that God has a sense of humor, and it also proves that what look like obstacles and assaults on faith and holiness in the hands of your heavenly Father become vehicles for your faith and holiness. God has a dream for you. He has a purpose for you, and the greatest assaults on that dream and purpose will only fulfill it. That should give you some confidence. The Hebrews writer says, shall we not be subject to the Father of spirits and live? Be subject and live. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us the assurance that because of Jesus Christ, you come into our lives as our Father. And that does mean to love us, and that does mean to forgive us, but you love us so much that you don't only forgive us. You're working in our lives, and we thank you for it, though so much of your work is unpleasant and difficult. But we ask, Lord, that as we see our Savior and we see that He suffered losing your fatherly care so that in our suffering we could know we have it, that even things that look like their weaknesses, weakenings make us strong. Even things that look like you're abandoning us are not so, because your silences are not absences, and your hiddenness is never impotence. You will fulfill your quiet purposes for us quietly, behind the scenes sometimes. You will never let them fail. We thank you for that. We ask that you would help us to live with the humility and the joy and the poise and the confidence that we should, knowing these things. Change our hearts with these truths. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
