TITLE: Does Religion Lead to Peace on Earth? (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/does-religion-lead-to-peace-on-earth-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now, I'm the only person that gets to hear the music over and over and over again. We're doing this six times over three nights. And it's making me happier and happier to hear the music over and over again. It's easier for me. I'm the listener. They have to do it. So it's a little more stress-inducing for them. But they're doing it so well. And I envy myself. No, how can I do that? All right. But I don't envy them because they get to hear me speak six times, which is nearly as interesting. Can't be soul-sweetening. I hope it's provocative. So let me give it a shot again. Christmas is about peace on earth. But can any religion, any religion at all, really claim to lead to peace on earth? Don't religions, in general, erode peace on earth and lead to strife and conflict and division? And I think we need to, right up front, admit the fact that that's true. In general, religions do not lead to peace on earth. Religion leads away from peace on earth because here's what it does. Your religion sets up a slippery slope in your heart. Your religion tells you you've got the truth. This is the right way to believe and act. That makes you feel superior to people who don't have those beliefs and practices. That leads to caricaturing them a little bit, separating from them, excluding them, not spending as much time with them. That can lead to, therefore, thinking of them as less important people, justifying in your mind their marginalization or their exclusion or even their oppression or their abuse. It's just a slippery slope. Now, once you come to understand that religion tends to lead away from peace on earth, what are we going to do about it? Now, there's three things, I believe, that are being done about it, none of which I believe are working. And then there's, I'd like to make a modest proposal for a fourth way. So, three things that are being done about the fact that religion really doesn't lead to peace on earth, it tends to erode it. The first thing that people are doing about it is hoping and expecting that religion will thin out and eventually go away. That it'll thin out and go away. This is, for the last 60 years in Europe and America, up until about 10 years ago, for many, many years, actually, the intellectual class of the West has believed what was called the secularization thesis. And the secularization thesis was the idea that religion was strong in primitive societies, but the more scientifically sophisticated and technologically advanced a society gets, the more it does, understands the natural world and can control it through science and nature, the less human beings will need thick religious beliefs. And so, eventually, what will happen is religion will sort of thin out away from the belief in the supernatural into just a kind of general, loving spirituality and eventually die off altogether. And everybody was taught that. I was taught that. I'm 55, so I was taught that, you know, in the 50s and 60s and 70s. But basically, everyone has dropped that thesis because it looks like religion is here to stay. It's just not happening. You know, America is a much, a very, very technologically advanced society, and it has stayed religious to a great degree. And there are other modernizing places like Africa, Asia, and Latin America where religion is growing tremendously. Every major religion is growing. And Christianity, just to give you some examples to press this home quickly, Christianity has grown in Africa from 9% of the population to 60% in 100 years, in Korea from 1% to 50% in 100 years, and probably in China over the next 100 years it's going to do the same thing, from 2% to maybe 30, 40, or 50%. And that's going to change history, really, human history, when half of China, 1.4 billion Chinese, become Christians. And that's what's coming. In short, Christianity is growing at 7 to 10 times the population rate in Africa, Latin America, Asia. Sorry, the idea that religion is going to die out is wrong, and religion is a permanent condition of the human being. So that's not going to help. If religion leads to division, it's not going to die out. So number one isn't working. We can't hope and expect it to go away. The second way people are dealing with religion is there have been some experiments where we just simply forbid and control it. Soviet Russia, communist China, Cambodia, Nazi Germany in a different way decided to heavily control centralized governments, heavenly control, or even just forbid religion altogether. And that's the way to get rid of the divisiveness of religion. And, of course, we all know that that led to more oppression. That did not lead to peace on earth to just try to forcibly force it out. Alistair McGrath, who did a history of those efforts, an Oxford Press book by Alistair McGrath, says this about those efforts to control religion in the 20th century. He says the 20th century gave rise to one of the greatest and most distressing paradoxes century were practiced by those who believed that religion caused intolerance and violence. By trying to get rid of intolerant, violent religion, it created more intolerance and violence than was there before. And not only that, it didn't work. As those of you who know, Communist China thought by pushing out all the Western missionaries in the 1940s, that was the last they'd see of Christianity. And of course, all they did was Chinese-ize Christianity and make it stronger. So it doesn't work. So you can't hope it goes away, number one. You can't try to forcibly eliminate it. Now, the third thing people are trying to do about the divisiveness of religion is to urge that we privatize it. And this third option is the main option right now that people are hoping in, certainly in a place like New York City. And here's the strategy. The strategy is we can have peace on earth if all people who have religious beliefs privatize them. They keep them hidden. They keep them private. You must never bring your religious beliefs into work, politics, or public discourse in general. You shouldn't try to convert other people to it. But you should keep it private. And in public, what we should all do is be pragmatists. Let's just put our values and our religious beliefs behind us and simply come together and just do what works. Work on the great moral issues of our day together like AIDS and poverty and education and just simply do what works. Forget about religion. Keep that in the back. Let's just do what works. Let's privatize it. Secular public square, as it were. Now, Stephen Carter at Yale says that that is an incredibly naive and ultimately inequitable way to go, even though it's still probably the way that most people, at least for the next decade or two, are going to feel is the way to deal with the problem of religion and peace. Carter of Yale says this, Efforts to craft a public square from which religious conversation is absent, no matter how thoughtfully worked out, will always in the end say to those of organized religion that they alone, unlike everyone else, must enter public dialogue only after leaving behind that part of themselves that they consider the most vital. That bears some explanation. What is he talking about? Here's what he means. What is religion? Some people say religion is believing in God, but Zen Buddhism is a religion and does not believe in God. Some people say, well, religion is believing in the supernatural. Well, Hinduism actually doesn't believe in the supernatural. It believes that the spiritual is part of the physical. So here's what religion is. Religion is a set of unprovable faith assumptions about the meaning of life, about who we are, and about what is really important for human beings to spend their lives doing. So if you believe that the supernatural doesn't exist, this world is all that exists, and the most important thing for a human being to do is find whatever makes you happy, and do whatever it is that makes you happy, as long as you don't get in the way of somebody else's happiness. That is implicitly a religious view. It's a set of faith, unprovable faith assumptions about who we are and what life is about. Philosophers call it a master narrative, an account of things that you can't prove. Some people call it a worldview. Some people call it a narrative identity. But whatever you call it, it's a set of unprovable faith assumptions about the nature of things. And everyone implicitly has a set of these things just to function. Just to function. Even if you don't go to a synagogue or a mosque or a church, even if you're not part of an organized religion, everybody's got an implicit set of religious faith assumptions. And so there's no way we can all get together, leave those behind, and say, let's just work pragmatically and find solutions that just work for everybody. Because what you think works depends on what you think human flourishing is and what human beings should be doing. And that is always resting on faith assumptions. Let me give you an example. It's not a very gripping or interesting example, but it only takes about 60 seconds. So I was reading an article about divorce law. Now, there's something to really get you to sleep at night. And why not we all just come together and decide what are the divorce laws that work? You don't need to bring your values into this. You don't need to bring your faith or assumptions into this. Let's just figure out what divorce laws really work. Ah, but if you think the purpose of marriage is basically to raise children, then you're going to make divorce laws hard. Divorce, I mean hard. And if you think the real purpose of marriage is the happiness and fulfillment of the two individuals that get into the marriage, and that that's more important than anything else, then you're going to make divorce easy. Well, how are you going to decide which is which? The idea that the family is more important than individual happiness, and that that's how human beings flourish best is a view that's rooted in the moral change. idea that actually marriage should be for the happiness of individuals, that's rooted in what we could call the Enlightenment tradition. The Enlightenment was a view that says that human beings flourish best in a situation where every individual has the right to question authority and tradition and the group. And individual rights is the most important thing. That's what will help human flourishing. But that's a set of faith assumptions. In other words, we can't even agree on what works. We can't agree on what human flourishing is unless you bring in, and everybody inevitably will be bringing in, your faith assumptions. And so what Stephen Carter is saying is if you say, let's privatize religion, people who go to organized religious institutions, churches, synagogues, and mosques, they won't be allowed to be bringing their faith views in. But people who have informal and implicit religious views, and everybody does, they'll be allowed to bring theirs. Inequitable? Won't work. Stephen Carter ought to know. And he's right. And therefore, here's where we are. Religion is sort of a permanent condition. Religion can't be stamped out. Religion really can't inequitably be sort of privatized away. And yet, secularism, individual secularism, the Enlightenment, tends to make people selfish. But organized, formal, thick religion tends to make people tribal. What are we going to do? Modest proposal. Take a closer look at Christianity. Because actually, Christianity has got inside itself resources for both explaining and expunging that natural slippery slope that tends to grow in every human heart toward oppression and division. What do I mean by that? All right. Most people say if there is a God, you meet that God, find that God through being a good person, or working hard, or being good parents, or following the Ten Commandments. So, in other words, let's call that the moral improvement master narrative. Let's just call it the moral narrative. I know that God, you know, accepts me because I'm a hardworking person, or I'm a good person, or I'm a moral person. The Christian gospel is not only a little different than that, it's the opposite. Totally opposite. The Christian gospel is every human being is sinful in that we are self-centered. We put ourselves where only God deserves to be. We make ourselves the center of the universe. You know, put ourselves ahead of everybody else. That's sin. That's what makes the world the mess it is. And the only way we can get out of that is if God came into this world as Jesus Christ and did the exact opposite of what we do. We put ourselves in his place. He put himself in our place. We put ourselves first. He put himself last. He died on the cross for our sins. And the only people who receive that salvation in the Christian understanding are not people who say, I'm good enough for God, or they're people who say, I'm bad enough, I need a savior. I'm not better than anyone else. Now, let's call that the grace narrative. Now, if your narrative identity is a moral narrative, you've got to feel superior to people. It sets up the slippery slope. If God likes me because I'm a hard worker, you have to look down your nose at lazy people. If you believe God likes me because I'm a liberal, open-minded person, you have to look down your nose at bigoted, conservative people. If you think God loves me and cares about me because I'm a moral, conservative person of traditional values, then you have to look down your nose at liberals and libertines and relativists. But if you believe you're a sinner saved by sheer grace, then I see a Hindu person or a Jewish person. If I, as a Christian man, see a Hindu or a Jewish or an atheist, I would never assume that I must be a better father or husband or man than they are. Why? Because I'm not saved because I'm a better husband, father, or man. I expect that they're going to be better than me in many, many, many ways. The grace narrative keeps you from feeling superior to other people, and therefore, the gospel explains why religion tends to create division and gives you a tool to expunge that in your own heart. It is a given around New York City that fundamentalism breeds violence. And I've tried to show you here tonight. Everybody's got fundamentals. Everybody's basing their lives on truth claims that are fundamentals. People around New York say, nobody has the truth. That's a truth claim. So you can't avoid fundamentals, and you can't avoid truth claims. The real question is, which fundamental truth claims make the bearers of them see themselves beneath as servants to appreciating of people who deeply differ with them? Which truth claims make you look at people who don't have your truth claim and don't have your belief and make you care for them, love them, consider them, want to serve them, want to learn from them? Here it is. If the fundamental of your life is a man who died for his enemies, if the fundamental of your life is a man who died for his enemies, that, the more that will destroy the slippery slope of the human heart that turns religion into division. So if Christianity really has these incredible resources, from inside, you see, of faith, to critique the religiosity, to critique the divisiveness of faith and religion, if it's really got that kind of power and you don't believe Christianity, why don't you consider believing it? It's got great resources for the peace on earth. And if you do believe it in general, why not look more carefully at it and use it on your heart so that you can be an agent of peace on earth? Maybe the Christmas carols are right. Maybe Christmas actually does bring peace on earth.
