TITLE: Easter Stories
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Redemption Forgiveness Easter
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/easter-stories/

============================================================

When we first came to Redeemer two and a half years ago, my husband and I were on the verge of separating. Seven years before, he had recognized that he had a drinking problem, but although he was in a 12-step program, he had stopped drinking, and he was depressed. Things between us were not getting better. After we had been coming to Redeemer for about six months, I heard a powerful Tim Keller sermon one Sunday about the sin of self-righteousness. I had never until then thought of myself as a Pharisee. But that day, I realized that I had behaved very badly toward my husband, denigrating him and criticizing him. There and then, after the service, in a flood of tears, I asked my husband and God to forgive me. It was a turning point in my faith and in my marriage. From then on, I tried to find out as much as possible about the Bible's teaching, on marriage. I discovered that God intends the husband to be the head of the household, so instead of getting on his case every ten minutes, I tried to let go and give my husband the responsibilities that I had been taking over, both financial and everything else. The second year, there was another blow. I discovered that what I suspected was true. He had a severe gambling problem. That really shook me up. How could God do this to me, I thought, when I had just found a new faith? But it was God turning on his marvelous light, bringing everything out in the open. The gambling was even harder to deal with than the alcoholism. My husband was in a terrible financial mess, which terrified me. Dealing with it meant confronting him, which I hated, and having the patience and the strength to follow through. I could never have done it without God and Redeemer's support. It was also a real test of faith in God's laws. There were many times when I wanted to give up and run away from my husband, from Redeemer, from everything, but I couldn't run away from God. So I kept hanging in there and making a lot of phone calls. Now, slowly, things are turning around. The gambling has stopped. We're rebuilding our finances and our marriage. Through having to deal with this, we have become much closer, more honest with each other. We have accepted each other the way we really are. I am more forgiving of his weaknesses, more appreciative of his strengths. Finally, after all this time, we have a real marriage, a marriage based on reality and honesty, on knowing the worst about each other and surviving it, and helping each other get through with God's help. Hi, my name is Kathy, and I'm a pediatrician and allergist at Mount Sinai. Like most of you, I had childhood and adolescent experiences, which God used to form my life. And in my particular instance, it was a chronic illness, asthma. And it was really only after 11th grade that I really began to feel like a regular human being. But because of this chronic illness, God really led me into my chosen profession, which is medicine. And actually, it was on this stage that I graduated 22 years ago. So it's the second time I've been on this stage. Anyway, when I turned 35, I really saw that God had blessed my life in so many different ways. But there was one area of emptiness in my life which many people here who are single can identify with. Like most singles, I really desired to have a partner in life. And I used to pray about this on a regular basis. And I used to ask God to take away the feeling if it was his desire for me to remain single for the rest of my life. As it turned out, God did bring a man into my life. And it was eight months after my 35th birthday that I was married, which is 12 years ago. And God blessed us richly. And he gave us two children, Joanne and Joshua. And there were many times in which, you know, I felt that things were just too good to be true almost. I was very happy in my relationship. And I was very happy with my career. And I just loved being a mother as well. My husband at that time was a church leader, was very well respected, had different capacities. And he had been very well discipled by the navigators. So his knowledge of the scriptures was extensive. And he was very happy with my parents. And he was very happy with those, And he had been very well discipled by the Navigators, so his knowledge of the Scriptures was extensive. Then I would say, roughly three and a half years ago, I began to observe that the Bible and spiritual things became less important to him. And it was actually around this time that we switched churches and came to Redeemer, because he just felt as though his needs were not being met in the church we were attending at that time. A year ago, I really noticed that things were on a decline. I had asked my family and some very close personal friends to pray for him, but at that time I had no idea of the spiritual battle that I was confronting. Then this past October, when he had become emotionally very distant, he suddenly announced without any preliminary discussion that he was going to leave our home. This happened actually on October 4th, and this was really a terrible time for me. I remember being up the entire night, just crying and crying, and just not knowing why this had happened to me. And why this had happened to our family, because obviously not just me, but it's the children as well. And the next day I had to work, and it's amazing how, you know, God knows in advance when we are going to go through difficult times. And I can see how he made things easier for me. And what was really amazing about the next day, which also happened to me, my son's 8th birthday, was that I had to interview somebody for a job, and it turned out that the person I interviewed was a believer. And it was just such a blessing to me, because I was in pretty terrible shape. And in the afternoon, when I had office hours, a minister brought his son to me for a consultation. And it was a minister who had also gone through a very bad marital experience. And he was able to really meet my needs at that juncture. The days that followed were very difficult, but it's amazing how God is there. And I really learned the true meaning of the verse in 2 Corinthians 12, 9, where it says, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. And I began to experience God's strength in a way that I had never experienced his strength before. I also learned the power of prayer. And some individuals came into my life, and they asked me if I would like to pray with them on a regular basis. And I cannot begin to tell you how immensely helpful this was and continues to be, to have three regular prayer partners as well as a Bible study group. God definitely used friends in my life, both Christian and non-Christian. I think some of my friends thought that I was tougher than I really was, but I think we're all frail human beings. And sometimes when a major hit comes like this, it doesn't matter what your profession is, you're really weak inside. And it's interesting how God brought people in my life. People would call me up or leave messages on the tape saying, I really wish I could be with you. People invited us over for dinner. And in one case, the group of medical students from Mount Sinai brought dinner to the house. And that I really appreciated greatly. Because what happens many times when someone is under such great stress is that it takes, you're one is so emotionally depleted that to reach out to others is just not easy. And the people who sent me to call, it doesn't matter what time, I really enjoyed hearing those words, but I really did not take action on those words. During this time of recovery, of depression, with the prayer and reading the scriptures, it was interesting. Within ten days after when this crisis hit, I really began to feel God's joy again. And this was really a wonderful feeling, because I went ten days without feeling God's joy. And that just compounded the depression, but it came. And ten days, I think, is relatively short. And I still remember when that was. I was on the bus going to work, having devotions. And all of a sudden, I felt his joy coming back into my heart. During this recovery period, I've also decided to find out more about the reason why my husband left me. And the reason that he left me is because he decided to enter the gay lifestyle. And although I do a lot of teaching, I was quite ignorant about homosexuality. And that's it. And that's it. And that's why youא� dalam is because he decided to enter the gay lifestyle. And although I do a lot of teaching, I was quite ignorant about homosexuality. I had, I've worked with a lot of gays in the workplace. I found them to be really very nice people. I felt from a biblical standpoint that one should not act out on the feelings, but I was still very ignorant. And by reading books and talking to friends who are in the ministry, I came to understand what enormous struggle it is for somebody who has feelings towards a person of the same sex. I never realized how incredibly powerful these feelings are and what a conflict this is for a person who is a believer who has been struggling with these feelings from adolescence. But I also learned in the course of my research, which I continue to do, is that there are services available. There are not only good books, but there are some really wonderful, nurturing organizations. I would like to end my testimony with a passage of scripture, which one of my prayer partners brought to my attention, which, in my opinion, sort of says it all. Well, it's from Isaiah 43, verses 1 to 3. And God addresses this to Israel, but those of us who are believers, we are also God's chosen people. So I feel that this verse holds for us as well. And this is what it says. But now thus says the Lord, He who created you, O Jacob, He who formed you, O Israel, Fear not, for I have redeemed you. I have called you by name. You are mine. When you pass through the waters, I will be with you. And through the floods, they will not overwhelm you. When you walk through the fire, you will not be burned, and the flame will not consume you. For I am the Lord, the Holy One of Israel, your Savior. Can you believe this? All right. Good evening. My name is Rich Yates, for those of you who don't know me. And I'm standing here tonight because Jesus is alive. And he does free those in bondage. I might get crazy, so bear with me. I want to read some excerpts from Psalms. I took them out of Psalm 106 and 107. I've replaced some of the pronouns of them, and there is for mine and I. And it reads as an outline of my history, at least in my mind. So to paraphrase, it goes, I was in the desert I gave into my cravings. I exchanged my glory for an image. I forgot the God who saved me. I did not believe his promise. I did not obey the Lord. I rebelled against the Spirit of God. Defining myself by what I did, I wasted away in sin. But, big but in the Bible, and this is to God's glory, he took note of my distress, he sent forth his word, and he healed me. He rescued me from the grave. I came to New York to both hide and pursue the lust of my evil desires. I lived for 25 years believing I could not go home again. I believed I was, and therefore had to be, homosexual. Under the cover of camouflages and lies, I desperately sought life, hoping for a discovery of self and approval. The year of my 42nd birthday, all idols collapsed. Tragedy struck, family, business, and friends. Paralyzed with fear, and defeated, I collapsed. Good Friday, 1989, I entered into a church for the first time since my youth. Once I had known God, once I had desired to be a missionary. There I prayed, who are you, Jesus? Are you real? Let me know you. I need you. It's been several years now. The Lord's led me to Redeemer. Here he has taught and fed me. I know now the hope of glory and my salvation. Each day, the Lord continues to reveal to me more of my true identity in him, removing my false self through the power of his blood and resurrection. Jesus is showing me the he he created. He is healing me, and I know he will complete the work he has begun. Looking back, I see my arrogance and rebellion. It was always covered by the mercy and unfailing love of a God who saves by grace. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. who saves by grace. Hi, I'm Glenn Angermeyer, and I'm here to give a testimony about an idol that's played a large part in my life, and I hope that some of you can relate to what I have to share. Our relationship to God is like any other relationship in that we show our commitment by the priority that we give in our lives. Anything in our lives that is more important than showing our love to God is an idol, and one of the idols in my life is my work. I placed my faith in Jesus Christ as my personal Savior quite a few years ago, but my struggle to commit my life to him is an ongoing struggle to this day. I know that God deserves my total commitment because he saved me from death, but it's so hard to trust him with all my life, particularly those parts of my life that I feel like I'm doing just fine with by myself. Not long after college, I enrolled in a graduate business school. Business school not only teaches you the tools of the trade, but it also prepares you for a business career. It's almost as if you're making a commitment to a lifestyle with common goals, values, and criteria for success. I learned from those around me that my job should be the most important, or at least one of the most important things in my life. From the first semester, a substantial part of my time was spent thinking about the job that would fling me towards unprecedented success. After I accepted a job and had graduated, I often thought about getting a better job. I believed that success was there for the taking and that I had to grab it before someone else took it from me. The president of a family-owned business described his commitment to his business. When you go home, the business is in the back of your mind. It's got to be an all-consuming thing if you're going to make it work. Well, that view is contradicted by Paul. He said that your life is not your own. You're bought at a price. I'm not saying that we should all quit our jobs and become missionaries. However, in my own life, I have fallen prey to the big lie. The big lie is that if you commit yourself to your work, you'll be successful. And, now here's where the lie becomes the most tempting, you'll be fulfilled. A few years after I started working, as I began to submit various areas of my life to God's sovereignty, I realized that my efforts to submit my work to God were not working. Some of the signs that my work was an idol were numerous. My confidence and self-esteem fluctuated with my success in the job, not with my success at growing in my Christian faith. During my quiet time, my mind often drifted to thoughts of work. But I never had a problem with drifting into prayer while I was at work. I had to ask myself, would I be willing to give my apologies for not working late one night in order to attend a Bible study? If not, who then is Lord of my life? After struggling somewhat unsuccessfully with this idol, God stepped in. That's usually not a good sign. It's kind of like when you're at home fighting with your brothers and sisters and your father steps in. Things never quite work out the way you want. Due to events that were somewhat out of my control, I found myself in a job that I did not enjoy, working for people that I did not respect. In short, my idol had become impotent. And no matter what I had sacrificed before its altar in the past, or promised to sacrifice in the future, it remained impotent. When I pursued my career without considering God, it eventually became a hollow and futile pursuit. The result is described by the book of Ecclesiastes. Naked, man comes from his mother's womb. And as he comes, so he departs. He takes nothing from his labor that he can carry in his hand. As a man comes, so he departs. And what does he gain? For he toils for the wind. Through a very painful process, I realize that nowhere in the Bible does God promise me a brilliant career in the financial services industry. In fact, in Genesis 3, he tells me clearly that work will be painful because of man's rebelliousness. Cursed is the ground because of you. Through painful toil you will eat of it all the days of your life. While I have not yet fully removed my job from the altar of my life, I have come to look at my job differently in a few ways. and and and Thank you. the kingdom of God, leading to increased grace and eventual promotion to heaven. In one respect, I try to give my job the same priority that I gave my part-time job while I was in college. Then, I knew that the real reason I was there was to prepare for adult life, not serve food in the dorm cafeteria. Well, now I try to remember that the real reason I am here is to prepare for life with God in heaven, not work in the financial services industry. Our work does matter to God, and he honors excellence in our work. With God's help, I am trying to commit my work fully to him. I'll give you my few points here before I start. My name is Will Forrester, and I'm an artist and a tender here. I've been here about two and a half years. A few points I want to get through first about my life changed by God is that God gives us our true gifts and our true selves. It sounds kind of obvious to some of us, but it's a real lie for many of us to have to work through, thinking that we're going to lose ourselves when we come to God. But, boy, I have found the exact opposite. Second point, God's work in my life has been a continually deeper unleashing, not stifling, of my talents as an artist. This is another lie many of us go through, thinking that our work will become insipid and bland. And the other thing, the other truth about the Christian walk is it's an incredible adventure. It's the best adventure. And I spent a lot of time looking for a lot of adventures, either hot air ballooning or scuba diving or living a meandering lifestyle out west. And the greatest adventure of all is to pursue and request the heart of God and to confront and admit my sin and incompleteness without Jesus. In 76, I went out west to indulge myself in my creative abilities in Seattle. And not soon after I got there, I started my sister, who I had gone out to visit, left on this hitchhiking tour all through the southwest, turned into this epic journey for her, winding her up in Fisherman's Wharf in San Francisco, hanging out with the Moonies. And I started getting some bizarre letters from her, but I didn't much care. I was 19. All her friends warned me not to hitchhike down and see her, and I did anyway, and wound up in the Moonies when I was 19. And 19 or 20, 77. And although, of course, the Moonies are twisted, counterfeit, just like a counterfeit dollar bill looks like the real thing, but it isn't. Although they were twisted and wrong, it was the first time I'd ever been exposed to scripture, twisted, of course, and the fact that I am a spiritual being seeking truth. I didn't want to admit it. I had enough going for me. I had working with a cinematographer in Seattle and published my own calendar, and I had good things going. And then, well, I got out of there through a whole labyrinth of events, too numerous to mention. Ended up with Keith Green, the singer. My sister had been flower selling in Bonwit Tellers in Hollywood, selling flowers, and somebody who worked with him noticed her and took her back to Keith's house and put her up. So I started getting these phone calls in San Francisco from, I forgot to check when I started. But I'll be watching. So anyway, I left the counterfeit of the Moonies, and he flew me down there to L.A. to surprise me. working at Sparrow Records, and I knew I wouldn't get out of L.A. without becoming a Christian. And I kind of did it just to get him off my back, you know, he was really annoying. And I did it, you know, the smart aleck I was, I did it to, you know, tease my friends back in Seattle, but I also did it for one reason, another reason, and that's that Keith had this list, and this is a peculiar testimony because it's kind of a, God pulled a preemptive strike with me, I really believe. Keith had this list, and many of you maybe have heard, that he and Melody actually went through everything, I Ching, Buddhism, Hinduism, everything, and Jesus was literally at the end of the list, and he said to me, why don't you just go right to the end of the list, you know, and I believed him, and God richly blessed me right away in my art. My line came alive, and I stopped drawing Spider-Man and Incredible Hulk, and other things started to happen, but when I left Seattle to move to New York in 82, I had this, lived with this lie for a long time that New York must be covered with some kind of satanic dome, you know, God's grace just doesn't work here, you know, it's just this Buckminster Fuller-like dome that resides over the city, and just the Holy Spirit can't penetrate, and so I meandered around for about eight years, as Tim calls it, sleepwalking in the faith, and, here, let me go back to a paper here now. In my last few years at Redeemer, God has done so much in my life, I can't count. Since coming to Redeemer, I've had to finally pull out all the stops on my faith, and made serious commitments to where before I simply ambled along. I find now that in my 30s, in my 20s, God just keeps giving. The more we seek God, the more he gives us ourselves. It's kind of annoying, you know, I want God, but I keep getting more of me. But, um, now in my 30s, I'm finding that he wants to perfect the things that he kept giving so liberally, so freely, so many of the gifts. And, uh, how am I doing? All right? Okay. Um, um, um, so, never mind the external blessings that he's given me, such as food, clothing, and shelter, and continual growth creatively. But he's reinvigorated my thirst for truth, and has placed the truth of his son's love and redemption in my heart, and has given me a hope and a vision to share this with my young art students in Brooklyn, and to pass on this and other gifts to them. Um, here at Redeemer, I've sorted out a lot of lies that constantly seep in about self-actualization. Um, you know, many of the lies of, uh, our times that confuse our faith. Um, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. But by returning our gifts to God, who gave them to us in the first place, whoops, if, if an artist makes man the measure of man, you end up with vacuous art. But when we seek heaven and make our maker as our measure, then we find ourselves lifted up and brought into a deeper, richer relationship with God and with each other. Thank you. Good evening. Much better. Thank you. Maybe not. There we are. Thank you. I'm Pat Newland, and I'm very happy to be here. Sometimes Tim talks in his sermons about one of the greatest evidences of God's work is the fact that we're here at all. And, uh, certainly anybody that knew me two years ago, uh, would say it is clearly an evidence of God's work that I am here at all, and I'm very happy to be here this evening. Two months ago, I was called by a reporter from Time Magazine and asked, uh, would I comment, uh, for an article that she was doing on, uh, boomers finding religion. And, um, I said, of course. And I proceeded to, um, answer her questions and talk to her, uh, about this. And, um, and basically told her absolutely every facet of my walk with God over the last all facets of this, even though I am president of my own public relations agency. And if there's one thing I know, it is how the media takes information and can play with it and quote out of context and do all those things. And I thought this was definitely a physician heal thyself experience because I hadn't thought about it before she called. I knew she was going to at some point. I hadn't media trained myself. I had not done all of the things that I would counsel any client to do at any point along the way. I just went, bah, here's what happened. And so now I'm going to tell you here's what happened. And I hope you get more out of it than the lady from time did. What I told her was that about two years ago, 18 months ago, I was headed for a trip to Paris where I was going to be in Paris over Thanksgiving. And I called a colleague of mine and somebody who had worked at my company for several years and said, she was living in London at the time, going to school. And I said, would you like to meet me for Thanksgiving dinner in Paris? And she said, of course. And she is a born again Christian. Her name is Hillary Bidwell. And she was one of the original members of Redeemer. And I knew that she was a born again Christian, but I didn't hold it against her. And, you know, I thought she was one of life's more quaint people because every time I'd be on the phone with her, I'd be talking to her or getting a letter from her. She would always close with, well, I have to leave now because I have to go to Bible study or I have to go to church. And I thought, poor thing, probably the only person left in the world that does that. I wonder, like, who she studies the Bible with. But, you know, I made this list because I'm essentially an earnest person. I made this list of things I wanted to talk to Hillary with while we were in Paris for Thanksgiving dinner. And one of the things on the list was God. And we went to the Notre Dame that day and walked along the Seine and really talked. And I said, now, tell me about this God of years. And the thing that she said to me, because she knew me quite well, was that Pascal says that we all walk around with a God-shaped vacuum inside us and we seek to fill it with other things. And that our lives, until we understand that it is a God-shaped vacuum, it is uniquely shaped, we tend to try to fill it with work or we'll fill it with relationships or we'll fill it with things. The next car, the next house, the next job, the next relationship, the next whatever. We will constantly seek to try to fill ourselves, fill that vacuum with these things. And I listened to her and I thought, this is truth. I now know it. You could have heard a pin drop in my heart. I listened to it and I thought, this is truth and I can't not know it. Now that I know it, this is what my life has been about. I went on to tell the lady from time that it worked very quickly for me from there. Within six weeks, I had gone to St. James Episcopal Church here in New York and been baptized. The same day I was baptized. I came here to redeem her. And again, I heard Tim give a sermon and I thought, this is truth. I'm listening to truth and nobody has ever told me truth before or I wasn't in a place where I could hear it. And I thought, let me listen to this and how amazing it is that there's a pastoral staff here and their wives and the elders and the deacons and all of these people who are just committed to telling us the truth. And what we do with it then is what we do with it. But they're here and they're telling it to us. And I began to be insatiable. I was eager. I wanted to get into a Bible study. I wanted to go work at a homeless shelter. I wanted to take the New Foundations class. And more than anything, I wanted to be a member of this church. And so I went and took the New Members Seminar. And then, in order to become a member, you must meet with an elder and a deaconess of the church. And so I signed up to do that. And I went and met with them in one of the little rooms of the church. And it was Glenn and Laura. And they sat with me and went through the five questions of membership. And I said, I'm totally fine. get it. We did high, like Glenn and I did high, like Indiana bonding. He went to Purdue. I went to Indiana University. It was totally cool. And then at the end of it, the fifth question we talked about, which was, do you agree to put yourself under the authority of this church? And I said, listen, I'm totally willing to do it. I'm blown away by this whole process. But here's the thing. I've spent the last 10 years of my life living as a gay woman in New York City. And if you tell me that the authority of the church is don't do this, I think I can live with that, but I just need to know. And Glenn, I will never forget this. Glenn said, well, Pat, here's what I understand to be true. That God so understands the sanctity of sexual intimacy that he wants to protect it in marriage, in a covenantal relationship, and that it's meant to be between a man and a woman. But he said, let me pray with you over this. And he said, God, if you're trying to teach Pat something about this, we pray that you'll make this clear to her. And if you're trying to teach us something about it, I pray that you'll make that clear to us. And I left there, and I thought, you people are extraordinary. It was the most gracious, nonjudgmental answer imaginable. And I thought about it, and I thought, this is obviously like a very fair approach to this. Let's pray about it. Five weeks later, I went to see Tim, and I said, when I met with him originally, I thought it was an issue. But I feel a major healing going on in my life. Like, I know I was gay, but I don't think I am anymore. I was Saul of Tarsus. I'm not. You know, like, what is this? And he said, well, are there other evidences of God working in your life? And I said, yes. I'm, you know, suddenly I'm volunteering at a homeless shelter. And I, you know, this was not my, my modus operandi. And I have a different relationship to work. And I understand it very differently about the people that work for me and what my responsibility is to them. My life is changing just around me. And he said, well, then, you know, then this is probably changing too. And, you know, of course, you may be a member of this church. And so I became a member. But one of the things that he said to me, and I will also not forget this, is he said, don't take your identity now from that. Don't, you were gay. Don't now become an ex-gay person. You are a Christian. That is your primary identity. And that's the thing to hold on to. And I left there and I thought, all right, that's, that's good counsel too. These people haven't lied to me yet. Like, let me do that. Like, okay, I'm a Christian first. It's not, I am something else or I'm something ex-else. Let me just hold on to that. Now, I told all of that to Time Magazine and the part they chose to read. And when I hung up the phone, I was crazed. I was absolutely crazed. I thought, if I were a journalist, what's the story here? And what is that going to look like in print? There are any number of people in the world that don't know this 10-year part of my life. And to have them read about it in this fashion, many, many friends of my mother. And I did not want that to happen. And I'm like going, going through this whole thing now. This has become very real. And I got, I made myself crazy, as Kathy to Keller could tell you. I got into a high anxiety mode. And then I just chilled out. And I said, well, you know, God has gotten me this far. He'll take it the rest of the way. Let him use what's relevant, what is helpful. And if it's that, then it's that. And I'll deal with my mother. And then I got a call. I was in London. And I got a call from the Time reporter. And she said, you know, let me read you the quote. And the quote is about walking along the sin and talking about the God-shaped vacuum in the shadow of the Notre Dame. And I said, that's a great quote. Did I say that? That's great. And that's all it was. And I thought, how obvious of God to, like, take that part that was the entry level for me and make that the part that Time used. And two nights ago, I got a call from CNN saying, do you want to be on the Sonya Live show? And because we read about you in Time magazine. And I thought, I don't know what you're doing, God. But I'm fine. I'll go with you on this. Like, whatever you want me to do, I'll do. I'll go on the Sonya Live show and talk about the God-shaped vacuum within and the shadow of the Notre Dame and whatever else. I'm totally able to do that. And I'm very excited about that, actually. And two weeks from now, I leave to go on sabbatical. in Paris working on a book, it's a dream that I've always had to be a novelist and I'm now going to take time off, the company is seven years old I'm going to take time off and do that and it's a modern day retelling of the book of Ecclesiastes and I think like look at the adventure that my life is turning into, somebody said this earlier, I know the road I would be on if I continued walking down the road that I put myself on the road that God has put me on is radically different I promise you I never dreamed of being on Sonya Live and yet I'm going to be apparently and then I'm going off to Paris and write a book and everything else is a total adventure, I have no idea where I'm going to end up but I can tell you I'm very pleased to be here tonight and to share this with you Thank you What you heard about tonight is the other side of the doctrine of the resurrection spiritual resurrection You see, Christianity adamantly refuses to be either a left or right-brained religion On the one hand, the doctrine of the resurrection is that there was an objective historical fact that Jesus was raised from the dead But a Christian, Paul says in Philippians 3, is someone who doesn't just believe in the fact of the resurrection but has experienced the reality of it It's not either a left or right-brained It's not just for cognitive, it's not just for mystics, it's both What you were hearing about tonight was what happens when the Spirit of God takes the truth of the resurrection and burns it into your heart so it becomes your experience too A Christian is not just somebody who believes intellectually in the fact of the historical resurrection but someone who has actually received the Spirit of power and the resurrection of Christ in your own being A Christian is someone who knows the resurrection spiritually And I'll tell you what happens And there's a theme running through all of this When a person looks at the fact that Jesus died and rose for you and the Spirit begins to burn it in it does two things at once On the one hand, it destroys your self-importance But on the other hand, it destroys your self-hatred On the one hand, it destroys your self-importance because you begin to say He died and rose I'm so bad that the Son of God had to do that But on the other hand, it destroys your self-hatred You say, He died and rose and He loved me so much that He would do that for me Self-importance and self-hatred are both destroyed and that's one of the reasons why what happens to a Christian is the love and the joy and the peace and the self-control that begins to develop out of that because you get a unique nature You get a unique self-image You have a way of looking at yourself and life which is utterly different You have to experience the resurrection in your life Have you done that? Some years ago, there was a real classroom This happened in Harvard University at a class on counseling systems and a professor was saying Look, here is how psychodynamic psychology helped this man find out that he hated his mother and it was dominating his life So he took the class through a case study and he was about to move on to another case study One student raised a hand and said Well, what if the client after you've shown him that his life is dominated by hostility to his mother came to you and said I'd like to get beyond that now I'd like to forgive and love my mother And the professor said I'd say, lots of luck Well, the student said, why? I mean, you mean you can't help? And he says, no, no You can't take your neuroses and impose them on him about forgiveness The best you can do is to show the man the emotional structures of his life so he's not dominated by them so he can learn to live with them And the young idealistic students complained even further And finally he looked at them and said This is a quote from the professor Look, if you're asking for a changed heart you're in the wrong department But when you come to Easter you're in the right department Let's pray Our Father, we ask that tonight as we receive the bread and the cup we might understand that as the Spirit of God takes into our lives the reality of Jesus' physical resurrection we can know a spiritual resurrection And Father, those of us who are believers would confess to you tonight we know too little of that power We pray that you would burn into our hearts through the testimonies and through the song and the worship and the word of God tonight just what you have done for us in the death and resurrection of Christ so that we feel ourselves and we're going to pray for you tonight and we're going to pray for you tonight testimonies and through the song and the worship and the Word of God tonight, just what you have done for us in the death and resurrection of Christ, so that we feel our self-importance and our self-hatred burning away, so that we find ourselves becoming bold and humble, confident and tender, becoming like your Son. Father, we pray that we might know the power of spiritual resurrection as we take up the bread and cup, and we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen. There was an objective historical fact that Jesus was raised from the dead, but a Christian, Paul says in Philippians 3, is someone who doesn't just believe in the fact of the resurrection, but has experienced the reality of it. It's not either a left or right brain, it's not just for cognitive, it's not just for mystics, it's both. What you are hearing about tonight was what happens when the Spirit of God takes the truth of the resurrection and burns it into your heart so it becomes your experience too. A Christian is not just somebody who believes intellectually in the fact of the historical resurrection, but someone who has actually received the spirit of power and the resurrection of Christ in your own being. A Christian is someone who knows the resurrection spiritually, and I'll tell you what happens, and there's a theme running through all of this. When a person looks at the fact that Jesus died and rose for you, and the Spirit begins to burn it in, it does two things at once. On the one hand, it destroys your self-importance, but on the other hand, it destroys your self-hatred. On the one hand, it destroys your self-importance because you begin to say, he died and rose. I'm so bad that the Son of God had to do that. But on the other hand, it destroys your self-hatred. You say, he died and rose, and he loved me so much that he would do that for me. Self-importance and self-hatred are both destroyed, and that's one of the reasons why what happens to a Christian is the love and the joy and the peace and the self-control that begins to develop out of that because you get a unique nature. You get a unique self-image. You have a way of looking at yourself and life which is utterly different. You have to experience the resurrection in your life. Have you done that? Some years ago, there was a real classroom. This happened in Harvard University at a class on counseling systems, and a professor was saying, look, here is how psychodynamic psychology helped this man find out that he hated his mother, and it was dominating his life. So he took the class through a case study, and he was about to move on to another case study. One student raised a hand and said, well, what if the client, after you've shown him that his life is dominated by hostility to his mother, came to you and said, I'd like to get beyond that now. I'd like to forgive and love my mother. And the professor said, I'd say, lots of luck. Well, the student said, why? I mean, you mean you can't help? And he says, no, no, you can't take your neuroses and impose them on him about forgiveness. The best you can do is to show the man the emotional structures of his life so he's not dominated by them so he can learn to live with them. And this young idealistic students complained even further, and finally he looked at them and said, this is a quote from the professor, look, if you are asking for a changed heart, you're in the wrong department. But when you come to Easter, you're in the right department. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask that tonight, as we receive the bread and the cup, we might understand that as the Spirit of God takes into our lives the reality of Jesus' physical resurrection, we can know a spiritual resurrection. And Father, those of us who are believers would confess to you tonight, we know too little of that power. We pray that you would burn into our hearts through the testimonies and through the song and the worship and the Word of God tonight just what you have done for us in the death and resurrection of Christ so that we feel our self-importance and our self-hatred burning away so that we find ourselves becoming bold and humble, confident and tender, becoming like your Son. Father, we pray that we might know the power of spiritual resurrection as we take up the bread and cup, and we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
