TITLE: Easter
SCRIPTURE: Acts 17:16-18
TOPICS: Easter Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/easter/

============================================================

The message on which our teaching is based this morning is printed for you in your bulletin. It's Acts chapter 17. I'm just going to read verses 16, 17, and 18. While Paul was waiting for them in Athens, he was greatly distressed to see that the city was full of idols. So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the God-fearing Greeks, as well as in the marketplace day by day with all who happened to be there. A group of Epicurean and Stoic philosophers began to dispute with him, and some of them asked, what is this babbler trying to say? Others remarked, he seems to be advocating foreign gods. They said this because Paul was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection. Here ends the reading of God's word. Now, it's very, very normal for intelligent, educated, sophisticated people in New York City to say, the idea of resurrection is fine. It's a wonderful idea. Renewal, springtime, circle of life, rebirth, that's all very wonderful. But we no longer, this is how it goes, we no longer can believe in the literal doctrine of the resurrection. We can no longer believe, as was once widely believed, that Jesus was bodily raised from the dead, that he was physically raised from the dead. Why not? Well, because such legends are no longer credible, and therefore no longer relevant to modern 20th century people. And we've grown up. We've come of age. In those days, people were rather naive about such things, but we've grown up. Now, I don't know what you would expect. I'm going to try to come against that. I'm going to propose that that's a wrong way to think about Easter and the doctrine of the resurrection. And if you read the book of Acts, which I've been doing for almost a year now, if you look and see how the gospel spread in the early church, the book of Acts is a very reliable historical document, and particularly reliable when it comes to how the Apostle Paul went about planting churches and spreading the Christian message everywhere. And whenever you go around, if you read the book of Acts, whenever he went around and you see how he preaches in the various places, he went to Rome, he went to Athens, you see. Our passage is Athens, the academic center of the Greco-Roman world. He went to Rome, he went to Corinth, to Ephesus, Antioch, Jerusalem. Everywhere he went, you see two things. Two things. First of all, you see that there was lots of skepticism back then. Look at what do the philosophers say. They say, what does this babbler, what is he trying to say? And if you read on further in the passage in verse 31, as soon as Paul mentions the resurrection again, they sneer at him. And you can go through the book of Acts and you will see that 2,000 years ago, when people first heard of the resurrection, they laughed, they scoffed, they sneered. They said, that's impossible, that can't happen. And that's why the first thing you learn is, if you have a problem believing in the resurrection, if you say, oh, I can't believe in the resurrection, if you're skeptical, okay, but do not blame it on modern times. Do not blame it on the age. Do not attribute it. Don't attribute your skepticism to being modern because the skepticism was rife then, 2,000 years ago. Whatever your problems would be with the resurrection, it's the same problem we've had for 2,000 years. People have railed against the resurrection. They sneered at it for centuries. So don't blame it on that. This skepticism that you have today is the same skepticism people had then. And second thing we learn is, in spite of the skepticism, we know that the Greco-Roman world was swept by Christianity. It was swept up. That people had all these questions and they had all this skepticism and they threw their tests of credibility at the whole idea of the resurrection and so many people, when they looked at the evidence, became convinced. In such a wide-scale way, so many people, who also sneered and laughed, became convinced, when they looked at the evidence, that that entire old world was changed. You know why? Because the resurrection of Jesus Christ not only can meet the tests of credibility, but it also can answer the deepest needs of the heart. And when people threw the tests of credibility at the resurrection, they did sneer back then. They didn't just, they weren't gullible people. They said, how could this be? They looked at it and we know as a historical fact that just millions of people believed. And when they believed because they believed it was true, when it met their tests of credibility, then they found it. heart. Let me show you how. It met the test of credibility and met the needs of the heart. And the reason it's important for us is you just can't get out from under and say, that's for them. Today, we have all this skepticism back then. People, it must have met their needs. No. They had the skepticism too, and they had the needs too, and we have the skepticism now, and we have the needs now. We're not that different. That's what I want to show you. Look and see for a moment how they met the deepest needs of the heart then, and then you'll see how they can do it now. First of all, look at the test of credibility with me for a minute. Look at the test. When Paul preached the resurrection, he never said, well, you just have to believe. You can't question these things. You have to close your eyes. You have to have faith. You have to make a leap in the dark. See, over the years, I've talked to many people who tried to convert me into their various religions or sects. There's many people out on the streets of New York. If you stop to talk with them, you will get them. You'll have the same experience as I do. There's a lot of people out there who are trying to convert you into their particular sect. It wouldn't be a bad idea to try to stop sometime and let them try for a while. You'd learn something. It doesn't matter who they are because they always do the same thing. They say, this is the case, this is the case, and when you say, what's the evidence? What they ordinarily say, one way or the other, they say, well, you have to believe. You just have to trust. You have to close your eyes and pray, and God will show you. I can't give you any evidence. You'll just know it in your heart. Paul never did that. Never. Because when people see the doctrine of the resurrection, he did not say, well, I can't prove anything to you. You just have to believe it. No. He said, bring your tests of credibility. If you want a great example of that, in Acts chapter 26, there is an astonishing and remarkable place that shows you how Paul and how the apostles and all the Christians preached the resurrection without any intellectual obscurantism about that preaching at all. Because Paul was in prison at the time. He was under arrest for disturbing the peace because he, like a lot of other people on the streets of New York, tried to convert people. And back then, they weren't as enlightened, I guess, as we are now. And he was arrested. And he was pretty well known. He was a kind of celebrity prisoner. And at one point, he was brought to give his message before two high officials, Festus and Agrippa. You can read about it in Acts 26. Festus was a Roman consul. He was a Roman governor. Agrippa was the king of Judea. Now, Agrippa was Jewish, but he was raised in Rome along with the royal family. And he was recognized as the king of Judea by the Roman government. But he was Jewish and he was from Judea. And so, here's Paul and he's talking about the gospel. And they're listening to him. And, as usual, when he gets to the resurrection, they were following him along. They were listening to him when he talked about Jesus and about the Old Testament prophets and about the need for redemption. They were with him. They were hearing him. As soon as Paul says, Jesus was raised from the dead, Festus blurts out and he says, Paul, your great learning has driven you mad. Paul, you're crazy. See, how dare we have such chronological snobbery as to think, well, back then people were gullible. Every time Paul brings up the resurrection, what's the first response? You can't expect me to believe that. You're crazy, says Festus. What does Paul say? Does Paul say, well, Festus, if you'll just sit down and pray in your heart and ask God to show you it's true, he'll show you. No, he doesn't. Now, by the way, it can work, but Paul doesn't do that. He turns to Agrippa. Agrippa lives in Judea. Agrippa knows what's been going on and he says, I think one of the most remarkable statements in the New Testament. He says, King Agrippa, you know these things I say are true. You have not been ignorant of them because these things were not done in a corner. That's in Acts 26. He says, Agrippa, you know the things I'm saying are true. These things were not done in a corner. Now, that's one of the most remarkable statements in the Bible. And you know why? It's remarkable for its vulnerability and for its confidence. Let me show you what I mean. It's remarkable for its vulnerability. First, when Paul makes such a statement, he does something that I think no other religion, nobody, no other religion does this. Christianity is completely and totally based and contingent on a historical fact, a miracle, the resurrection. Christianity says, if the resurrection didn't happen, everything falls apart. Jeff quoted St. Paul in 1 Corinthians 15. He says, if Christ is not raised, if he wasn't bodily raised, you're still in your sins, your faith is in vain, it all falls apart. Paul makes himself utterly vulnerable at that point. He says, if the resurrection isn't true, everything about Christianity makes no sense. It's all gone. Why? Well, here's what the Christian message is. This is the reason why you see in this verse 18, the whole Christian message can be summed up in that one phrase. Paul was preaching the good news about Jesus and the resurrection. Why? Because Christianity essentially says, the Son of God came to earth and he died on the cross to pay for our sins so that we could come to know the Father. Now, how do you know that's true? You say, well, that's an interesting claim. All the different religions have various claims. How do we know that's true? The resurrection. If Jesus is the Son of God, that is why he was raised. The resurrection proves he wasn't just a human being, but he was the Son of God. And secondly, how do you know not only that he was the Son of God, but how do you know that when he died on the cross, that wasn't just a wonderful example? How do we know it satisfied the justice of God? How do we know that it actually accomplished our salvation? How do we know it really paid for all our sins? The resurrection. Paul says, if Christ wasn't raised, you don't know if he was the Son of God. And Paul says, if Christ was not raised, you have no idea whether he paid for our sins. If Christ was not raised, then all of Christianity falls apart. But if the resurrection is a historic fact, then it all comes together. See, the other day on TV, I saw somebody say, well, you know, he says, every religion is okay if it gives you some value. Any religion is fine as long as you get something out of it, as long as it's some value to you. That would drive Paul absolutely crazy. You know why? Here's what Paul would say. Paul would say, if the resurrection happened, then Christianity is of infinite value. Why? Oh, other religions aren't vulnerable like this. Other religions say their founder wasn't God. They say their founders were prophets. Well, you can't disprove that, can you? But our religion says Jesus was the Son of God, and the resurrection proves it. Other religions also say the way to get to God is to try to live a good life. Christianity says, no, no, no, you can't do that. Nobody's good enough. Christianity says our founder is not just pointing the way to God. He is God. Christianity says our religion doesn't come to tell you how to find God by your efforts, but how Jesus came and did it all for you. He died for your sins. He was your substitute. He brings you to God. Paul says if the resurrection is true, then Christianity is of infinite value, because you have God himself come in the flesh, opening the way to come in freely, not through effort, but through reception of a gift of eternal life. But if Christianity is not, pardon me, if resurrection is not true, then Christianity is of no value at all. But the one thing it can't be is of some value. It could be of some value. It's either of infinite value, or if it's no value, it's a sham, it's divisive. But it can't be of some value. Don't you see, Paul makes himself incredibly vulnerable at that point. He says not, well, you know, the way you can tell Christianity is true is look at the wonderful moral ethic of Jesus. Look at the wonderful teaching of love. No, every religion has that, wonderful teachings. Paul doesn't say, well, the way you know Christianity is true is because Jesus is a wonderful example. You know, every religion has got wonderful moral exemplars. That's not what Christianity comes and offers, though. Way beyond that. It offers you God himself come in the flesh that you can know personally. It offers you a way into the Father with all your sins forgiven, totally, completely. And Paul says it all has to do with the resurrection. All. Now, no religion has ever made itself vulnerable like that. No religion. He's begging it for it to be disproved. But look at this. Look at the confidence. I, I, it just, it makes my hair stand on end. He says to Agrippa, you know this is true. You know the facts. What I am saying about the physical resurrection of Jesus Christ cannot be disproved. Now, you've got to remember when Paul's talking. Paul is talking 15 years after the fact. And here's what Paul is saying. Paul is saying, Agrippa, you know that you can't disprove the evidence. Well, what's the evidence? We know what the evidence was. First of all, he's saying, Agrippa, produce the body. Go ahead. Try. that all the Roman officials, all the religious leaders of Judea, they desperately would have liked to have tried to stop this spread of Christianity. They wanted nobody, had more motivation and desire than the leaders of the religion and of the government of Judea to stop this thing. They couldn't. When Paul says, you know it's true, these things were not done in a corner, these things weren't done in a little hole, what is he saying? He says, find me the body, but you can't. He says, cross-examine the witnesses. Do you know how many people claim to have seen Jesus? You have the women. There's a group of female disciples that claim to see Jesus raised from the dead on Easter morning. Then you have the disciples who claim to have seen Jesus a number of times over the next 40 days, but that's not all. You have the disciples on the road to Emmaus. Paul also talks in 1 Corinthians 15 about 500 people that saw Jesus Christ risen, speaking to them all at once. This is the way Paul preached the gospel. This is the way the apostles preached the gospel. Read 1 Corinthians 15. How does he tell the people to believe? He doesn't say, well, you're just going to have to believe. Just close your eyes. No. Here's what he says. He says, most of the people who saw him, most of those 500 people are still alive. He says, go talk to them. You check them out. These things were not done in a corner. How are you going to explain a hallucination that happens to 500 people at once? How are you going to explain the fact that over the years, nobody, you can't have a hoax like that. That's a lousy hoax. 500 people cannot be trusted to get together and say, let's pull one over on the world. That's not the best way to do it. You can't get 500 people to keep their mouth shut. He says, explain it. Go ahead. You try to explain it, King Agrippa. You try to deal with the facts. Look at the witnesses. Look at the sightings. Look at the empty tomb. And you know what's amazing? The evidence for the resurrection back then was much stronger in a way. It was easier for the individual to go check it out, eyewitness. You go talk to the witnesses. You go look at the tomb. I mean, this, this, the message was spreading all over the, over the world. And there was nothing that the people who wanted it to stop the most could do about it. Paul had that kind of confidence. These things were not done in a corner. You know I'm right. And what does Agrippa do? He can't say anything. He doesn't say anything. You know what's interesting? The evidence is so strong, even today, that, and this is amazing, and I'm, I'm delighted that the day has come that I can say this, but a lot of the evidence is so strong that it's even well summarized on, in the, on the last page of last week's article on miracles in Time magazine. Last week's article on miracles in Time magazine. Go to the very last page of the article and you will see they summarize the very compelling evidence for the resurrection. They, for example, they mention on there, number one, that for last hundred years, scholars have tried to say that the gospels were written so late. They were written a hundred years after the, after the fact that there was no eyewitnesses around to contradict. That's the reason why the gospels could be circulated. But now the latest scholarly findings show that the gospels were written within the lifetime of eyewitnesses so they couldn't be fabrications, not wholesale. Secondly, on, in the Time magazine article, it says if these were fabrications, they were the stupidest fabrications in history because the first eyewitnesses of the resurrection were what? Women. And you realize that the women were of such low estate in that society and culture that their testimony was not admissible in court? And therefore, if you're going to write a document and you're going to make up a story to try to show that Jesus Christ was risen from the dead, you would never have women be the first eyewitnesses. Never. You'd, you'd just be, you'd be killing yourself. Well, then why are all of the documents saying that women were the first people that Jesus appeared to? You know why? Because he did. That's just like Jesus. The gospel destroys stereotypes and the gospel is counterintuitive to expectations. You see, there's nothing about the gospels that look like fabrications. Not only that, Time magazine also points out it's hard to believe that if there were ringleaders for this hoax, the apostles, that they all would have died for the hoax. How do you explain that? Even Time magazine right there says that's a hard thing to explain. The evidence is mighty overwhelming. So here's the question, right? Not why did people believe it. Oh my gosh, no. They threw all their skepticism, they threw all their arguments at it, and it still spread like wildfire. The real question is why didn't they? Why didn't they? It's not because they were modern. You know what? Because they weren't modern. sneer? Why did they jeer? Why did they persist in their unbelief? If you see what Agrippa says, Paul says, Agrippa, you know these things are true. They were not done in a corner. What does Agrippa say? He says, you're trying to make me a Christian. How can you think that I would become a Christian? Now, what kind of answer is that? That is not a rational answer, but that is an understandable answer. Because the real problem with the doctrine of the resurrection is it's not that if it's true, it's a nice idea. If it's true, you lose control of your life. That's what Agrippa is saying. Agrippa is saying, Paul, interesting. Evidence is very interesting. You expect me to become a Christian? Paul was saying, I'm not talking about what the Roman authorities will say. I'm not talking about what your family will say. I'm not talking about what your ruling class will say. I'm asking you, is it true? He can't think about the truth, though. Agrippa won't do that. Agrippa knows that if the resurrection is true, I lose control of my life. It means he's Savior. It means he's Lord. It means I can't live the way I want to live. And I say to you that this is still the reason why people can't be objective about the evidence. If the resurrection is true, you know, let's just say, I'm sure there's some people out here who really have a lot of trouble with the idea of the bodily resurrection. All right, keep this in mind. If it's true, you lose control, do you not? You lose control of what you do with your money. You lose control of what you do with your sexuality. We're getting very practical here. You lose control of what you do with your life. How in the world can you expect yourself to be objective when you look at the evidence? You can't. Therefore, you must be careful. If a judge were to try a case, the outcome of which would radically affect that judge's life and lifestyle, that judge usually wouldn't hear the case, right? They would say, I won't be objective. Well, you can't avoid it. But if you are going to look at the evidence for the resurrection, make sure that you doubt your doubts and you're skeptical about your skepticism. Realize that you have deep motivation to disbelieve it. That you are not a disinterested. Nobody's a disinterested observer when they come to it. The resurrection took all the tests of credibility, but that's not all it did. The resurrection also took all the tests of the human heart. Now, here's the great irony. We need the resurrection. It's not just that the resurrection is true. That's not the only reason that it changed that old world. The whole Greco-Roman world was changed because people began to see the resurrection was true, but once they decided it was true and they embraced it, they found that it met the deepest desire of the heart. Now, this is very dangerous for modern people, late 20th century people. We have a tendency to say it's true if it works for me. And so many people might look at the resurrection and say, I wish it was true. I need it to be true. Here is the mystery of the gospel. The resurrection is not true because it works, though it works. It works because it's true. Because it's true. If you believe the resurrection because you need it, it won't fill your need. If you believe the resurrection because it's true, not because you need it, you'll find that it fills that need. You know what the great need was? You know what the great need is? It's the same skepticism today as before. It's the same need we have today as before. And that need always has been, unless you've got a solution for the problem of death, life is meaningless. That's the milieu into which Paul spoke the resurrection message in Acts 17. You know who the Stoics and the Epicureans were? The Stoics and the Epicureans were philosophers. They were the two main parties that had captured the intellectual class of the Roman world. But, even though they were angry at each other and they were parties and they criticized each other, they both fundamentally agreed with one thing. And that is that death is it. When death comes, that's the end of conscious individual consciousness. It's the end of personal existence. Now the Epicureans said, here's how to respond to the fact that death is the end. Let's have a good time. Don't let anybody tell you what to do. Live for pleasure. Live selfishly. You only go around once in life and you've got to grab for all the gusto that you can. That's what the Epicureans said. The Stoics said, here's how you have to respond to death and that is... your emotions, sublimate your emotions and do what's right. In other words, Stoics are what we today call conservatives. They really don't have, they don't know what comes after death. The only thing that's important is tradition, duty. Just say no. Liberals, on the other hand, they also don't know what comes after death, but instead of sublimateing the individual, they say, make it free, write your own script, sing your own songs, decide what kind of life will make you happy and do it. You have to create your own reality, you have to create your own morality. Well, of course, these liberals and conservatives, the Stoics and the Epicureans were very unhappy with each other and they fought with each other, but you know what happened? The intellectuals said, there's really no God, there's no answer for death, and they had their little battles, but do you see what it says in verse 16 and 17 about what happened in the general culture? The more irreligious that the intelligentsia got, the more hyper-religious the populace got. Now, the place was filled with idols. The place was filled with temples. The place was filled with cults and crazy religions everywhere. You know why? Because the populace has always been smarter than the intelligentsia. The intelligentsia says, you know what? There is no solution. Death is the end. But you can still live a life. The populace knows that's just not true. Listen, if death is the end of all individual consciousness and all personal existence, the only way to have any joy is to deny that. To really think about it means that's the end of your joy. You know, Albert Camus gives this great illustration. He says, imagine somebody comes to you and says, tell me what you enjoy most. And you say, I love watching football. Or you say, I love listening to the hallelujah chorus on the particular CD I have. He says, fine. So this person says, I'm going to kill you in an hour. However, I've got a gun right here. I'm going to shoot you in an hour. But I want you to enjoy yourself for the next hour. Do whatever makes you happiest. And you know what you would say? You would say, somehow I don't think I'm going to have much fun. Somehow I don't think this football game will mean much to me. This CD will not mean much to me. Well, you know what Albert Camus asked? Why? Don't you realize that life is like a gun to your head? You're going to die. It's inevitable. People, how can you have any joy unless you deny your mortality? In fact, life also makes accomplishment meaningless. People say, I want to be able, even though I believe when I die, that's it, but I want to leave something behind. What? I want to leave something behind so I live on beyond. Well, how long? Go ahead. Try it. Build a pyramid. That lasts a long time. People don't even know who built the pyramids. And eventually the pyramids will be gone. If, you know, the philosophers can say, well, death, you can still live a life. The Stoics say, be strong, even though death is the end. And the Epicureans say, have fun, even though death is the end. But the people knew that you can't live a thoughtful life like that. If death is the end, then there's no meaning. If death is the end, there's no joy. If death is the end, accomplishment means nothing. And you know what? Here's the other scary thing. Epicurus, the leader of the Epicureans, said, and if you start to live as if death is the end, and you get that cynical edge that you have to have, this tremendous hard edge you have to have, here's what goes wrong. You're always doubtful. Along with your meaninglessness comes an anxiety. Because Epicurus says, my biggest fear is not that death is the end, but that death perhaps is not the end. Epicurus says, you know, when you decide I'm going to be cynical, I'm going to live a life as if death is the end, in spite of all my meaninglessness underneath, there's still an anxiety because I know I've gambled my eternal destiny on this. Because if there is a God, because if there is a judgment day, and I can't be sure there's not, I might lose incalculably. Into this comes the gospel of the resurrection. And you know what happens? Paul, see, Paul doesn't say, believe this because you need it. Can you imagine? People would have said, oh my gosh, I need it. And you know what? People today say that. If you're thoughtful, a person who says, I don't believe in the resurrection, I believe when you die you rot, but you can still be good, you can still have a good life, you're not thinking. You're not thinking it out. The people who do think it out, when they hear about the resurrection, they say, I've got to have this. This is the only way I can face life. This is the only way I can have joy. This is the only way I can know there's meaning. This is the only way. You know what Paul says? Don't believe this because you need it. You've got to have it. in. And do you know what it does? Oh my. First of all, do you know what's really underneath all of your anxiety? Do you know why you want so much to accomplish things? Do you know what's underneath your diets and all the new clothes? You want to last. You don't want to believe you're a wave upon the sand. Deep down inside, we want to know we count. We don't want to be weightless. We don't want to be a dream. We don't want to be a phantom that vanishes. We want to last. We want to count. And you have no idea. Ernest Becker, Norman Brown, they're not Christians. They're modern guys. They've done some wonderful analysis. Ernest Becker, denial of death, Pulitzer Prize winning guy. Not a believer at all. But they knew this. They knew that people are unbelievably controlled by their fear of death. The fear of being ephemeral. The fear of being nothing. A Christian gets the resurrection in to the center. And you know what you start to do? You start to say, now I know I count. And if somebody rejects me, it's not the end of myself. And if my accomplishments, if my career doesn't go well, it's not the end of myself. You see? And if I start to gain weight and I start to age, it's not the end of myself. It's not all over. The anxiety's gone. There's a deep, deep consolation that the resurrection brings. But you know what? But even as it brings you a consolation, it makes you willing to fight against evil. The real problem that the Stoics and the Epicureans had was they could give people no incentive to fight against poverty and disease and evil. You know why? The Stoics said, well, it's fate. It's going to happen. It's all illusion anyway. After a while, you're going to die and it's all going to be over. What difference does it make? You can't make any difference in life. This is the way it is. The Epicureans said, well, you better not sacrifice. Certainly don't give a lot of your money away. You only go around once in life and you have to grab for all the gusto that you can. But Christians said, you know what? God loves bodies. God loves this world. He loves matter. He made matter. He inhabited a body in Jesus Christ. And he raised the body up. He hates poverty. He hates disease. He hates pain. And I can give myself to fight against that because I am, therefore, on the side of God. Because these bodies are, because the physical world is not temporary. God is going to redeem this world and it's going to last forever. When I die, I'm not going off into some kind of nether world, some esoteric ocean of being. I'm going to have friends still. I'm going to eat in the kingdom of God. I'm going to hug in the kingdom of God. God, I'm going to be hugged in the kingdom of God. My feet will not float over the streets. I'll march in the kingdom of God. That's why Jesus, in his resurrection body, said, I'm not a ghost. Give me a fish. And when he ate the fish, my heart leaps. Because I realize that what I'm in for is a life of permanent personal love. My future, our future is a personal one, not a nebulous one. Our future even is a physical one. You understand? Not an ephemeral one. Our future is a sure one. If you don't have this, how in the world can you face? How can you face the problems of life? How can you face death itself? Lewis says, when a Christian understands the resurrection, the Christian says, I know that the worst thing that happens to me, death itself, comes upon me. All it can do is make me into a blindingly, radiantly immortal person who actually pulsates throughout with such energy and love and nobility and joy that no one can now imagine. It's to become a bright stainless mirror reflecting back to God his own boundless power, love, goodness, and delight. That's what a Christian has in front. Now, what does that mean? It means this. If the gospel of the resurrection is true, it makes everything else unimportant. This is what you live for. But get this. If the gospel of the resurrection is not true, everything's unimportant anyway. Think about it. Please. Some of you don't believe in the resurrection. I urge you to watch out. Remember what a grip is like. You don't want to lose control. But there's a tremendous bias that we all have. Doubt your doubts. Be skeptical of your skepticism. Spend the time. You have gambled everything on it not being true. You better be sure. Please look at the evidence. Please do the exploration. You know, if you don't want to believe in Christianity, fine, but you don't just shrug and laugh at it because you know that you've taken your life into your hands. Secondly, Christians, if there's people here who believe in the resurrection, right? But you don't go to church much. But you don't go to church much. in the resurrection but may only come to church on Easter. Look, if you don't believe in the resurrection, I'm glad you're here, even on Easter. You know, I'm delighted that you're willing to give us this kind of entree. I'm delighted that you're willing to put up with this. If you do believe in Easter, if you do believe in the resurrection and you only come to church on Easter, all I can say to you is, how dare you? If resurrection is true, you've lost control. If the resurrection is true, you can't do everything that you want to do. You've got to give yourself to him, but if you do, you'll be able to face anything. What does this babbler have to say, Saint Paul? What does this babbler have to say? Everything you need, listen to him. Let's pray. Father, give us now the grace to understand intellectually and personally. Help us to understand the credibility and the deep personal relevance of the resurrection for our lives this morning. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
