TITLE: Economic Justice: A God Who Identifies With the Poor
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Formed for Justice Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/economic-justice-a-god-who-identifies-with-the-poor-2/

============================================================

Economic justice, according to what the, when the Bible talks about economic justice or economic injustice, what's the Bible mean by that? So I know that largely we, you have heard about these two Hebrew words, probably, tzedekah and mishpat, that both are translated righteousness or justice, but there are too often, I think, translated righteousness in our English text rather than justice. Partly, one of the problems with that, of course, is in English usage, righteousness and justice are two almost radically different things. Nevertheless, the words mean a right relationship, to be rightly related to someone, and therefore it's just as easy to, just as right to translate them as justice, as righteousness. But the key would be, what I'm going to show you here is, if you go through the Bible and you look for all the places where the words tzedekah and mishpat show up near money and near the poor, in other words, when those words are used in the same verses with things like money and the poor and wages and that sort of thing, you start to get a picture of what economic justice is. So let's ask this question, what is economic justice? And I'm going to say, I think there's, as far as I know, the Bible is telling us it's three things. And secondly, though, I'm going to say, what are the beliefs that you're going to have to hold if you're ever going to pursue economic justice? I'll explain what I mean by that. And lastly, a couple of practical balances you have to keep in mind as you're pursuing economic justice. So first, so what is economic justice? What must we believe in order to pursue economic justice? And what else must we do when we're doing justice? So what is economic justice? I'll give you three things from what I can tell. And over the years, studying what the Bible says about this, it means first, equal treatment of everyone. Secondly, special concern and respect and aid for those without economic power. And thirdly, don't worry, I'm going back over this. It means radical generosity with your own money and possessions. And unless your life reflects those three things, equal treatment of all, special concern, respect and aid for those without economic power, and radical generosity with your own goods and possessions, you are actually not doing economic justice. You're not living the way the Bible wants. You're not a person of tzedakah or mishpat. So first, what do I mean? Equal treatment of all. It's stunning, especially if you understand something about ancient times, for verses like this, Leviticus 24, 22, you are to have the same law for the immigrant foreigner as for the native-born. Or Leviticus 19, 15, do not show partiality to the rich or the poor in the lawsuit, but judge fairly. Now, you have to remember that this is an era, ancient times, in which family was everything. The tribe was everything. The tribe was everything. The race was everything. And yet, here's the Bible constantly saying, race and class, you know, it says, you should have the same law for immigrant foreigner as the native-born. Do not show partiality for the rich or the poor. You know, or as Acts chapter 10, Peter says, now I see that God does not play favorites. This is a very, very important part of what the Bible teaches, is that it is unjust to treat people differently on the basis of how much money they have. Now, let me give you just three examples, all of which would be forms of economic injustice, according to the Bible. One is unfair wages and prices. I know I'm opening a can of worms here. I'm just telling what the Bible said. This is not my idea. For example, in Proverbs 11, 26, it talks about a man who during a time of poor harvests, there have been poor harvests, he hoards the grain to drive the price up, and then finally sells and makes a ton of money. Is that legal? Sure, it's legal. It's market. That's the market, right? You know, he had cornered the market. He was able to basically name his own price. And Proverbs 11, 26 says, it's right that the community would curse him. So, it's legal, but he's cursed. Why? Because he only has one bottom line, and it is maximize profits. And the other bottom line is the good of the community, the good of the people around him. And I know some of you out there with economics background are saying, Now, wait a minute, wait a minute, I'm just Proverbs 11.26. Not me. Or Jeremiah 22.13 and Leviticus 19.13 and Deuteronomy 24.14-15 say you've got to pay just wages. That meant timely wages as well as fair wages. Timely wages. By the way, the covenant, Leviticus 19.13 and Deuteronomy 24.14-15 says you had to pay your workers that day. It was written in the law. You had to pay your workers that day. And you did not say, I'll pay you at the end of the week. You had to pay them that day because people needed. People did live from hand to mouth, as it were. And according to the prophets, go to Amos and Isaiah and Jeremiah and all that. Wealthy people never did that, even though it was written into the law. They never did that. Of course, why? Because, you know, having all the money up front is hard. Better to get the job done, get the work done, and, you know, keep delaying and keep delaying and keep delaying. And that's wrong. That's a form of injustice. So, unfair wages, unfair prices is injustice. Secondly, unfair legal practices. Deuteronomy 24.17 says, don't deprive a foreigner or the fatherless of justice. Now, notice, the foreigner was a person of a different race, but the fatherless was a person of your race, but, you know, an orphan or somebody who had less money, lower economic class. And you must not treat them differently in court. And you must not treat them differently in government. You must not. But actually, one of the great, one of the most remarkable things, if you actually go through and start to collect the verses on this, it's astounding how often, especially in the Old Testament, but in the New Testament, too, bribery is condemned. Over and over and over again. So, for example, Isaiah 1.23 says, your leaders are always accepting gifts and bribes. They never defend orphans in court or listen when widows present their cases. Now, what was wrong with bribery? I'll tell you what's wrong with bribery. Poor people can't bribe. It's unfair. See? They didn't have the money for it. And basically, what the Bible says is any system of justice or any system of government in which outcomes are affected to a great degree by how much money you have, your outcome and your treatment is affected to a great degree by how much money you have. That's a stench in God's nostrils over and over and over and over again, which, by the way, raises questions about the very, the very, the system of bail. Right? Okay? The more money you have, the more likely you are to go free. Or even political contributions, but let's not go there. Because anything that actually, any system of government or system of court, system of legal system that is weighted in any way in favor of people with more money is a stench in God's nostrils. So there's unfair wages is one form of unequal treatment, unfair legal practices, and lastly, unfair business practices. Just to give you a quick example, here's one I love, always like. Amos chapter 6, verses 5 to 6, where it says, You use unjust scales, selling even the sweepings of the wheat. Now, an unjust scale is very simple, even though, of course, they didn't have pounds back then, but an unjust scale would be simply this. You know, here's the farmer, he comes in, and he puts his grain on the scale, and on the other side is a 5-pound weight. Except, it's really not 5 pounds, right? It's 6 pounds. And so, basically, what you're doing, though, is you're getting 6 pounds of grain for only 5 pounds of price. And that's an unjust scale. But the other thing I liked is, and you sell even the sweepings of the wheat. Now, you know what the sweepings were? It was the chaff. In other words, you would throw the grain up in the air, and the wind would blow away the chaff. And, of course, you're supposed to sell the grain, not the chaff. Unless you just go over here, and you sweep a little bit of the chaff in there, and you sell it. And you weigh it. And you're giving people an inferior product. In fact, you're cheating. Over and over again, unfair business practices, unfair legal systems, unfair wages and prices. And the Bible says it's an anathema to God. And all those are forms of economic injustice. However, number two, according to the Bible, economic justice is not just treating everybody equally. But get this. And at first, this is going to sound like a contradiction. It means special concern, respect, and aid for those without economic power. Number two, it means special concern. And if there's no rule of accomplishment, that's going to be just treating everybody equally, but get this, and at first this is going to sound like a contradiction. It means special concern, respect, and aid for those without economic power. Special respect, concern, and aid for people without economic power. Now, some people are going to say, wait a minute, didn't you just read me Leviticus 19.15, do not show partiality to the rich or the poor in the lawsuit, but judge fairly. Yeah, that's right. In other words, don't favor a poor person in a lawsuit just because they're poor. Well, that means you should never treat the poor any differently than anybody else. And of course, the answer to the Bible there is, make the case here, is that's not fair, actually. Believe it or not, that's actually not fair. Because unless you take into consideration the lack of economic power that poor people have, you actually are not treating them fairly. Let me give you a couple of examples. Special respect, concern, and aid for people without economic power. If you're not doing that, you are not doing justice. So, okay, first of all, special respect and concern is reflected in a couple things. One is advocacy. This is a pretty famous verse, Proverbs 31, 8, and 9, and I quote, speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves. Speak up for the rights of all who are destitute. Speak up and judge fairly. Defend the rights of the poor and the needy. Zechariah 7, administer true justice. Show mercy and compassion to one another. Do not oppress the widow or the fatherless, the immigrant or the poor. Now, here's what's interesting. Nowhere in the Bible does it say, speak up, speak up for the rich and the powerful. You know why it never says that? Because they don't need you to speak up for them. They can speak up for themselves. They can pay people to speak up for themselves. So, you see, if the Bible doesn't at this point say, you know, it says, speak up for the rich. It always says, speak up for these people. Go after them. They need your help. Privilege them, in a sense, when it comes to how much time and effort you put into helping them. Psalm 41.1. You'll always overlook this because they don't really now have a, they don't have a good way of translating this Hebrew word, but it'll say, blessed is the one who considers the poor. Now, the word considers there is a really strong word. It means to think, meditate, strategize. In other words, you are being told in Psalm 41.1 that you're supposed to look at the poor, especially the poor in your community, and think, and think, and think, how do I lift them up? What are their needs? What are their issues? How do I lift them up? There's nothing like that. There's no, blessed is the one who considers the rich. It's just not there. Why? Because they don't need you to do that. And therefore, there's a sense in which you're supposed to treat everyone equally. There's another sense in which you better not treat everybody equally, because actually, it's not fair. It's not fair. Advocacy, strategic thinking about the poor. If you're not doing that, you actually are engaging in economic injustice. Also, just policies. For example, Deuteronomy 24.17 says, you shall not take a widow's garment in pledge. Now, when you made a loan in those days, you would take something in pledge until it came back. So, you might actually go and take a piece of furniture or something like that, or a cloak. You could take somebody's coat in pledge and say, when you pay this back, it's collateral, we call it. But you're never, you're not supposed to do that for a widow. Why? Because that's the only cloak she has. She's poor. In other words, if you treat her the same way you would treat somebody else in your loan practices, in your economic practices, you are actually sinning. You are engaged in economic injustice. And so, when you say, well, what does it mean then? If I'm supposed to be strategically thinking about the poor, and if I'm not thinking about the poor, and not caring about the poor, I'm actually indulging in economic injustice, what should I do? I'm happy you asked that question. There's three things the Bible says we should be doing. Relief. Now, by the way, you can argue about these names, but relief, development, and reform. Relief is what a lot of people, especially traditionally, think of as helping the poor. It's what the Good Samaritan did on the road. He picks the guy up, puts him on, you know, gives him medical care, gives him a financial subsidy. Relief, you know, somebody's hungry, you feed them. Somebody's, you know, you give them clothes, clothing closets, you know, soup kitchens, that's relief. But that's not the limit. In fact, that's not even the goal. The goal is to lift people up so that they're self-sufficient, help them be self-sufficient, not keep them in a state of dependency and make yourself feel good about it. Interestingly enough, in Deuteron... make sense unless I very quickly say something. In the Old Testament, slavery was a form of bankruptcy law. Got that? In other words, in the Old Testament, whenever it talks about slavery, that the Mosaic law prescribes, it's a form of bankruptcy law. So if somebody, today you can declare bankruptcy, and that means that your creditors don't get anything. In those days, what would happen when you declared bankruptcy, as it were, was you had to go work for your creditor until the debt was gone. Now what's interesting is you had to work exclusively for your, you were a slave, you had to work exclusively for that creditor until the debt was gone. Well, you say, well, what if the debt is so big you'd stay a slave the rest of your life? The mercy of the Mosaic covenant was you could only stay a slave for six years, which meant that if your debt wasn't paid off in six years, at that point, that your creditor didn't get anything else. But here's what's interesting. What's intriguing about Deuteronomy 15, it says, when the person that is working for you, your indentured servant, I almost hate to use the word slave, because when you and I hear the word slave, you're thinking of chattel slavery, race-based slavery, lifelong slavery. But nevertheless, when that person leaves you, here's what it says in Deuteronomy 15, it says, you must send him out, or her, with grain, tools, and resources for a sufficient new life, which is really intriguing. It almost makes you wonder why they would ever actually, it's not great for the creditor, because the creditor is not supposed to say, you're free, and now they have no resources. You've got to send them out with grain. You've got to send them out with what it would take for them to establish themselves as economically self-sufficient. And that's the idea of development. That you're really trying to lift the poor up. You're trying to help them lift themselves up. You're not simply just giving them a handout. There's relief, development, and reform. Now, reform means going beyond just working with the individuals to trying to create social systems that don't create the problem. So, for example, I'm going to get to this in a minute, but I'll get back to this. But, for example, in Job chapter 21, no, 29, he doesn't just say he clothed the naked and he shared his, you know, his food with the hungry. He also says he broke the fangs of the wicked and made them drop their victims. He saw people oppressing the poor, and he went after them and stopped them. That's social reform. Daniel, in Daniel chapter 4, by the way, he called Nebuchadnezzar to account for oppressing the poor. Nebuchadnezzar was not a believing king. This is not David or Saul. This isn't an Israelite king. This is a pagan. This is a person who doesn't believe in God at all. And yet Daniel says, you need to stop oppressing the poor. That's basically a call for social reform. Or one more way to put it is, if that good Samaritan, month after month after month, would go up to Jericho. And every single month he met, there were two or three more people having been beaten up in the road because the robbers have, you know, been there. At a certain point, he might say, you know what, instead of me just picking people up, maybe we need to increase police protection on the road. Maybe we need to change. The road, the conditions here are producing beaten up people. So let's do something so they don't keep producing. That's reform. That's working on the social structure. And in the end, there's really no way you can really love the poor without trying to, you know, work on the social structure in some way. And therefore, you have relief, development, reform. If you're not, I'm not saying you have to do all three of them. You have to do one of them. You have to do some of them. But the point is, without that special concern or care for, special respect and concern and aid for the poor, you're actually not treating them fairly. And therefore, you are actually engaging in economic injustice. Here's the last one. So the three things, economic justice, put it that way. I'm going back and forth. I know I'm speaking negatively. Economic justice is equal, fair treatment for all. It's a special concern, respect, and aid for those without economic power. And it's being radically generous with your own goods. This is where a lot of Americans really go nuts. And I get a lot of pushback over the years. A lot of people say, if I want to help the poor, that's fine. But that's up to me. It's voluntary. It's charity. And that's really not what the Bible says. It doesn't mean that the Bible says, Of course it does. And compassion, of course it does. But it also talks in terms of justice. Let me give you a couple of ideas on this. Job chapter 31, there's an interesting place where Job, you have to listen carefully, where Job says this. He says, if I have denied the desires of the poor or let the eyes of the widow grow weary, if I've kept my bread to myself, not sharing it with the fatherless, if I've seen anyone perishing for lack of clothing or the needy without garments and their hearts did not bless me for warming them with the fleece of my sheep. See, if I've kept my bread to myself, if I've seen anybody perishing for lack of clothing and I kept my fleece to myself, if I did that, then let my arm fall from my shoulder, let it be broken off of the joint. For I dreaded destruction from God and for fear of his splendor, I could not do such things. In other words, he says, if I see people without and I don't share my, you know, my food, my clothing with them, if I've got more and I don't share it with them, it's a sin. It's not a lack of charity. It's not stinginess. It's a sin to be judged, which means you're unjust. Or, for example, Psalm 112, 9, shows you something that happened eventually that you can even see in the New Testament. How is giving to the poor, what is it named? And it's named acts of righteousness, said Acha. So, in Psalm 112, verse 9, it says, to freely give to the poor is righteousness. righteousness. That's your righteousness to give to the poor. And if maybe you notice, in Matthew 6, 1, Jesus talks about almsgiving as acts of righteousness, which is a direct, of course, it's a Greek word there, but it's directly tied to the idea that when you give to the poor, it's not, it was not called in Hebrew charity, it was called justice. And I'll tell you why. Let me just, let's think about this for a second. Um, I realized at one point in my life, you may have heard me use this illustration before, um, my children grew up in New York City. Okay? Um, and, uh, there were other people, other children who were born here and growing up in some very poor parts of the city. And I knew that my children had about three or four hundred times a better chance of having a successful economic life than those, or even a successful life. They had a three hundred times better, uh, chance of having a successful life than the kids that were growing up in, in some very poor parts of the city. Why? Well, the Democrats would say, and I'll get back to this in a second, it was unjust social systems. And the Republicans would say, bad families, you know, irresponsibility, family breakdown. And guess what? Biblically, they're probably both true. But here's the thing I want to point out. It's not the kids' fault, is it? It's not the kids' fault where they were born. Could it be? Of course it's not the kids' fault. They couldn't help where they were born. And therefore, there is an inequitable, a drastically inequitable distribution of economic power. People are just born into it. And because they were born where they were as opposed to being born into my family, they have a far worse prospect of any kind of decent life. Now, what does that mean? If you're born into a situation where you've actually got a lot of privileges and you've got an awful lot of power and you've got a lot of these things, then it's not just stingy not to share it. It's unjust. Because, you know, you were born into it and they were not born into it. Then it's just being unjust. And that's why I over... Generally speaking, the thing you've got to keep in mind... Oh, by the way, let me just give you a couple more interesting ideas here. Deuteronomy 24. Translations usually don't do this very well. But when you read through Deuteronomy 24, God says, when you're harvesting in your field and you overlook a sheaf, do not go back to get it. It belongs to the poor. When you beat the olives from your trees, do not go over the branches a second time. It belongs to the immigrant, to the fatherless and the widow. When you harvest the grapes in your vineyard, do not go over the vines again. Why? It belongs to the immigrant, the fatherless and the widow. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and that is why I command you to do this. The point is, if you remember... The point is, it's not just for you to maximize your profits. Olive oil, grapes, you know, wheat. You Lord, The point is, unjust. It's not just that, well, you know, go out to the edges and maximize your profit and then give it away in charity. No, it says if you maximize your profit, if you don't leave it for the poor, then you're being unjust because it's not yours. It's a weird thing, but there it is. It's saying not all of your money is yours. It says so. No, it doesn't say money. Of course, by the way, there was no money back then, just everybody. The wheat was your money. The olive oil was your money. And it says if you think it's all yours, you're wrong and you're guilty of injustice. Being radically generous with your possessions, being radically generous with your money, is justice. And to not be radically generous is injustice. Now, what I'm going to do lastly here is I know enough now after years of trying to talk about this and preach on this and write about this, that there's still a strong resistance, especially amongst American Christians, to that definition. They don't like the idea that, wait a minute, what do you mean some of my money belongs to the poor? Wait a minute, what is it? How could it? I don't know what. What are you talking about there? What do you mean that I have to have special concern for the poor? That unless I'm really working for them and considering the poor and trying to aid them, that somehow I'm being unjust? I don't like that. And I think it's because, I'll tell you what I think it is, there are six background beliefs, biblical beliefs I'm going to just go through quickly, very quickly, and say everything the Bible says about justice makes sense if you believe these six background beliefs. And if you really waffle on these, then what the justice stuff doesn't make sense. So here's what they are. I really am literally kind of going to give you about 45 seconds on each one. Here they are, ready? Number one, what the Bible says about your attitude toward your own wealth, none of your wealth is yours, it's God's. None of your wealth is yours, it's God's, you know that. First Chronicles 29, where it talks about that, you are not an owner, you are a steward. Everything you, I mean, Americans have trouble saying, I've worked hard for what I, yeah, I know, look, the fact that you were not, the fact you were not born on a mountain in Tibet in the 13th century, if you were born on a mountain in Tibet in the 13th century, which God could have done to you, you could have worked very, very hard and you wouldn't have much. You wouldn't have much. You could have been born blind. I mean, the point is that everything you have, according to the Bible, is God's. And you are only a steward of what you have, that's all. And imagine, what if somebody hired you to basically manage her money, and you, basically she was, you were over all of her money, but she says, I want this much to go to this, and this much to go to this, and this much to go to this, and what if instead of that, you just started spending on it yourself? Of course, you'd be in jail soon. And, right, it would be injustice, right? God is the owner of everything you own. Your money is not yours. And God wants your money to go, to flow to the church, if you're a Christian. He wants your money to flow to the poor. And therefore, if you're not giving your money where it should go, then you're robbing them of the money that is theirs, and you're robbing God of the money that's his. So, first of all, first thing is, do you understand all your wealth is God's? Number two, do you understand the biblical causes of poverty? Probably not, because I haven't actually laid them out. But if you, and this is, again, such an overview, the Bible sometimes says poverty is caused by oppression. In fact, the main Hebrew word for the poor in the Old Testament, ani, means the oppressed. But secondly, calamity can do it too. Famine, see? Calamity, calamity can do it as well. Or a war coming through and just wiping you out. That's a calamity, basically. You know, one is more of an act of God, calamity. One is more of an act of man, calamity, calamity. So, the first reason is oppression, injustice. The second is, I mean, there's a place in Proverbs where it says, the poor man works very hard. The poor man's field is fertile, but injustice sweeps it away. So, there's oppression. Secondly, there's calamity. And thirdly, there's irresponsibility and laziness. Yes. Proverbs talks about that too. But here's what's interesting. And this is really, really interesting. The average, read Robert Bella's book, Habits of the Heart. And Robert Bella says, the average American believes that if you're rich, it was because of your personal choices. And if you're poor, it's because of your personal choices. Period. Period. Period. Period. Period. Period. Period. Period. nothing to do with your personal choices at all. It's all a matter of your social location. Basically, who you are is totally determined by your social location. The Bible says they're both wrong. The Bible says they're both reductionistic. The Bible says they're both, in a sense, depersonalizing. The Bible says that the reality is a kind of interesting, fascinating, horrible mix of what brings poverty about. And therefore, it's really, really, really hard, actually, to alleviate. And a lot of people don't like the justice talk because they actually don't believe that there is three causes of poverty. They usually fall into one or the other. Number three, doctrine of the image of God. The doctrine of the image of God. But if you've got a strong doctrine that every human being is made in the image of God and therefore is of infinite value, all the justice stuff won't make sense. But listen, this is John Calvin. Nobody's ever accused John Calvin of being a cultural Marxist, but here he is. And this is what he says. Some people say about their neighbor, I owe him nothing for any service. He does not deserve it because of the way in which he lives. Yet what has the Lord deserved? Now listen, this is what Calvin says. Remember, sorry, it's a little bit old English, but remember not to consider men's evil intention, but to look upon the image of God in them, which cancels and effaces their transgressions, and with its beauty and dignity allures us to love and embrace them. And then Calvin goes on and says, which I think is astounding. Each Christian will so consider himself a debtor to his neighbors that he ought in exercising kindness toward them to set no other limit than the end of his resources. It's an extraordinarily… What Calvin's saying is, you look at your neighbor, in himself, your neighbor may be very morally undeserving. But because of the image of God, remember not to consider men's evil intention. Don't look at them. Don't look at them. But look upon the image of God in them, which cancels and effaces their transgressions with its beauty and dignity. It allures us to love and embrace them. And therefore, you see, he says, don't say, what does he deserve? He asks the question, what does God deserve? And God's image is on him. And so this breathtaking practical implication. Every Christian will so consider himself a debtor to his neighbors and that he ought in exercising kindness toward them to set no other limit than the end of his resources. I don't feel that way personally. It's probably because I haven't meditated enough on the image of God. And if you do understand that, then a lot of this justice stuff makes sense. Number four, the second great commandment, love your neighbor, which Jesus Christ defines in the parable of the Good Samaritan. What does it mean to love my neighbor? Remember, what does Jesus say? He shows us a picture of a man who is giving practical, material, economic help to a man of a different race and a different religion. There it is. See, when somebody asks Jesus, what does it mean to love my neighbor? He shows him someone loving someone of a different race and of a different religion in a practical way. So the fourth great commandment. Next, how many is that? Okay. Am I on the fifth one now? Number five. And this is a big one. The Bible's understanding of corporate responsibility. You know, I've left myself like seconds pretty much. But one of the reasons why a lot of people in America just push back on talk about justice is because they are, they actually are, how do I say it? They're gullible to the American idea that there is no corporate responsibility. Daniel chapter 9, he's confessing the sins of his people, and he wasn't alive when his people were doing those sins, but he confesses them. He feels responsible for them. Okay. Or Achan, when he steals some things from the battle of Jericho, he steals some things and he hides them against God's law, when it's discovered what he has done. He's not just stoned to death. His entire family is stoned to death. Modern Americans go, oh, that's just not right. And yet the idea is, and listen, most people in the history of the world have understood this. You are not just the product of your own choices. Don't, don't, I know that's what you think you are. By the way, if you're young, you think you are. By the time you get to my age, you realize you're so much more like your parents than you ever wanted to be. That you are not really just the product of your, of your, of your choices. You're the product of a family. You're a product of a community. did without both the implicit and explicit family culture that produced him. Or, look, God says at one point in Deuteronomy 10, and he says to the Israelites, I don't want you to oppress an immigrant, an alien, because you were aliens in Egypt, except all the people that he's talking to were not aliens in Egypt. It was their parents. They all died off. You all, he says you, even though in their past they were aliens in Egypt, none of them had individually been aliens in Egypt. You know, I've had plenty of people, right, especially white people say, I don't know why you should hold me responsible for how black people are today. I never owned any slaves. Same thing. God looks at people and says, you were aliens in Egypt, even though actually none of them were. Daniel says, I'm sorry for our sins, even though he didn't do any of the sins. God actually says to Ammon and Moab and Edom at certain points in the book of Jeremiah and Amos, he says, I'm going to punish you for the things you did to Israel when they came into the promised land, except all the individuals in those nations weren't alive when Israel came into the promised land. The fact of the matter, then you have Ezekiel 18, which says, I punish people for their own sin, not the sin of their fathers. And you say, what, what, what, what? The answer is, in the end, individual responsibility is dominant in the Bible. You do have to take responsibility for yourself. You do have to make your own choices. And yet, the idea of corporate responsibility is there. And unless you understand that, then all this talk about justice is not going to make much sense. Lastly, oh, here's the last thing I'll just say, because time's up. It's actually my title, I think, or at least the title they gave me. God identifies with the poor. The last thing you're going to have to understand is this. In Proverbs 14, I think it is. Let me see if I can find that. Yeah, in Proverbs 14, 31, God says, if you insult the poor, you insult the Lord. Proverbs 19, 17 says, if you give to the poor, you give to the Lord. That's remarkable. God is saying, I so identify with the needs of the poor. I care so much about them. I'm so involved with them that when I see you caring for someone who's poor, I feel like you're caring for me. That's an amazing statement. I mean, if somebody asked me, what did you do? Who are you? I'd say, I was the founder of Redeemer Presbyterian Church, and I'm the wife of Kathy, and I'm the father of Michael, and David, and of Jonathan. And because that's the main things I've done. When God introduces himself, he says what? I'm a father to the fatherless, a defender of widows. I mean, if God so identifies with the poor that he introduces himself like that, and if God so identifies with the poor that when he did become a human being, he came into a manger, a feed trough, not to a throne. Seek not in courts or palaces, nor royal curtains draw, but search the stable. See your God extended on the straw. So if God cares that much about the poor, that's the last thing I'll say. Then all this stuff about justice makes sense. But at this point, we're going to stop, and we're going to have a great conversation with other people besides me, and Justin's going to lead us. We're going to have a great conversation We're going to have a great conversation
