TITLE: Enemy Within
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 1:5-10
TOPICS: God's Love
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/enemy-within-2/

============================================================

The passage that we're going to be basing our teaching on tonight is in your bulletins, and if you were actually following along with everyone else, you should be right there. It's 1 John chapter 1, verses 5 through 6, 5 to 10. 1 John chapter 1, 5 to 10, and we're going to be reading that and making that the basis of our teaching right now. This is the message we have heard from him and declare to you, God is light, in him there is no darkness at all. If we claim to have fellowship with him, yet walk in the darkness, we lie and do not live by the truth, but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus' Son purifies us from all sin. If we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not within us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and purify us from all unrighteousness. If we claim we have not sinned, we make him out to be a liar, and his word has no place in our lives. This is God's word. Well, we have to remember when we get to this passage, verses 5 and on, you see John starts off saying, this is the message. We have to ask ourselves what came right before, or we don't know why he's saying this is the message. Now, we've been looking at 1 John, we're looking at this epistle, this letter all year, and we notice that in the very first four verses, we heard John say that as an apostle, as one of the people who had actually met Jesus and had touched him, had seen him and touched him before and after his resurrection. He had not only a general knowledge, an intellectual knowledge, that Jesus was the Son of God, but he now had what he calls fellowship with God. John talks about fellowship, and we spent a good deal of time talking about fellowship. Fellowship with God means personal interaction, personal exchange, a real dealing with the very Godhead, the very Godhead, the Father and the Son. He said, we have fellowship with the Father and the Son. In other words, the very glory and love of his presence comes down sometimes on the soul. There's nothing greater than this. This is what we're all after. This is what you're after, whether you know it or not. This is what you're after in art. This is what you're after in career. This is what you're after in sex. This is what you're after in love. This is what you're after in everything. Now, we spent a lot of time talking on that, and he said, I want you to have what I have, says John. I want you to have this fullness of joy. I write you, he said, verse 4, the verse right before the section that we read tonight. I'm writing you this. I'm sending you this message so you can have the fullness of joy, so you can have fellowship with God too. So, starting with verse 5, John is saying, now, if you want to have this fullness of joy, you have to get the message down. And what you really have, and it happens so often in the New Testament, that's what's so wonderful about looking at the New Testament. You have a gospel presentation in verses 5 to 10. You've got a nutshell of the gospel. What John is saying is, there are these things that you've got to know if you want to have this joy. You've got to grasp these principles. Now, the three of them, and we began looking at the first one last week so we can mention it and then keep moving. They're very simple, so simple, but we mustn't miss them. And especially tonight when we're going to be receiving the Lord's Supper, and the Lord's Supper is just simply a visible gospel presentation. He says, you've got to understand three things. God is light, you have sin, and the blood of Jesus, his son, cleanses from all sin. Those are the three things you've got to know. If you want to have this joy, if you want to have fellowship with God, if you don't have all three of those, if you don't understand that, you'll never have fellowship with God. So, we take a look at it. Number one, now, we began looking at it this week, but let's, so we can be a little bit more brief, but let's remind ourselves of what we said and so on. He says, the first thing, the message starts with God. God is light, and in him there is no darkness at all. Now, what's remarkable... Now, what's remarkable... John is saying, here's how I want you to understand joy. I want you to get this joy. Here's the first thing you have to understand if you have this great joy. If you want this tremendous joy, first thing you have to understand, God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all. Now, and most of us, I think, look at that and say, I thought you were about to tell me how to have joy. I thought you were about to tell me how to have this fullness of joy, and the first thing you tell me is, God is holy, God is light, God is perfect. He cannot brook any kind of evil. In Him there is no darkness at all. That doesn't make me feel good. Why do you start with that? And John is basically saying, you will never have joy unless you understand that God is light. And though we alluded to it last week, let's say it again. John is saying that unless you understand that God is holy, and He's perfect, and He's morally pure, that He's absolutely just, that He cannot tolerate evil, if you don't understand that, and if you don't grasp that, His love will not bring you joy. And we mentioned the great philosopher, that philosopher who was dying a couple hundred years ago, and he lived a very debauched life, and somebody says, aren't you afraid to meet God after all the kind of immoral life that you've led? And he says, God will forgive me, that's His job. And you see, what we have there is a great example. If God is only love, then accepting people is His job. But do you realize, here's the irony. If you've got to do something, it's not mercy. Right? In other words, if you've, if it's my, if it's my duty to do something, if I've been elected to do something, if I have been hired to do something, or something like that, and I give you something I was elected to do, or hired to do, if it's my duty to do it, if it's my job to do it, it's not mercy. See, the great irony, there are so many people who have rejected this idea of God, that God is holy, that God is just. Ah, people say, you know, that's the problem with the old-time religion. See, all this talk about God being holy and just. I believe in a God who loves us unconditionally. I believe in a God who is nothing but love. If He's nothing but love, He's not love. If He's not light, He's not really love. Because if it's His job to accept, and if it's His job to forgive, and if He just shrugs it no matter what you do, and if it doesn't bother Him about all the evil, it maybe bothers Him, but He doesn't do anything about it, you see. It's His job just to love and forgive everyone, no matter what they do. It's not mercy. And you will never be thrilled by the mercy, because it's not mercy. If God is only mercy, He's not mercy at all. Now, what is the holiness of God? Maybe the best way to put it, when it says, God is light, and in Him there is no darkness at all, maybe the best way to put it is this way, my favorite way, is to say that God makes everything revolve around what is good, and what is right, and what is true. God makes everything turn on that. Everything that happens, everything that He says, everything that He does, everything that He controls, the center, His center, He makes everything turn on what is good, and is right, and what is just. Now, for a moment, let's contrast that with you and me. What is our center? What is the thing that we make everything turn on? What is the center of our orbit? Well, we take into consideration what is true and what is just. We will be happy to consider that. But really, what we make, what is the non-negotiable? What is the non-negotiable of our lives? What makes us happy? What is comfortable? What is advantageous? Everything, for us, turns on what is good. We'll be very, for us, what is good for us. We'll be happy to consider what is true and right. But, you know, the fact is, if, you know, here's the Ten Commandments, and it goes that way, and what really will work for us, what will be comfortable for us, what will make us happy, what will enrich us, what will make us happy, it goes off in this direction, we go in that direction. And therefore, we make everything turn on what is comfortable, and he makes everything turn on what is right. And the reason I make, use the metaphor this way, is the reason our solar system is a solar system, the reason that the planets don't run into each other, is that all the planets have the same orbit, the sun. all agree on the same center, there's harmony. But if, what if two or three of the planets had different orbital centers? For a while it'll be all right, but eventually they'd crash, they'd collide, see. When we get near the God who is light, who makes everything center on what is right and what is true, when Isaiah got near the holy God and he says, woe is me, I'm coming apart. And when Job gets near the holy God and says, I see you with my eye and I despise myself in dust and ashes. And when Peter got near the holy God and he says, depart from me, O Lord, for I'm a sinful man. And this is the way you always react when you get near the real God and you realize that he and he alone is the right center. He is the only worthy center. And you know, we don't want to see that. We don't like to see that. We don't believe that. And to get near it and to realize that though, that the things that seem so reasonable to us, our center, our happiness, our joy is completely unreasonable. We hate that idea. So to get near the very holiness of God always is traumatic. But John says, you will not understand the love of God till you see the holiness of God, a God of standards. God is light. In him there is no darkness at all. Okay. Now the second point, that goes very, very tight. The second point is not just that you have to see that God is light, but you have to see that you have sin. See, again and again, John says, if we claim to have fellowship with him yet walk in darkness, we don't live by the truth. If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another. If we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves. If we say we have not sinned, verse 10, we make him out to be a liar. Now what he's saying is the second thing you have to know in order to really have joy in your life is that you are a wretched sinner. Okay. Now, I mean, unless you look at the whole, unless you see the context, you won't see that's what he's saying. He is saying, if you want to have joy in your life, first of all, you've got to know that God is light. But secondly, if you want to have joy in your life, you've got to see that you are a wretched sinner. That sounds counterintuitive, I know. But what you've got here is critical. The test of whether you are a real Christian, the test of whether you have fellowship with God, the test of whether you understand the gospel, or whether you're just a nice person, a religious person, a moral person, but not a real Christian, not a person who understands the gospel. How do you know the difference? It's how you experience sin and failure. You see, a moralist is somebody who gets his or her confidence, spiritual confidence, out of your performance. You get your confidence out of your performance. You say, I know that God loves me because I'm better than most. I try my best. I've given my life. I come to church. I give my money. I work hard to be good. I follow the Ten Commandments. Your confidence is in your own performance, and as a result, your understanding of God's love is based on your performance. A Christian is somebody whose confidence is based completely in Christ's performance. A Christian is somebody who says, the only reason that God accepts me is because of what Jesus has done for me. Now, the problem is that a Christian and a moralist, a person who understands the gospel, and a nice, decent, religious person, will come to church, and they look on the outside very, very similar. They're both trying to be good. They're both trying to—they both believe what the Bible teaches in general ways. They both respect Jesus Christ. They both pray. They both give money. They both try to help out. They try to deal with the—help the poor. They both are trying to live good lives. How do you know the difference? Here's the difference. John says you can tell the difference because recognizing your sin, confessing your sin brings greater joy and fellowship with God. It brings you into the light. But if you're a moralist, new discoveries of your sin devastate you and leaves you devastated. In other words, a moralistic person, when you see that you're a worse sinner than you thought, you become less, less appreciative of God's love for you. You doubt his love for you. You say, how could he possibly love me? But if you're a Christian and you get new discoveries of your sin and you see new depths of your own selfishness, of course that's shattering. Of Jesus did for me on the cross was even greater than I thought. You get a greater appreciation of God's love for you. A moralist, when you see that you're a much more wicked sinner than you thought, you never want to see God again, you leave him, you run away, you don't want to be in his presence. A Christian, when you see that you're a more wicked sinner than you thought, you fly to him. Because you say, you see, it's not until the last day when we see how holy he really is, and we see how wicked we really are, that we will really have fullness of joy. Do you see why? Because not until you see the size of the debt will you know the size of the payment. Not until you see the size of the problem will you know the size of the solution. Not until you see just how in debt you are will you ever appreciate the incredible riches that have been put to your account. Now, the way you respond to sin tells you whether or not you're a Christian or a moral person. Just a moral person, just a moralist, just a religious person. Pretty interesting. Now, lastly, you've got to know three things. First of all, unless you see that God is light, you'll never get fellowship with him or have joy. And secondly, unless you see that you're a sinner, that you have sin, that you do sin. Those aren't the same thing, but tonight we don't have time to look at it. You see, if you look carefully, just in passing I'll mention this, John says three things. He says we walk in darkness, even though sometimes we say we have fellowship with him. We walk in darkness, we have sin, and we do sin. Verse 6, verse 8, and verse 10. We walk in darkness, we have sin, and we do sin. Those are three aspects to the doctrine of sin. Sin is more than just actions. That's number 10. Sin, to really understand your sin nature is to realize that you've got a nature. You have sin before you do sin. There's a sinful nature. There's a selfishness. There's a pride that's in us. And that walking in darkness means that sin is more than just a bunch of deeds, but it's an entire outlook. It's an entire mindset. It's like a culture. It's a whole outlook. It's the outlook that only thinks about God when you have a need. See? That when there's a problem, then you say, God, how do you get me out of this? And God, why did you get me into this? But you think of God in terms of what he can do for you and what he can give you. See, there's a whole outlook. Christians understand the depth of their sin. It's a mindset. It's a nature. It's not simply particular violations of rules and regulations. And until you understand that, you'll never understand the joy of the Lord and the joy of fellowship with him. But then last of all, see, the point is, we say, the three things that John says you've got to know is that God is light, that you're a sinner, and that Jesus' blood cleanses from all sin. And you see, it's the blood that makes it possible for us to get joy from the looking at God's holiness in our sin. I'll put it to you this way. The light, you can't know God's light unless you know Christ's blood. And you can't know Christ's blood unless you know God's light. You can't appreciate God's light. It'll just crush you unless you see God's blood, Christ's blood. On the other hand, you can't be moved and melted by Christ's blood unless you see God's light in your sin. They work together. Now, it tells us that if we take the blood of Christ, in a sense, if we use the blood of Christ in our life, we will walk in the light. Now, what's it mean to walk in the light? I think this is one of the great things about Christianity. Christianity, and I hate to trivialize it with this illustration, but it's a little bit too hard to pass over. Woody Hayes, who used to be the Ohio State coach, used to say the reason he never did much passing, you know, they were a three yards and a cloud of dust kind of team. And he never did much passing. He says, I'll tell you why. When you pass the ball, there's three things that can happen, and two of them are bad. Right? The ball can be caught, or the ball can be dropped, or it can be intercepted. So, there's three things that can happen, and two are bad. That's why it don't pass. Now, in all other religions, when you get tempted, there's three things that can happen, and two of them are bad. In other words... fail and repent, but you see, you've still disobeyed. You've still fallen short, and the only way to be, the only way to actually be saved is to be good and be obedient. And the third thing you can do is to sin and not repent. See, you can obey, you can sin and repent, or you can sin and not repent. But in Christianity, of those three things, two of them are good, because you walk in the light by using the blood of Christ. The blood of Christ, first of all, helps you as you're about to be tempted, and it keeps you obedient. If you use the blood of Christ as you're walking through the day, it'll keep you obedient. Well, how? It's pretty simple. The cross is the number one incentive for obedience. You look up at the cross, and you see Jesus dying, and you know why he died? It tells you in 1 Peter 2. It says, he bore our sins on the tree that we might die unto sins and live unto righteousness. So, I look at Jesus' blood, and you know what it says to me? You know what Jesus says to me from the cross? If you think about it, when you're tempted, should I disobey? Should I do what God wants me to do, or should I do something else? I hear Jesus Christ saying, are you about to completely frustrate the entire design and aim of my whole career? What do you think I'm doing up here on the cross? I am dying so that you can be free from sin. Don't I look like I've been beaten enough? Are you going to hit me one more time? Don't I look like I've been speared enough? Are you going to hit the other side? Are you going to put your hands around my throat? Now, you see, when we disobey, we never think of it like that, do we? That's why we disobey. We're not using the blood of Christ to keep us in the light. See, when we're about to sin, we really don't think, oh, I'm slamming Jesus Christ to the floor. I'm trampling on his blood. I'm hitting him one more time. We don't think of it. All we say is, I can't help it. I'm unhappy. I deserve a break. See, you know, poor me. We don't think of the blood of Christ. We don't think that we're trampling on him. And that's the reason why we do sin. The blood of Christ destroys the attractive power of sin over you. You look at it and say, look, here's Jesus Christ writhing in the dust, sweating blood in the garden, dying on the cross. The spear, the thorns, the wormwood, the gall, all for us. In spite of it all, he did all that for us. Now, what could you do for him? To be true to us, he experienced all that. To be true to him, what are you going to have to do to be obedient? The blood of Christ keeps you in the light by keeping you obedient. There is no way… See, you don't have… Your incentive for obedience is not a fear that you're going to lose his love. Not at all. Your incentive for obedience is, I've got an unlosable love that was put on me at an incredible cost. How in the world can I trample on it? But on the other hand, if you do sin… And this is what's the incredible… This is the incredible thing about the cross and about the blood of Christ. It'll… See, it'll… No matter what your disease, this is the medicine. Because if you're about to sin, the blood of Christ says, how can you do this to me? And it's the only motive that'll melt you down. You don't hear God saying, you better not do that or I'll get you. Instead, you have Jesus Christ saying, how could you do this to me? It melts you. There's no greater, more natural and organic and wonderful incentive to be obedient than the cross. But at the same time, if you have sinned… If you have sinned… Oh… What is there that's holding him to the cross? You know, he's God. What kept him up there? Look at the pain he's going through. Look at the suffering he's going through. What kept him up there? The nails? The chains? The cords? No. His love for you. And his love for you was so strong that it took hell itself being poured out, the wrath of God being poured out, the cup. Now, do you think that if it bore that, your inconsistency, your sin, your coldness, do you think that your sin and your failures are going to… love for you if it took that? Therefore, if you're crushed under guilt, if you say, I've done it again, how in the world could God receive me? How in the world could he receive me? You don't understand God's love. You're insulting the love of Jesus Christ. The very same blood that keeps you from sinning restores you when you do. This is the medicine for any disease, whether it's temptation or accusation, whether it's too much guilt or too little guilt. This is the amazing thing. The blood of Jesus Christ gets you to walk in the light because if you are about to be tempted, the blood of Christ will keep you straight if you listen to it. But if you've fallen, the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses you. You look at it and you say, I've been restored. Don't you see? There's three things that can happen. The only thing that can destroy you is for you to sin and not go to the blood. There's three things that can happen. You can obey because of the blood. You can sin and repent through the blood. Or, and the only thing that can destroy you is to sin and refuse to repent to say, my sins are too great. You can walk in the light tonight no matter where you are. If you're tempted, if you're facing some things right now that are just too hard, you think, you feel like you're about to go under, what we're about to do is we're about to break the bread. We're about to pour out the cup. It's the blood. It's the death of Christ. Look at it. If you think I'm about to go under, I can't help it. I have to hate that person. I can't help it. I have to be dishonest. I can't help it. I have to give in this way. I have to do this. I have to do that. No, you don't. You can be absolutely free. The blood of Christ will help you to walk in the light. On the other hand, if you've come here tonight and you've done something that's quite bad, quite wrong, and you have this concern that maybe, oh my word, no, maybe it's too much. Maybe I finally worn Christ out. Look what he endured for you. His love is strong love. It can endure anything. You can't break it with your sin. He's still there for you. You see, John, no, George Herbert in one of his poems put it this way. He says, though I fail, I weep. There it is. Isn't that great? Though I fail, I weep. The only way to truly fail is not to weep. Though I fail, he said, I weep. Though I halt in pace, I creep to the throne of grace. That's what he said. And maybe some of you need to do that now. Let's get ready to do it. Our Father, please enable us now to see that two out of three are good things. Because of the gospel, there's three things that can happen as we go out into the world and seek to obey you. And two of them are good. We thank you that the blood of Jesus Christ equally is an incentive for obedience and a cleansing from guilt. Because of his blood, we say, how in the world can I do this sin? But if we have sin, how in the world can I be crushed with guilt? We thank you, Lord, that for a perfect medicine for whatever ails us, legalism or license, temptation or accusation, too much guilt or too little guilt. We pray, Father, that tonight that those of us who need to be disturbed might be comforted, might be disturbed. And those who need to be comforted might be comforted. I pray, Father, that those of us who don't have enough of a sense of the danger of sin will see it. And those of us who don't have enough of a sense of the greatness of grace will see it as well. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
