TITLE: Fire on the Mountain
SCRIPTURE: 1 Kings 18:20-39
TOPICS: Idolatry
SERIES: Discerning the Spirits (with Elijah)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/fire-on-the-mountain/

============================================================

After the sermon, we're going to be doing the Lord's Supper, so let's hear what the Word of God has to say before we come before Him through the Lord's Supper. This is 1 Kings 18, verses 20 to 39. Let me tell you what happened right before here, by the way. This is an ongoing narrative about the life of Elijah. Last week, we began the story of Elijah, and it goes like this. During the 8th to 9th century BC, 800 years before Christ, in Israel, there was a king of Israel, Ahab, and the queen, Jezebel. And Ahab and Jezebel, the king and queen of Israel, were going on a very organized and deliberate effort to try to make Israel religiously pluralistic. They were seeking to spread the worship of the Baal of Tyre and Sidon, who was a great rain god, a storm god. And they were trying to get that idolatry spread throughout Israel. And the Lord sends his prophet Elijah to Ahab and Jezebel and says, I'm going to send a drought. There will not be a drop of water. There will not be a drop of dew. And the reason for that is it's God's way of challenging the god Baal because, in a way, he's saying, we'll see who's the lord of the storm. And so there's been a drought for three years now. And things are desperate. And at the beginning of chapter 18, Elijah shows up and says to Ahab, here I am. Meet me on Mount Carmel. He says, bring all your prophets of Baal, bring all the people, and we'll have a contest and we'll see who is the true God. Who's the true God? Now, that's where we are. Let's see what happens. So Ahab, verse 20, sent word throughout all Israel and assembled the prophets on Mount Carmel. Elijah went before the people and said, how long will you waver between two opinions? If the Lord is a god, follow him. But if Baal is god, follow him. But the people said nothing. Then Elijah said to them, I am the only one of the Lord's prophets left. But Baal has 450 prophets. Get two bulls for us. Let them choose one for themselves. Let them cut it into pieces and put it on the wood, but not set fire to it. I will prepare the other bull and put it on the wood, but not set fire to it. Then you call on the name of your God, and I will call on the name of the Lord. The God who answers by fire, he is God. Then all the people said, what you say is good. And Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, choose one of the bulls and prepare it first, since there are so many of you. Call on the name of your God, but do not light the fire. So they took the bull given them and prepared it. Then they called on the name of Baal from morning till noon. Oh, Baal, answer us, they shouted, but there was no response. No one answered, and they danced around the altar they had made. At noon, Elijah began to taunt them. Shout louder, he said. Surely he is a God. Perhaps he is deep in thought or busy or traveling. Perhaps he is sleeping and must be awakened. So they shouted louder and slashed themselves with swords and spears, as was their custom, until their blood flowed. Midday passed, and they continued their frantic prophesying until the time for the evening sacrifice. But there was no response. No one answered. No one paid attention. Then Elijah said to all the people, come here to me. They came to him, and he repaired the altar of the Lord, which was in ruins. Elijah took twelve stones, one for each of the tribes descended from Jacob, to whom the word of the Lord had come, saying, your name shall be Israel. With the stones, he built an altar in the name of the Lord, and he dug a trench around it, large enough to hold two seahs of seed. He arranged the wood, cut the bulls into pieces, and laid it on the wood. Then he said to them, fill four large jars with water, and pour it on the offering and on the wood. And then they turned the page over. Do it again, he said, and they did it again. Do it a third time, he ordered, and they did it a third time. The water ran down around the altar and even filled the trench. At the time of the sacrifice, the prophet Elijah stepped forward and prayed, O Lord, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, let it be known today that you are God in Israel, and I am your servant and have done all these things at your command. Answer me, O Lord, answer me, so these people will know that you, O Lord, are God, and that you are turning their hearts back again. Then the fire of the Lord fell and burned up the sacrifice and the wood and the stones and the soil and also licked up the water in the trench. All right. cried, The Lord, He is God. The Lord, He is God. Now what do we learn? By the way, this happened, and one of the reasons we know it happened is thousands of people showed up. Thousands of people saw this happen. And even though this was written down sometime later, the fact is you couldn't write a story like this back anywhere close to the time in which it happened and just make it up. People are going to remember this. It's going to be remembered for years. This happened. The real question is, what does it mean? And the answer is this. We live in a time now like the time of Elijah. For the first time in centuries, we live in a time in which we're surrounded by multiple faiths and multiple gods. We don't live in a time anymore where you had, you know, every country had basically one religion or two religions. Now there's multiple religions in every city and every nation increasingly. And instead of in the past asking the question, do I want to believe in God or not? Now the question is, how do you know which God is the true God? And Elijah lived in a time in which the people had all kinds of gods around them. And he says, let's have a contest. Let's test which the true God is. And so what we learn in this story is something about how do you discern among all the competing spiritual claims, which faith, which God is true and which one is false? And we learn three things here. We learn, the first thing we learn is why there should even be a contest. Secondly, how you know a false God. And thirdly, how you know the true God. Why there should be a contest, how you know this false God, and how do you know the true God? First, why should there even be a contest? See, he says, let's have a contest. Let's see who the right God is, who the right religion is, which is the true faith. Now, you see, he begins the narrative talking to the people in verse 21. The first thing he does when he gets there, he says, how long will you waver between two opinions? If the Lord is God, follow him. If Baal is God, follow him. But the people said nothing. Now, why does Elijah start that way? Here's why. Because the pagan people back then would have said the very same thing that the average New Yorker believes, and probably many of you in this room do too. And that is this. When Elijah says, we're going to see who the true God is, which one is true and which one is false, the average person then and the average person now says, why? Why decide which one is right and which one is wrong? Aren't all the religions basically fundamentally the same? Aren't they all essentially right? Aren't they similarly valid? Why decide one's right and one's wrong? Who wants to do that? You know, the average person back then said, hey, I worship, I sacrifice to Baal on Monday. I sacrifice to the Lord on the Sabbath day. Why can't I do both? Why do I have to choose? But look what Elijah says. Elijah comes after them and he says, how long will you waver between two opinions? Now, literally, he says, why are you sinking between two thoughts? See, the word waiver is better translated. It means literally to go lame and to be falling down. And here's what he's saying. If you're for God of Israel or you're against the God of Israel, in other words, if you're for a religion or you're against a religion, those are two valid places to stand. But if you presume the delusion of neutrality, if you say, oh, I think all religions are basically good and I don't think, you know, what, just because you prefer Christianity over Islam doesn't mean that's the true religion. It's just the one you like. And that's what they said then. That's what they say now. And Elijah says to be for God or against God is okay, basically, compared to saying, I'm not going to have a position. I think they're all basically valid. Why? Isn't that interesting? He says it would be better to be against God than to be, to have the illusion that you really are neutral. But the average person in New York, this is exactly the position they have. What's so bad about it? Well, Elijah basically is saying it's the worst possible place to be standing. It's not a place to stand at all. Why not? Let me just suggest, let me give you some reasons. To say, all religions are basically valid is the one thing Elijah says you mustn't say. It'd be better to be for or against God, but not to say that. It's not a valid position to say we don't need a contest. We don't need to judge what's true and what's false in religion. You just take what you prefer. What's wrong with that position? Why is that the worst one, according to Elijah? Why is it like a swamp? It's a swamp intellectually. I'll give you the idea. It's like a swamp intellectually, psychologically, and culturally. follow me is there's people in this room that are not going forward. They're stuck spiritually because they have this position. The one that Elijah says, get out of it. It's sinking. First of all, it's a swamp intellectually. When you say, look, every religion's got part of the truth. No religion sees the big picture. No religion should say, my view of truth is superior to anybody else's. But when you say, nobody has a superior view to anyone else, that is to assume that you have a superior view to everybody else. To say no one sees the whole picture, all the truth, is to assume that you see the whole truth because you could know that every religion only sees part of the truth unless you assume that you see the whole truth. Now, when I've said that in the past, people say, this is a trick. I don't get it. It's just a trick. It's a verbal trick. No. Let me give you an example. It's typical for people to say, ah, you know, all religions are basically valid. They're all going to the same place. And they use an illustration of the mountain. And what they say is, imagine the different religions are like climbers on a mountain. And one party is going that way. But another party is going that way on the side of the mountain. Another party is going that way. And they all look at each other and they say, I'm on the right path. You're on the wrong path. I am on the path to the top. You are on the path to destruction. And so the problem is they don't see the whole mountain because they don't see that they're all going to the top. And that's the reason. The reason that they think that their truth is the right one, that their religion is right and the others are wrong, is because they don't see they're all going to the top to the same base of God. They're all going to the same basic place. Doesn't that sound very open-minded? The only problem is the only way you could know that every religion doesn't see the whole mountain is if you see the whole mountain. The only way you could possibly know that every religion goes to the same place is if you are the one that you think you're on the top. Which means when you say every religion is basically valid, you are assuming the very kind of ultimate knowledge you insist nobody else can have. And when you tell a person you mustn't say your view of spiritual reality is superior to anybody else's, you're saying to that person that your view of spiritual reality is greater than any other person. You're doing the very thing you forbid. You know, to be a Christian is to say I believe in Christ and everybody falls short of that. To be a Muslim is to say submission to Allah and everybody falls short of that. But to have this position is to be contradictory at your heart. It's an intellectual contradiction. Not only that, it's a psychological contradiction because at least a Christian admits we're dogmatic about certain things and a Muslim admits they're dogmatic about certain things and a Buddhist admits they're dogmatic about certain things. But a person who says all religions are basically alike is very dogmatic, but they don't know it. And that's the only kind of dogmatism that can kill you. You see, a person with this view says all views are relative except mine, but they don't say except mine, but they have to be saying except mine and therefore they're in denial. They're in denial. They're in denial about the fact that they believe their view of truth is superior to all the others. That they have a view of truth that nobody else has got. But worst of all this, culturally, now hear me out. The reason that this view is so prominent today is because of tolerance. They say, well, you know, the only way we're going to tolerate all the religions is if we believe they're all basically okay. That's not true. This view is violent to religions. The view that says that all religions are basically going in the same place, that all religions are okay, we don't have to choose between true and false, is absolutely violent because it refuses to listen to what the religions are saying about themselves. It's worse than any, it's the most intolerant of all views. You say, how could that be? Let me push you. I was on a panel once with a Muslim cleric, an imam, a Muslim clergy. And I was a Protestant minister and he was there and we were answering questions about our respective faiths. And at one point, a young man put his hand up and said, well, you know, I think both of your religions are basically the same. Oh, we said, how's that? Well, I think basically at the heart, both of your religions is love God and love your neighbor. Now, we looked at him and we took five minutes and we said, now, wait a minute. The essence of Islam, we both said this, the essence of Islam is that there is no visible representation of God on earth. God is absolutely invisible. There can be no images of God. And the essence of Christianity is that Jesus Christ is the visible image and representation of God. God is definitely 붙 eta. He says, God is actually given by signs of love, but we absolutely do it. Oh, we do it. Oh, God is absolutely that and I want to know and let's just say it. Hey. no images of God. And the essence of Christianity is that Jesus Christ is the visible image and representation of God. And therefore, one of us is seriously distorted in our understanding and presentation of who God is. And we might both be wrong, but we couldn't both be right. And he says, no, no, no, no, I don't agree. I said, you know, the essence of Christianity, the essence of Islam is just you love God and you love other people. And we looked at him, we looked at each other. Here's the irony. I heard what he was saying. I let him be himself. He heard what I was saying and he respected it. He understood it. This guy, in order to say all religions are basically alike, could refuse to let us say who we were, refuse to listen to it. In other words, he says, I accept all religions as long as every religion pulls the heart and gut out of their original vision. It's emotionally violent. We were looking at each other. We couldn't believe it. In the name of tolerance, it was the most intolerant possible way. Because you see, it's one thing to say, I hear you, but I don't believe you. It's another thing to refuse to admit you've said what was just said. What is Elijah saying? There are only two positions. There is no neutrality. Nobody. Everybody has a view of truth that says, mine is the ultimate. So we're going to have to decide whose claims are true and who claims are false. Don't you dare say they're all okay. They're just like different flavors of ice cream. And there's people in this room that are not going to be able to move on because they are stuck between those two places. They think that there is a third place, but there isn't. They're sinking intellectually, emotionally, and culturally. Now, second thing we learn. I told you, Elijah is going to be a guide. The first thing he says, there's no neutrality in spiritual issues. The second thing we're told is, how do you know if you're worshiping a false god? Now, right away, a lot of you are going to say, okay, in other words, you're going to start knocking other religions. Not exactly. Let me surprise you. Look at the next part of the narrative. The second part of the narrative talks about Baal worship. And here's what happens. When the prophets of Baal begin their religious activities, what do they do? It says, they called on the name, verse 26, of Baal from morning to noon. Oh, Baal, answer us, they shouted. But there was no response. No one answered. They danced. Then Elijah says, what's the matter? Why aren't you getting an answer? So they shouted louder, and they slashed themselves with swords and spears, as was their custom, until the blood flowed. Now, pretty interesting. Let me say something. Let me give you two surprises. First of all, there is no alternative. Remember, there's no intellectual neutrality. He says, you know, there's no intellectual neutrality. There's nothing in the middle. Well, here we're learning there's no spiritual neutrality. If God isn't your master, if the true God isn't your master, something else is your spiritual master. The word Baal is a generic word. When you, I mean, for many years, and I'm sure some of you are in this boat, for many years, when I read the Bible, I thought of Baal as a god, like Zeus, or like, you know, Hera or Athena, right? Didn't you? But the word Baal is a generic name for any god. It's a word that really means spiritual lord. This was a rain Baal. But there was a beauty Baal, and there was a military Baal, and there was a party Baal, and there was a party god, and there was a military god, and there was an educational god, and there was a wisdom god, and there was a scholarship god. I mean, every created thing was a god. There was a Baal. They worshipped everything, and you say, yes, that's those primitive people. Primitive? Let me tell you something. The pagans knew something that you and I don't. They admit things that we don't. They're ahead of us in some ways. They knew that everybody worships something, that everybody is under the spiritual power of something, that everything is a Baal. Now, let me give you a quick example. On the subways, you're just barraged with pictures, images of beautiful, thin women. You just barrage. You're hit with it over and over and over again. Now, the pagans understood. What are those pictures? They're not there just to give you information. There's a spiritual authority about them. There's a spiritual power about them, and they can pass into your soul and begin to exercise that power. When you take any created thing and you make it the thing that really makes you happy, the thing that really makes you significant, the thing that really makes you acceptable, it becomes a Baal, and you get into Baal worship. And we're so modern and we're so secular that we don't believe it. The pagans at least understood that. That's why they had a temple for virtually everything. For example, look at those images. If you're a young girl and they pass into your soul and they... at the worst, you can get into eating disorders. Because, you see, the image is saying, to look like this, that's power. That's worth. Then you're somebody, right? Okay, eating disorders is relatively rare, but I'll tell you what it does. If it passes into your soul, you're going to give men too much power in your life. Because you're going to need to have a man tell you that you're desirable. But wait a minute, it's not just for women. If the picture passes into the soul of a man, a young man, what happens? You say, that's the kind of woman I want. And there's very few like that. And therefore, you really find real women, un-airbrushed women. And that's the vast majority of people that I know. And you just, you know, they don't attract you. And you get hooked on pornography. You've got to have those kinds of women. You can't handle a real one. They're always too tall or too short or too fat or too something. And what happens to us who are aging? Us who are aging. Do those things pass into our souls so they begin to exercise some kind of spiritual authority? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. You know, I mean, it's a terrible thing when you get up and you walk out of the subway and you go by, you know, image of beauty. Beauty, beauty, beauty. And then suddenly you get to one of the windows, you know, where it's dark and you see yourself and you go, oh, my gosh. Why? Why does that bother me? Why does it bother you if you're getting to look like me? What happens? You know, in other cultures, I'll tell you why. In other cultures, you know, you get grayer, you get older. And in those cultures, wisdom and sagacity and aged people are kind of revered and so on. But in this culture, in those cultures also don't have posters. The Greeks, the Romans, the pagans, they knew something that you and I won't admit. This is Aphrodite, they called it. They had temples for it. They worshiped and bowed down to it. They knew it was a spiritual power. They knew it was exercising spiritual power in their life. And I want you to know that if you're religious, if you're not religious and you say, well, I see, I'm neutral. I really don't know which religion is for me. Oh, no, this is telling you everything can be a bale. Everything is a bale. And whether it's career, whether it's family, or whether it's having children, or maybe it's a particular person, or whether it's, you know, whether it is physical, whatever it is, something in your life, there's no spiritual neutrality. Something, you're into bale worship. But I want you to know it's not just that non-religious people are shocked when they're told they're into bale worship. They didn't know they were religious, but they are. But here's something else. Religious people are shocked. People who've gone to church all their lives are shocked when they use what we're learning here and find out that they're into bale worship too. Because the mark of bale worship is role reversal. The mark of bale worship is you get into a works-righteous religion in which you and God change places. Look at this religion. You laugh at it. You're going to laugh at it? First of all, they dance. Well, you say, that's primitive. No, what is that? They're not just dancing. Have you ever seen, some of you are dancers, do you know how hard it is to dance? You know what this is saying? They go before their God to perform. When they go before their God, they don't go as a friend. They don't go assured of a relationship. They go to perform. They have to perform. They've got to do their dance steps. You can't go in without your makeup on. You've got to impress this God. You've got to do everything just right so that He has to answer your prayer. And you know, let me give you an example of this. I read this. There's a guy who lost his faith virtually because he prayed a very important prayer and he wasn't answered. And he said, man, oh man, this just doesn't work. He said this. He says, I followed every biblical principle for praying. He says, I believed. I prayed in faith. I confessed all known sin. I claimed all the promises. I rebuked the devil. I pleaded the blood. I thanked God ahead of time for the answer, and I fasted. I followed the rules, and God didn't come through. I danced. And not in celebration like David. I danced to be acceptable. I did everything just right. What's the matter? Or I know somebody else once said to me, I followed every biblical principle for child rearing, and my children didn't turn out right. I was wondering. I was wondering. Because in bail worship, you switch roles. You're the one who's wise because you know what you need. And you're the one who's good because you've done everything right. And he's the one who might be on a journey. He's the one who might be distracted. He's the one who might be asleep. He's the one who you've got to kind of wheedle and control and put pressure on. He's the one that needs information. And you do everything for him. Works, righteousness, performance in order to get what you absolutely deserve. That's bail worship. See, what we're told here, the mark of bail worship, is that you are under the spiritual authority of something. And yet, you try to be in the driver's seat. You try to do a number on it. But it, in the end, does a number on you. Because you know what? The real way you know something is an idol in your life is that when you find you can't get what you need, you start to slash yourself. See, first they dance. But when nothing happens, then they cut themselves. Here's two people that try to get into law school. One, neither of them do. They're both going to be grieved. They're both going to be really hurt. But what if one seems to recover and the other one just can't get over it? Can't get over it. Hate themselves. Can't get over it. Why? Because it was a bail. Well, if you start to slash yourself when you can't, when it won't answer, if you start to slash yourself when you can't get it, it's a spiritual authority in your life. It's not just a good thing. It's become a spiritual authority. Now, this is the second point. The first point is there's no intellectual neutrality. That's the first thing you've got to know. But the second thing is there's no spiritual neutrality. We all have got bales in our life. We're trying to do a number on it, but it ends up doing a number on us. Because if we fail it, we're always trying to perform for it, if we fail it, we get extremely angry, but we hate ourselves. We slash ourselves. And so if you want to make any progress in spiritual life, the first thing you've got to get over is the New York fiction, that there's no such thing as true and false religion. The second thing you've got to get over is the fiction that you're not into bail worship. If you were raised in a good Bible-believing church in the South, or if you have never darkened the door of a church, you're into bail worship of some kind. And you're never going to find the true God until, first of all, you recognize your false gods. Thirdly, lastly, third thing we learn is, the question was, why a contest? Because there's no neutrality. The second question is, how do you know there's a false god in your life? Look for the role reversals between the divine and the human. Look for the slashing. Look for the dancing. Then thirdly, how do you find the true God? And the answer is, only by fire. What do I mean, only by fire? Well, look, in two ways. First of all, it's not enough, usually, to intellectually, I mean, find God. It never works that way. God has to send a thunderbolt down into your life. Now, what do I mean by that? Well, do you know what this contest is? What is this contest? This fire contest. Do you know what it is? It's a lightning contest. You see, God had made a drought to show that he was Lord of the heaven, not Baal. He's the one who's the Lord of the storm. He's the one that sends the thunderclouds and who doesn't. And now he's ready. They've had three years without water. He's ready to give them water. But you know, here's what God knows. This is what's so fascinating about this whole event. If God just sends them water, they'll drown spiritually. Because you see, there's nothing more dangerous than a happy life. If he just gives them water, they're going to say, either Baal did that or else they're going to say, well, I'm fine the way I am. Hey, it works. I'm okay. Have you ever noticed that? When you're successful, it just confirms you in your idols. When you're successful, you just always take credit for it. You say, I'm a pretty good person. You never find God when it just showers of blessing coming down. What God has to do is he's got to send down a thunderbolt so close that it singes the hair off of your eyebrows. Or he's got to knock you straight on your back. He's got to intervene somehow. Something has to happen to get your attention. And you never find the real God unless, first of all, a fire comes down in your life, a thunderbolt someplace, something to wake you up, something to scare you, something to shock you, something to hurt you. Now listen, God doesn't like the brokenness of the world, but sometimes he uses it to save you from absolute spiritual blindness. So the first thing, if you're going to find God, you have to do it through fire in your life. And secondly, if you want to find God in here, you've got to see where the fire came down. Why didn't the fire come down on them? Why didn't the fire come down on the people? It came down on the sacrifice. In Luke chapter 9, Jesus makes a reference, or the disciples and Jesus actually talk about this very event. In Luke chapter 9, verse 51, Jesus and the disciples are trying to go into a town, and the town people won't let him in. They reject Jesus, and the disciples are furious, and they say, shall we call down fire to burn them up like Elijah? So they're thinking of 1 Kings 18, fire, fire of judgment, fire of God's justice, fire on sin. Jesus rebukes them. He rebukes them. See, they don't even understand the Elijah story. And just a few verses later, in Luke chapter 12, almost for sure in connection with this, they don't understand the fire. Jesus says this. He says, I have come to bring fire, and oh, that it were kindled. For I saw, I have a baptism to undergo, and how constrained is my soul till it's completed. Jesus says, I have come to be baptized with fire. I have come to receive the fire. Here's what he's saying to his disciples. He was saying, you don't understand that story very well. I'm not Elijah calling fire down in judgment. I'm the sacrifice that received the fire of judgment. That's where I am in that story. See, Jesus is saying, look, the only reason those people were not consumed by the fire of judgment was because of the sacrifice. But actually, it's just a symbol. Jesus Christ went up Mount Calvary, and he took into his heart the sacrifice. He took into his heart the fire of justice so that you could have in your life the fire of God's power and love. Now, you know what? Let me put it to you one other way before we go to the table. Every other God says, slash yourself for me. If the main thing in your life is your art, don't get out of art. But realize, when art is your God, it'll just say, dance for me. Slash yourself for me. You know, into the ground. Success. Into the ground. It'll take you all the way into the ground. But there's one God and only one God who doesn't say, slash yourself for me. There's one God and only one Lord. Only one Lord who was slashed for you. For you. His blood ran. Every other God will make your blood run. See that? Verse 28. There's only one God that his blood ran. There's no other religion that even suggests that there's a God whose blood ran. Okay? But here's the only way you're going to overcome the power of idols in your life. You've got to see that Jesus gives you freely what every other God says it'll only give you through performance and through your blood. Jesus gives you through his blood what every other God demands through yours. Jesus says, you're already beautiful to me. That's why I did this for you. You have to see the fire coming down on the sacrifice. You've got to see what he has done for you. You can't just say, I'm not going to let these things have too much control over me. That's stoicism. It'll never work. You've got to see something. You've got to see a place where you can get the assurance of your beauty so that the God of beauty doesn't bother you anymore. Where you can get the assurance of your success so that the God of success doesn't bother you anymore. You've got to see it by fire. You only know God through fire. Here's what we're going to do with the Lord's Supper. Bread, juice. Food knits our heart together. It knits our bodies together, doesn't it? But only because it's been crushed. Isn't that interesting? You have to crush the grapes. You have to break the bread. If it stays whole, you and I starve. And we go to pieces. If we are to be made whole, it has to go to pieces. It's one or the other. Jesus Christ says, I took the fire of justice so you can have the fire of love. This summer I read a lot of the Catholic mystics, Teresa of Avalos, John of the Cross. And one thing they, and I know something of this, thank God. They said, you know, the thing about when you really experience God's love, it feels like a fire in your heart. It feels like a fire in your chest. When you really sense how much he loves you. But you know, you only get the fire of God's love. Because Jesus took the fire of the wrath of God. The justice of God. He took the punishment for us. That's what we're going to do right now. We're going to confess our sins. We're going to say, Lord, help me get rid of the Baal. Baalism. The Baalistic. The Baalistic. sins, and then after we've confessed our sins, we're going to go and say, Lord, bring the fire of your love into my life, because you brought the fire of justice into your son's life.
