TITLE: First Lost Son (and the Kiss of God)
SCRIPTURE: Luke 15:11-24
TOPICS: Repentance
SERIES: The Prodigal Son and the Elder Brother
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/first-lost-son-and-the-kiss-of-god/

============================================================

to the passage on which our teaching's based this morning. It's there in your bulletin. I'm going to read a little past the part we have printed, even though our concern this morning is going to be on the first part of the parable of the prodigal son. So it's Luke chapter 15, and we'll start with verse 11, and I'll read through, actually I'll read through the end of the chapter. Jesus continued, There was a man who had two sons. The younger one said to his father, Father, give me my share of the estate. So he divided his property between them. Not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a distant country, and there squandered his wealth and wild living. After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in the whole country, and he began to be in need. So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him to his field to feed pigs. He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything. When he came to his senses, he said, How many of my father's hired men have food to spare, and here I am starving to death. Well, I will set out and go back to my father and say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired men. So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion for him. He ran to his son, threw his arms around him, and kissed him. The son said to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. But the father said to his servants, Quick, bring the best robe and put it on him. Put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet. Bring a fattened calf and kill it. Let's have a feast and celebrate, for this son of mine was dead and is alive again. He was lost and is found. So they began to celebrate. Meanwhile, the older son was in the field. When he came near the house, he heard music and dancing. So he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on. Your brother has come, he replied. And your father killed the fattened calf because he has him back safe and sound. And the older brother was angry and refused to go in. So his father came out and pleaded with him. But he answered his father, Look, all these years I've been slaving for you never disobeyed your orders. Yet you never gave me even a young goat so I could celebrate with my friends. But when this son of yours, who has squandered your property with prostitutes, comes home, you kill the fattened calf for him. My son, the father said, You are always with me and everything I have is yours. But we had to celebrate and be glad because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again. He was lost and is found. This is God's word. We're spending three weeks on this tremendous chapter, Luke 15. And today and next week, we look at the parable that's been called the parable of the prodigal son. This is very, very famous. However, the story is so sentimentalized usually. And what we're trying to do is get a sense of how amazed the hearers would have been. This would have been an absolutely astonishing and an amazing thing to hear. The purpose of this parable in particular, the parable of the prodigal son, was to blow out the existing paradigms, the existing categories that human beings had for their understanding of their relationship with God. You see, some people have what you might call a moralistic grid, a moralistic view of life. And the moralistic view of life says the problem with the world is not me, it's them, those immoral types. And these kinds of people usually stay home, they stay near where they were raised, and they live very good lives. Then you have another kind of person. And the other kind of worldview is what we could call not a moralistic grid of view of life, but let's call it the relativistic grid or view of life. And the relativistic people are the ones who say the problem with the world isn't me, it's them, those condemning types. You see, the moralistic say the problem is those immoral types, and the relativistic types is those condemning types. I need to get away from them. I need to go out and find myself. Now generally, the relativistic types, not the elder brother types, the moralistic, but the relativistic, the younger brother types, they tend to move. They tend to go away. They tend to go to New York City. two brothers, we see that he is coming at us and he's saying, neither, neither of these paradigms, neither of these grids. Now, these are the only grids anybody ever knows about. Whenever you read an article about the religious scene today, these two are always pitted against each other. And everybody always says, who's going to win? What's going to happen? But instead, Jesus says, and this is what is so astounding, and this is where it blows out the paradigms. Jesus Christ says, look at these two brothers. Look carefully. They are both lost. They are both alienated from the father's heart. Do you see? In both cases, they will not come in, and the father has to come out to bring them in. Jesus Christ lays bare the flaws of both of these paradigms. Now, and the most, the most startling way I can put it is this. The father has two sons, a Jekyll and a Hyde. And in the end, the Hyde, the Edward Hyde comes in, and the Dr. Jekyll stays out. And what this is telling us is that both a moralistic and a relativistic, both a moral person and an immoral person are equally alienated from the father. And if anything, and this is something we will not get to until next week. I'm just warning you to try to get you back. If anything, this story is telling us, if anything, it's the moralistic, it's the good person who's more alienated, less, more impervious, less able to understand Jesus' new gospel paradigm than the immoral. Now, what's so absolutely complete about this incredible story is it not only blows out and says there's another way. The gospel is a whole different way. It's not something any human being ever came up with. You're not going to read about it. You have to get it from Jesus. You're not going to make it up yourself. You're going to have to get it from Jesus. Not only that, but it's so wonderful because basically, everybody is either a Pharisee or a prodigal, except those of us who are kind of both. So there's a Pharisee kind of person who's alienated from God, and there's a prodigal kind of person who's alienated from God. But then in almost every person, when we look in our own hearts, we see of both a Pharisee and a prodigal. Now, this week, what we want to do is we want to see Jesus' paradigm as, in particular, it's applied to prodigals. And I think when we do that, next week, we'll get to the Pharisee. Next week, we'll get to the elder brother. But this week, to the prodigal. And when we do that, I think here's what we see. Jesus is telling us here something that, boy, everybody wants to know nowadays. He's talking to us about experience of God, the kiss of the father. How do you get that? See, it's one thing to know your father loves you. It's another thing to have him kiss you. What is a kiss? What's the difference? Well, when you're kissed, you're experiencing the love. How do you experience God? How do you have an experience of the father? How do you get the father's kiss? Verse 20. And this text tells us there's three things. Three things that absolutely have to happen if you're going to have not just a general religion, but an experience of God. These three things. I'm not going to, you know, I usually tell you the headings ahead of time. I'm not. I'm going to keep you guessing. First of all, first thing you've got to do, first thing you have to have is you have to come to your senses. You have to come to your senses. That's what it says here in verse 17. When he came to his senses, he said, now, first of all, something general. What is that? That is repentance. In 2 Timothy, I'm not sure, but I suppose when Paul wrote this, he could have easily had this story in mind. 2 Timothy, Paul writes, those who oppose you gently instruct in the hope that God will grant them repentance and that they will come to their senses and escape the trap. See, repentance, coming to your senses, that's what we're talking about. And right away, we learned something. Before I try to break it down, right away, we learned something very important. If you want experience with God, at the very heart of it is repentance. In the moralistic grid and in the relativistic grid, you don't see that. The mark of Jesus' grid is the centrality of repentance. See, in the moralistic grid, repentance is abnormal. In the relativistic grid, repentance is unnecessary. In the moralistic grid, repentance is abnormal. It only happens when you screw up. But you see, the moralistic grid has no to be in the right way. You're in the middle of the right direction. In the right direction, you can think it's necessary. In the moralistic grid, repentance is abnormal. It only happens when you screw up. But you see, the moralistic grid has no kiss. They have good feelings. There are good feelings in the moralistic grid, but the moralistic grid are the Pharisees. These are the people who come and say, I'm okay, you're not okay, you're immoral, I'm moral, and the reason I know God likes me and loves me and will answer my prayers is because I'm a good person. Now, there's a certain good feeling about that. It's a feeling of superiority, but it's not the kiss. In a sense, the love of God in the moralistic paradigm, you talk about the love of God to a person in that paradigm, and what do they say? Of course he loves me. I'm very good. Of course. There's no kiss. There's no explosion. There's no transformation because repentance is peripheral. It's abnormal. What they mistake for experience of God is that sense of superiority. If you go over to the relativistic grid, in the relativistic grid, repentance is unnecessary. Why? Because the relativistic grid says God embraces everybody just as we are. He loves us all just as we are. Only the condemners is he unhappy with. He just loves us as we are. Now, there's a certain good feeling that goes along with that. To be told, you know, just the way you are, you're just fine. God embraces everybody. God loves everybody. God's that way. But when you talk to a person in the relativistic grid about the love of God, it's just a sentiment. It's just an idea. It's a kind of good feeling. But again, if you say God loves you, what a person in the relativistic grid says, of course. Of course. There's no kiss. There's no transformation. It's not galvanizing. It doesn't change you. The difference between Christ's paradigm and the other two is the centrality of repentance. And even the way he describes it, look at this, comes to your senses. That's not what happens in the other two. I mean, there's a repentance that most of us think of when we think about the word repentance. But generally what we mean is, I'm sorry. You know, but look, the guy does not say, oh, I should never have spent all that money on prostitutes. Prostitutes, oh my word, I knew it was wrong, but now I'm so sorry. That's not, that's not coming to your senses. Coming to your senses mean you feel like you were, you're becoming sane. It's like looking at the whole world. In other words, looking at the whole world differently, coming to your senses means repentance is entering the new paradigm. Repentance is coming to look at everything differently. The language of repentance is, how could I have been so blind? How could I have been so ungrateful? How could I have missed the obvious? That's repentance, always. It's to see everything differently. But let's break it down here for a second. What does it mean to come to your senses? He saw two things. Two things he realized, all right? Now, the first thing he realized is the nature of sin, that it is essentially running from God in order to control his life. Now, we touched on this last week, but let's open it up. He begins to understand what sin is. It's not so much a violation of a rule. It's running from God in order to get control of your life. That's the reason why he says, I will go back to my father. That's the reason why he says, when I repent, I will say, father, I have sins against heaven. In your sight. Bear with me for a second. There is no emphasis on the rules. Why not? Sin is, underneath everything else, a desire, not so much to break the rules, to use the rules, either breaking them or keeping them, or keeping some and breaking some. You're using the rules. Either by breaking or keeping them, there's really, really no difference. But sin is to do whatever it takes to be able to say, God, I'm in charge of my life. I'm my own judge and my own master. You cannot tell me how to live my life. If you go back, take a look at the younger brother. Now, it's taken me a few years to figure out just how the early hearers, the people who listened to Jesus' parable felt when they heard this. In verse 12, it says, a man had two sons, verse 11, and the younger son says, give me my share of the inheritance. And I now think, it's pretty clear that there's a consensus of commentators that when the younger son did that, the younger son said, there's two of us. When you die, I will get my part. He will get his part. Probably the older brother's got a little more than half of the estate. The younger brother, they're a little less than half. But the point is, he comes and he says, I want my part of the estate now. I would like you to liquidate the percentage of the estate that belongs to me. I want it now. Now, here's what's so interesting. Of all the things Jesus Christ could have possibly done, all the stories he could have possibly come up with in order to show us the essence of sin, didn't come up with a murderer or a rapist or a thief. He came up with somebody who says, Father, Father, going on is the hearers on the one hand would have known that what he was asking for was technically okay there was nothing actually illegal about it it was his it literally was his 40 or whatever 40 of all the father's assets were his it wasn't illegal he wasn't breaking a rule he wasn't violating a law however we know that it was unbelievable that he would ask that it was out outrageous he would ask that you know why it was not a violation of a law it was a relational enormity what he was saying to the father is i wish you were dead i can't wait for you to be dead i want to live as if you're dead give me my part in other words he's saying i want your things father but i don't want my father i want my i want your things i don't want your my father he had his things he had access to his money he could have gone out and bought the things he wanted to do what changed when he asked for his inheritance not access to the money independence he didn't have the father to tell him what to do now the reason that this is so critical unless you understand that the essence of sin is it's not breaking a law it's breaking a law or keeping a law in order to say i got control now you say what do you mean keeping a law well what's so fascinating is now listen to what one commentator says at the end we have the elder brother who comes and sees what the father is doing with the property he's giving some to the son the younger son he's bringing it back in and he will not come in and one a commentator says it's astounding here's what this is what essentially is going on he says when the elder brother will not come in what is that doing what is he doing there and he says well what the elder brother is doing here's a quote from one british scholar the elder brother also is shaming the father by quarreling with him in public and in his turn he is also saying that he wished the father was dead so he could use the property as he wished now here's the point the elder brother says to the father i have obeyed you and because i've obeyed you i want to control the property my way and this younger brother see younger brother was trying to get get control by leaving and disobeying and the elder brother was trying to get control by staying and obeying and they're both lost and they're both alienated from the father and they're both trying to say they're both saying i would like your things but i don't want you and that's the essence of what sin is the essence of sin is saying i want to be my own master i want to be my own judge i want to be my own savior i wish he was dead now you begin to see now this is next week's sermon but you begin to see why the elder brother in the end is more alien from alienated from god than the younger brother why because the the elder brother doesn't couldn't possibly see that the elder brother couldn't possibly believe that if you came and said you're trying to get complete control he says what do you mean i slave for that man i'm obeying that man the bible says i don't care if you are the most religious and the most obedient the most moral person in the world i want to know why are you doing it your entire personality look he is condemning of other people he is self-righteous of other people he's angry at life he's angry at the way his life is going look at the elder brother he's miserable why not because he's obeying god's law everything's fine you should obey god's law why why it's all in the motive this lays bare the radically profound analysis of what sin is this blows out the moralistic paradigm completely it says the elder brother's trying to get control but it blows out the relativistic too in fact listen is there anybody here who says look i'm not an immoral person i'm a pretty good person oh i'm not i don't pray i don't know if there's a god what you've done is you've taken the things of god and you're just living without reference to him what are you doing you're saying i you're living as if he was dead you were living as if you hoped he was dead if he is there it's the same thing so the essence of sin he comes to his senses when he realizes basically what what david says in psalm 51 against thee and thee only have i sinned first of all he comes to his senses when he sees that sin is basically a relational thing it's it's your relationship with god it's what you're trying to do it's laid bare not by looking at how many you but why you're doing anything at all. And it's much more laid bare, well, by your attitude. When God asks you to do things you don't want to do, or brings into your life things you don't want to have. When God asks you to do things you don't want to do, or brings things into your life you don't want to have, then look at your heart. Then look at what happens. Then look at your attitude. Do you go ballistic? It's because, just like the elder brother, I have a right to a life that's run this way because I'm good. You see? So first of all, coming to your senses means seeing that you're running from God trying to control your life. But secondly, and more briefly, but very important, the second thing is he doesn't just see the things he's doing wrong as violations. He also sees that sin is seeking a home where there is no home. He says, guess what? What does he say? He says, in my father's house there's bread to spare and I'm starving here. Now, this is fairly simple, but it's very, very, very profound. What is home? Home is not a place. See, that's the reason why both the elder brother and the younger brother are away from home. That's the reason the elder brother doesn't know it, because he's in the place. But he's away from home. Why? What is home? Home is a relationship. You know, one psychiatrist, I read this years ago, one psychiatrist said, said, children who don't experience a home live all their lives with a fundamental inability of attachment. What I mean by home is a place where I belong and where I'm accepted. This young man said, if I go out and do these great things, then I'll know I'm accepted. He went out and he had sex. He went out and did many, many other things we're not sure about. The only one we know about is the elder brother. Prostitutes. We don't know what else happened out there. You know, the elder brother is a tattletale. He tells us a little bit about that. There's all sorts of other things. But the point is, he says, you know, I realized I was trying to go home. I left home to find home. I was trying to find a place where I really felt accepted, where I really belonged. And now I realize that the only home is back with the father. And so, you see, you're not repenting. You're not repenting if all you recognize is what I'm doing is wrong. See, he, it says here, when he went off, he squandered his money in riotous living or wild living. You see that little verse? Wild living? And we look at that and we laugh. It seems very quaint. But the word wild means out of control. Do you know why he's out of control? Here's the great irony. Whenever you try to get control of your life by going away from God, you end up giving control of your life to other things. You see, he, in other words, you know, put it another way. Henry Nowen wrote a really interesting book some years ago on the parable of the prodigal son. And he makes a very, very, he does a wonderful job of explaining what is actually happening to the prodigal son. Where he's going and where he's trying to run from. And he says, this is page five, so this, yes. He says this. He says, home is the center of my being where I can hear the voice that says, you are my beloved in whom I'm well pleased. Jesus made it clear that the same voice that he heard in the Jordan River and on Mount Tabor can be heard by me. He makes it clear that there's a home with the father. But if I decide to keep control, if I go out into the world, I will keep running around asking everything, do you really love me? Do you really love me? I give all the power to the voices of the world. It's the world that defines me then. The world's love is full of ifs. Yes, I love you if you're good looking, if you're intelligent, if you're well off, if you're educated, if you have connections, if you're productive. Endless ifs. And it is not too hard to know when I have left home spiritually. Resentment, jealousy, desire for revenge, lust, greed, ambition, rivalry are all obvious signs that I have left home. That I'm letting the world define me with its love full of ifs. But when I'm home with the father, when I know I'm the beloved, I can confront and console and admonish and encourage without any fear of rejection or need for affirmation. I can suffer persecution without desire for revenge or receive praise without using it as proof of my goodness. You see, if you try. get control of your life, you will give total control of your life to something else. That's why he was out of control. That's why he was wild. And that's why he said, I'm starving. There's bread at home. How in the world did I miss that? Coming to your senses is not just feeling sorry for this or that violation. Coming to your senses is to see that I've been running from the Father and trying to make other things home, and that's the reason why they've got me. See, Henry Nouwen says, anger, worry, resentment. Like, worry. How could he say that? How could he say anxiety means you've left home spiritually? Anxiety means you're a prodigal. Anxiety means you've tried to find bread somewhere else. How can he say that? Well, it's very simple. Why are you just eating up with anxiety? Because there's something out there. You say, if I have that. See, if I'm intelligent, but I may get bad grades. If I'm good looking, but I'm putting on weight. If I have a really sharp looking spouse, but I don't know he or she's going to want to marry me. If I have these. That's the world's love. I've left home. And as a result, those things that you have gone to instead of God, because you want to have control of your life, you've ceded control to them. And worry is the way it controls you. Or bitterness is the way these things control you. Repentance is not just to look at the violations, but to look underneath. To see why I'm doing what I'm doing. And it's not until he comes to his senses that he's on his way back to his father. That's the first thing you need. The second thing you need. The first thing you need to experience the father's kiss is you have to have, you have to come to your senses. The second thing you need to experience, God, is you need what? You need a love that's prior to repentance. Now, if you look carefully, you'll see what happens. As the young man's coming home, we see verse 20. And in verse 20, we read these absolutely remarkable words. It says, Now, what do we see here? Here's what we see. Look carefully. Look very carefully. Many people say this is a very different picture than the sheep and the coin. Because you see, in the parable of the lost sheep, the sheep is out there wandering away. And the shepherd takes the initiative and comes. And in the lost coin, of course, the coin is down there somewhere. And the woman takes the initiative and comes. But it looks like in this parable, which come right after those other two parables, it looks like it's saying that, no, no, no, we don't, it's not God that comes after us. We have to seek him. That's not true. First of all, the commentators say that almost any other Middle Eastern father, and certainly the hearers of this parable would have listened to this story about the younger son saying, Give me my inheritance. I wish you were dead. And any other father they knew would have done this, would have hit him, beaten him, and thrown him out without a sin. He probably would have died. He probably would have been absolutely penniless. Or he would have said, If I got my money, if I got those things, if I could sleep with whoever I wanted to, there'd be no repentance in that man's life. But this father's different. This father, by not beating him, but by responding to him gently, and by saying, Okay, here it is. Because of his mercy, because of his love, because of his gentleness, he bought this young man time. This young man would not be coming to his senses unless the father had already loved him. But now look carefully. When's the kiss? Before the speech? Or after the speech? It's before the speech. Here's a father. Now this is totally undignified. You know, venerable people would stand there on the porch and wait to hear the speech. Not this one. He rushes off the porch. He's not tapping his foot. He's not saying, This better be good. An old man, he runs down the path, he cuts across the field, he sees a gap, let's say, in the hedge, and he jumps on him. And what does he do? He's hugging him, he's kissing him, and he hasn't said a word. He hasn't said a word. As a matter of fact, surely you can imagine this young man is just scared to death on the way back. What am I going to say? How am I going to say it? It's a little easier to say something. already kissed you, already slobbered all over you, and stands back about six inches with the biggest smile you've ever seen. Then you don't mind asking for something. Listen, the love of God was not caused by the repentance. The repentance was caused by the love of God. The welcome of the father did not start at that moment. It started way back when he first came and said, give me my inheritance. And now, don't you see, the father jumps on him, not because he's beautiful, he's ugly. Have you ever seen somebody come back from a famine? But you see, the father doesn't say, oh my gosh, look how ugly he is. Oh my gosh, I better do something nice. I better be kind to him. After all, he's my son. No. His love completely overwhelms the ugliness of the son. See, beauty kisses the beast. And here he comes, and he throws himself on his son. And he says, I love you. In fact, the other thing you see is that he never finishes his speech. He lets him do the speech. That's great. It's got to be there. But notice, he says, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I'm no longer worthy to be called your son. And he doesn't let him get to the hired self. He says, just make me a hired hand. You don't understand, says the father. You are not coming in as a hired hand. You are my son. Bring a robe. Bring a ring. Kill the fatted calf. And they began to celebrate. Now, don't you see? You've got to have not just a repentant heart, but you've got to have a father like this. Why? Because his repentance wasn't right. His repentance was probably, you know, when he says, I only come in as a hired hand, you see that? We'll talk about this next week again. But he was starting to say, maybe I ought to do it like my older brother's done it. Listen, whenever you start to come back, God, you've been away from him for a long time. Almost immediately, the first thing you do is exactly what this young man did. You don't really believe he's the God of grace. You don't really believe the gospel yet. You say, I'm going to clean myself up. I'm really going to get myself ready. If I work as a hired hand, then maybe then God, my father, will do things for me and give me these sorts of things. We always do that to start with. I will be mighty good now. I will clean up. His repentance is absolutely impure. It's filled with ambiguities. It's cockeyed. It doesn't matter. God's love for you is not a response to your performance. It's not a response. It's not a function of your perfection. It's a response, a function of his perfection. It's not a function of your loveliness. It's a function of his loveliness. If you've got to put your makeup on before facing him, you're not really sure he loves you. And you can anyway. So the second thing you've got to have if you're going to experience the kiss of the father is you have to have a God like this. And there are no gods like this. There's not a single religion anywhere in the world that even claims to have a God like this. You must realize that. The moralistic grid doesn't have a God like this. The relativistic grid doesn't really have a God like this. Oh no. Because you see, the relativistic grid doesn't have a God whose love pounces. And that brings us to our third point. One of the things I said which is so important for us to understand this text is to realize how it hit the original hearers. And we said already the original hearers were astounded when it showed both the sons alienated from the father. And we also saw that they are astounded that the father is this loving. They just don't know a father like this. But here's the thing that's most astounding to the hearers and that is when they listen to this thing go along especially when they get to verse 24 especially when they get to verse 24 the hearers are about to say aha, aha, I knew it. He's soft on sin. You know why? There is no cost. The Jewish hearers would have said alright, maybe God is that loving. Maybe he's that accepting. Maybe, maybe. But if that father really believed in the God we know the God of holiness the God of justice he would have taken that son they would have gone to the temple and they would have had a sin offering. There has to be a cost. Somebody's got to pay. It has to be there. And you see the moralists who are listening to Jesus you know what they're doing? At this point when they get to verse 24 they say aha, I knew it. A relativist. I knew it. That's the reason why all these sinners like to flock around Jesus. That's what he's telling them. He's saying everything's fine. You can just come it doesn't matter. No cost. No payment. See the moralists are saying when sinners come to our places of worship we make them grovel. We make them feel bad like they should. We make them pay. We don't say oh God loves you right now. He said maybe if you work hard we make them feel bad. no cost. There's no cost. Oh, yes, there is. There is no more perfect and no more wonderful story that gives us the whole meaning of the gospel than this. There certainly is a cost. You don't just need to come to your senses if you want to experience the kiss of the father. And you don't just need a father who is this welcoming and loving. You also need an elder brother who will foot your bill. Now, here's what I want you to see. Look carefully. When the father brings the son in, is it really free? Because that's what the relativist says. It's free. The moralist says, no, salvation is costly. You've got to pay. You've got to earn it. And, of course, the relativist says, no, it's free. God just accepts everybody. Well, what is it? Is it free or is it costly? Which is it? Well, if we look carefully, we'll see the father brings him in. But wait a minute. Wait a minute. This is not free. And here's the reason why. 40% of the father or whatever, we're not totally sure, but about 40%, the younger brother's inheritance had already been liquidated and had been taken away. And what does this mean? Who does every robe belong to? Who does every fatted calf belong to? Who does every ring belong to? In verse 31, which we didn't print, but I read, at the very, very, very end, which may be the most significant verse I'm beginning to think in the whole story, the father says to the elder brother, son, everything I have is yours. Now, you know, sometimes we can talk like that by hyperbole. I suppose if I'm really feeling moved from one of, I have three sons and it would be very easy for me to say, and I probably have said, son, everything I have is yours. Well, legally, that's not really true. There's three sons. So actually I should be saying it, son, a third of everything I have is yours. What I should really be, I mean, I mean, that's just, I want to sell, I want to do all these things, but I mean, let's face it legally, legally, that's going to be divided three ways. That's the way the will goes. And in this case, the will's been divided. The younger son has taken away everything that he had a right to. And now absolutely everything the father has belongs to the elder brother. That's why he's so mad. See, the father says, bring a rope, but it's the elder brother's robe. Bring a ring, but it's the elder brother's ring. Kill the fatted calf. It's the elder brother's fatted calf. There is no way for the younger son to just come back in. The father can't just say, let's bygones be bygones. There's no, here's what Jesus is doing. He is showing us that there's an incredible cost and yet it's free. And he's also leaves out the temple. He leaves out the tabernacle. Why? You know what he's pointing to? What he's saying is this poor old prodigal, this poor younger brother, the only way back into the father's heart is through the expense of the elder brother. And he has a stingy elder brother and he has a terribly, uh, uh, you know, a condescending elder brother and he has a selfish other brother, but you don't. There's another elder brother. There's a true elder brother. There's one who did obey the father completely, never disobeyed him, who came to earth and loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind, and loved his neighbor as himself and earned everything, earned the robe, earned the ring, earned everything that you would get if you live that perfectly obedient life. But at the very end of his life, what happened? He was stripped and they cast lots for his robe. He didn't get the fatted calf, he got vinegar. And this true elder brother comes to you and says, the only way for you to be clothed is for me to be stripped. The only way for you to get the robe and the ring is for me to lose them. They're mine. I've done them. I've obeyed them. They're mine. I've earned them. But I freely give them to you. Don't you see? This is astounding. This is not relativistic. This is not moralistic. In other words, salvation is absolutely free, but it's unbelievably costly. It's far costlier than the moralists could ever believe. But it's absolutely much more free than the relativists could ever believe. Because the relativists would have freedom without costliness, so why get excited about that? And the moralists have costliness without freedom, and so why get excited about that? The moralists said, I slave for you, and that's exactly how you have to relate to God in that way. But look, Jesus says, come home. Because I will not be angry. off and give it to you. I will strip my own ring off and give it to you. Come home and I will go in and I will dance. If there is no dance, if there is no music, if there is no joy in your life, it's because either like the prodigal, you're letting your badness get in the way of God or like the Pharisee, you're letting your goodness get in the way. You're trying to control in one way or the other. I don't care how religious you are. If there's no joy and there's no dance, you still don't get it. Let's conclude this way. Prodigals, come home. Are you a confident prodigal? You say, hey, I come to New York City and I've done all these things and I don't fill any need for God. There's a famine coming. I can guarantee you there's a famine coming. There's always a famine coming and you will see that you will be in need. These things, work, romance, these things, they're not home. They are not home. They are voices that say, I love you if, and at some point a famine will come along and you won't be able to fulfill the if. And you know what? You'll be dead in the water. Come home now. Don't wait. Some of you are in the middle of the famine. You're suffering. We talked about this last week. Remember that beautiful story of the sheep and the shepherd bringing the sheep home, you know, over his shoulders and rejoicing? But one thing you've got to always remember, he's rejoicing, but the sheep is not. Because the reason that a shepherd has to put a sheep over his shoulders to bring it home is the sheep is so freaked out when you find, when the sheep is in danger, it's happy. When the sheep is being saved, it's terrified. You have to grab the sheep. You have to throw it down. You have to tie the front and the back and you have to stick it over and you have to bring it home. And you're rejoicing because the sheep is saved and the sheep is going to be safe and the sheep is soon going to eat and the sheep is crying and screaming and all that. The famine comes. Tying your feet up is a loving thing to do for the shepherd. The famine shows up. It's a loving thing to do for a father who's trying to get you back. If you're in the midst of suffering right now, don't say, how can he do this to me? He's trying to get you. He's trying to get you to come to your senses. Don't you see? And if you're a Pharisee, if you are condescending to other people or mad at God for how he's running your life, are you like the Pharisee who says, I have tried to live a good life. I don't like the way in which you're running things. You still haven't gotten it either. Whether you're a prodigal, whether you're Pharisee, come home. There's a true elder brother and he won't be grumpy. Let's pray. Our father, we ask that you would just show us how we can avoid those grids, avoid those other paradigms and really come home. Help us to see that the other things that we have are not home. Help us to see that the reason we're unhappy today and are broken up and messed up is because these things that we thought were home are not home. And help us to see that the only way back is not just to be sorry for our sins and just to think God will love us, but to just be filled with joy at the thought of an elder brother who is not angry to lose everything that we can be clothed. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
