TITLE: For Such a Time as This – How Faith Informs Our Work
SCRIPTURE: Esther 4:14
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Center for Faith and Work
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/for-such-a-time-as-this-how-faith-informs-our-work/

============================================================

One Sunday a year, Redeemer highlights one of our primary ministry fronts, and today it's faith and work. This focus couldn't be more timely. Another bank in trouble this week, signs of store closings, I'm noticing on my way here, and many firms laying off significant numbers of people. Our city and our church are particularly hard hit. Yet, whether you're a person of faith or not, you can't help but observing that something is broken here. We as people are either blowing it, or we've been blowing it for quite some time. We're all affected in some way. As Christians, we'd say we're seeing the results of the fall, sin in individuals and sin in the systems and organizations that we've established as people. And as a culture, as people who also believe that God gave us the gospel, the foretaste of the resurrection of all things, we have to ask, what's God going to do with this one? And what does he want us to do? We believe the gospel can and will transform our world, but what does that look like? Here's a big brokenness right before our very eyes. What can we do? What would God have us do at a time like this? Tim, let me put him on the spot today to address this question that some of the best minds in the world are scratching their heads about. Please don't expect that he's going to have a magic answer, but I'm thrilled that he's added today's talk to the fore he already gives every Sunday and is willing to come and speak with us. In a moment, he'll come up here, but before that, let me lay out the day. He's going to talk on the topic of, for a time such as this, what does God have in mind for us to do? Then we're going to have a little bit of Q&A time where you can talk to him about his talk, the area of faith and work. Then I'm going to introduce the Center for Faith and Work, sort of its mission, what we're trying to accomplish. And then we're going to leave to the west side where we actually have lunches for everyone. And the fifth floor, every single room is dedicated to one of the ministries of faith and work. And we have leaders, there's about 120 leaders involved in some way with the Center for Faith and Work. And they will be over there to greet you, talk about what's going on in their ministry, and welcome you in some way to use your gifts and talents to make this ministry continue to blossom. So with that, let's give a warm welcome to Tim Keller. Thank you. Okay, that's a great title, actually, to talk about what faith and work, how faith and work actually addresses our current situation. Let me give you three things that I know, that I think we are facing right now, three issues we're facing. And how a Christian integration of faith with work at least addresses those three issues. So the first one is demoralization. Now, what I mean by demoralization is, I'm a pastor, and therefore, when I think of work, I think of all these various fields. Most of you are in a field, so you're in finance, or you're in the arts, or you're in media, or you're in technology, you tend to be in a field. In a way, as a pastor, I connect to people in all these different fields. And right now, I actually, so I'm asking myself, what do I see that everyone seems to be facing? And one of them is, so many people are saying, my dreams have been narrowed enormously. I had ideas that I thought I could realize. I had goals is perhaps a little too strong a word, but I had dreams. I had a vision of where I would be in five years or ten years, or what I thought I could accomplish in my life. And now, these things are really being shut down. Now, this is, and this, by the way, isn't, it obviously isn't true of absolutely everyone. Everybody knows of an exception, somebody whose business is, or work seems to be not doing badly, or even thriving in this situation. But those are the exceptions. Almost everybody knows of an exception. I couldn't do it. Even wealthy people who are philanthropists, who have foundations. You'd say, oh, well, they're saying, oh, I wanted to do all this and now I've got so much less to do it with. Everybody is somewhat demoralized. And everybody's saying my dreams are being curtailed and in some ways they certainly don't enjoy getting up in the morning to do their work. So they're demoralized and they don't even want to take a look at work the next day. The second thing I see besides the demoralization is the, again, it depends on the field, but there's tremendous confusion and disarray in every field. Obviously, everyone points to the financial industry. There it does seem like somebody took all the cards and thrown them up in the air and everybody's waiting around to see how they land. Again, this is an outsider, an outsider's view of it. It seemed like the world had a farm system for the financial world and the farm system was pretty much centered on New York. And you had these great big investment banks and everybody in the whole world wanted to be an analyst at one of those five investment banks. And so there was a kind of farm system which you caught here and you put in your one or two or three years and you got your credential. And then you went off and did other things. And that farm system, from what I can tell, has exploded. Now what's going to happen? I don't know. And that's just one area. It seems like in every field there's great disarray and a lot of questions about how is it going to be in the future? And what is it going to be like in the future? And what are the business models now? But it's even more profound than business models. As we all know, the word business model actually means something you can sit down and write. This is how we're going to make an income. Here's the revenue. I'm talking about the very reason that some people go into business in certain fields and the reason their company exists. People are asking all kinds of very fundamental questions. There's great disarray. There's great confusion in those fields. So there's demoralization in here. There's great confusion in those fields. And I say one more interesting thing. I find everybody seems to be feeling pretty lonely during this – it's a little weak, again, to call it an economic downturn. But people are pretty lonely. And I'll tell you the reason why. When things are really good, when everybody's making money, when there's lots of jobs and everybody's hiring, not only don't you need community in a way. Anyway, you're making money, you don't actually need to ask anybody. You just pay for it. You do it yourself. And besides that, when you're making money, you don't have time to hang out with people because you're so busy and you're going from project to project. So there's a sense in which when everything's going very well, you don't – not only don't you need community in a way, but you actually can't have community because you're too busy or you're traveling too much or you're too mobile. And then suddenly things start to slow down, start to stop or stop or slow down. And suddenly everybody feels pretty lonely. Well, we are lonely. So there's a kind of internal demoralization. There's a – you might say in all of our fields, there's all sorts of reengineering going on and disarray and confusion about even how we're going to do our work in the future. And then I guess I should say in social context, we're feeling kind of lonely. Now, what Christians have understood as the intersection between their faith and their work, how their faith affects work, Christian faith integrated with work addresses all three of these things pretty well, I think, at least in a very intellectually and personally serious way. Okay. So first, I said the first problem is we're demoralized. People don't even want to get up and go to work. Faith can re-motivate you. Or how do I say it? Christian faith gives you some motives for working. And it could be if you've lost – if you've lost your passion and your interest in work, it could be that the motives you had weren't the best ones. And now circumstances have really challenged them. Maybe you ought to see what the Bible says about what your motivations ought to be. And I'll give you a couple. One thing, by the way, you know, there's a place where Paul talks about this in Ephesians 6 where he says, work as unto the Lord and not as unto I service. I mean, that's the old King James Version. Do you know that place? What he's really saying is it shouldn't matter what anybody thinks but God. You've been given a gift. You've been given a gift. in the day to do it. Do it with all your might, do it with all your ingenuity, do it as clear-eyed as you can, do it with all your heart, and know that what you're really seeking to do here is saying to God, God, I'm trying to be a good steward of the gifts you gave me. And so that's one motivation. It's an extremely important motivation. And I'll tell you why. An awful lot of us, I'll get to this in the second point anyway, an awful lot of us only get excited about certain kinds of work. I mean, I'm one of them. I would rather sit down with somebody and listen to them and open the Word of God with them. You know, that's one of my jobs here. And pray with them and have them look up at me with tears in their eyes and say, that just helped me so much. Wow, there's payoff. That is payoff. Wow. Thank you very much. You know, it's one of the scary, ministers never want you to know that you got, they just probably got more out of that than the parishioner did right there. And then I have to sit down and write a memo for my staff to make sure that we're all on the same page about some issue. And, oh, you know, well, that's administration. Because some things are more, have a great emotional payoff and some things don't. Well, what am I doing there? That's eye service. There's no doubt about it. Some things excite me because I'm getting affirmation. I'm getting applause. I'm getting acclaim. And this thing over here, not only that, I know some of my staff won't like what I'm saying in the memo, but I have to bring them around and we have to do it. And if I don't do it, you see, we're not going to have alignment. And then in a year or so, everybody's going to be doing what is right in their own eyes. Oh, administration. On the other hand, I could say, you know, this takes a little bravery. This does not. This takes me really working to concentrate. This actually is like a, is like a, this comes naturally. And God sees it. God sees it. And God's very pleased with me when I do something I don't want to do, but I know it's good for my church. He's pleased with it. He's glad. And if I'm, if I'm practicing the presence of God, if I'm not, if I'm working as under the Lord instead of under eye service, it changes the way in which I go through my day. I don't put things off that I don't like doing as much. It, it, it, it, it keeps me from being up and down depending on whether I'm getting thanks or applause or, or pats on the back and that kind of thing. Now, do you realize that sort of, that sort of, uh, re-engineering of your motivation, that kind of re-engineering of your motivation, uh, is an intensely spiritual thing. It's, uh, it, it takes prayer. It takes the ability to read the scripture and have it not just be information, but to actually have encounters with God through it. It takes a very, very, very developed inner, uh, life of spiritual disciplines. Uh, it is not at all an easy thing, but actually I'm telling you that that's one of the resources we need right now because a lot of us are not getting up and looking at work. That's all that rewarding. Many times some of us are taking work and jobs that we don't really want, but we can't be in the economy so bad. We got to eat. A lot of us are taking our, in our jobs are having to do all kinds of things that are very difficult right now. This is a lifeline. I would like you to consider it. Uh, you know, I mean, um, here at Redeemer, we do not assume that everybody who's sitting in front of us necessarily shares the Christian faith. And we're very, very, uh, always interested in having people, uh, talk with us about it and think about it. And we don't, but, but we, but I would like you to see that that's a resource. That's my first point. Second, as I said, the, um, every field right now is in disarray. And to some degree, it's partly because something snapped, at least in some ways, something snapped. You know, uh, um, Paul Krugman, who, uh, you know, got the, I guess, was it the Nobel prize or economics? And, um, he's obviously not just writing about economics. He's also a very political writer and he writes in the New York times. And at least half the time, I really don't like what he's saying. However, he said something, uh, in the New York times magazine article four years ago now, this is before all this happened that really struck me. And I think he's right about what he said was that in the nineties, something happened in Americans attitude toward money that happened in the sixties with regard to their attitude towards sex. It's kind of interesting. He said, uh, in the sixties, before the sixties, sex was actually not just something you just picked up and did. It was sort of a, you know, it was, uh, there were all kinds of taboos around it. There was all kinds of, uh, care that you had to take with it. And, and it really became something. I don't think. money. It used to be to brag about how much money you made was a bad thing. It used to be that debt, huge debt, wasn't a good thing. There's all kinds of sort of taboos around it. Thrift was a good idea. Savings was a good idea. Being careful was a good idea. And he said, that changed. I think he's probably right. And what that means is along with that, something happened with regard to work. And I think increasingly work became something you did for status, for money, for getting ahead. On the other hand, the Bible actually has a fairly different view of work. And if you want to find out what it is, you can go right into the very center. We've talked about this actually here. If you were at Redeemer a few weeks ago when we saw that God puts Adam and Eve in the garden and he tells them to cultivate it. And we have always taught here that if you want to understand what the Christian understanding of work is, you need to look at gardening. Because a gardener, on the one hand, doesn't pave over the garden and turn it into a parking lot. On the other hand, a gardener is not a park ranger who just walks around and tells everybody to stay off the grass and just keeps it as it is. A gardener actually digs up the ground. I mean, really can make a mess, really makes changes. But the purpose of a gardener is to take the raw material of the garden and rearrange it, sometimes drastically, in order to produce what? Food, flowers, beauty, nutrients. In other words, work is taking raw material and rearranging it in such a way that comports with human flourishing. Without food, we don't eat. In fact, we don't live. Without beauty, we don't live either. And therefore, all work can be like that. So what is music? Music is taking the raw material of physical sound, changing it into something beautiful that brings meaning into the lives of people who listen to it. What do playwrights do? What do writers do? What do movie makers do? They're taking the raw material of human experience and they're rearranging it into narratives that bring meaning in life and help us make sense out of life. What is farming? Well, we already saw what that is. It's taking the raw material and rearranging it in such a way that it produces food and produces the things that we need. What is architecture? It's taking the raw material of, say, stone or, you know, of ore or steel and building a bridge so people in Queens can get to Manhattan and there can be more interaction. And you can have a better civilization. And therefore, the purpose of work, if that's true, if that's right, that the purpose of work is to rearrange raw material for the purpose of human flourishing, not to get an identity, not to feel good about yourself, not even primarily to make money. Though, of course, making money is one of the ways in which we do all this. But if making money is not an end in itself, but a means to the flourishing of the human community, and you see work like that, that means, first of all, there's like no menial work, no menial work at all. The person who cleans your house or your apartment, if that didn't happen, if you didn't do it or somebody didn't do it for you, you would die. Why? This thing called bugs and germs and hygiene. It's extremely important to do that kind of cleaning. And we see it as menial work because it's not that hard to do. It doesn't take a lot of expertise. You don't have to go to college for four years to do it. And yet, in God's eyes, that is comporting with human flourishing, and there's an honor about that. If you don't see that, then you haven't really let the Christian understanding of work start to work on you. In other words, you treat people who do that with honor. You don't just treat them like robots or something, or animals. And if you do it, you can do it with a certain amount of pride. It means there's no such thing as menial work. But it also means even if you are a highly paid professional, you know that the ultimate purpose of your work is to make people flourish, to make your colleagues flourish, your employees flourish, the people who are getting your product flourish. That's it, not just to make profit. It's the reason why one of my favorite quotes that I like to get out and reflect on with people about that real Christian nature of work and how it changes everything once you grasp it is this quote by Dorothy Sayers, who's written quite a bit on work. And in one of her essays, she talks about what happened during World War II in Britain, because she's British. And she says, The habit of thinking about work as something you do to make money or to get a position in society is so ingrained in us that we can scarcely imagine what a revolutionary change it would be to think otherwise. Did you hear that? She says, that's how almost everybody thinks of work. Why do I work? Not to arrange raw material to do a good job in my life. work is to find my position in society, to get to a certain status, to get an identity, to make money. She says, well, what if you had a more revolutionary idea? He says, so often people become doctors, not primarily to relieve suffering, but to bring themselves and their family up in the world. So often people become lawyers not because they have a passion for justice but to bring themselves and family up in the world. But during World War II, one of the great surprises, many in the Army found themselves for the first time in their lives happy and satisfied. And by the way, there have been a lot of interesting studies done. You know, the World War II generation of British people are now in their, the ones that are left are like in their 80s. And yet there was a tremendous amount of, you know, during the Blitz, you know, what was it, 72 nights straight, London was bombed by the Nazis and all that. There have been a lot of studies done that, weirdly enough, almost everybody remembers the war years as being, in a sense, the happiest in their lives. And yet years that they never in a million years would want to go back over and do again. Because everybody had, you know, children or relatives in the service and people were dying and it was awful. And yet people also remember it being a time of incredible contentment and well-being. And people have been trying very hard to figure this, what this is. But one of the main reasons was what Dorothy Sayers is about to say here. One of the great surprises many in the Army had was they found themselves for the first time in their lives happy and satisfied. Why? For the first time in their lives, they found themselves working. Not for the pay, because it was utterly miserable. And not for the social standing, because everybody, all classes were thrown together. But for the sake of getting something done for everyone. Everybody knew that what I was doing was for human flourishing, was for the community, was something I really needed to get done. It didn't matter whether I'm menial, it didn't matter whether I was in it with somebody of a lower status than me. It didn't matter how much money I was making. It's possible to get some of that in your head right now, and in your heart right now, with good theology. So first of all, the demoralizing, the lack of motivation, I don't even want to work well. The Christian faith can give you a new moral, a new motivation, work as unto the Lord. Secondly, the whole area of why are we working in these fields need to be re-engineered, in light, I believe, of the Christian understanding that work is rearranging raw material for the purpose of human flourishing. And therefore, the real bottom line is human flourishing, not profit. And there's one more thing, and it's real brief. I said we're all kind of lonely. One of the things that always struck me is a report that, I've used this years ago in a sermon, so some of you may have heard it. But back in 1640 or something like that, 1650, it was one of the first or second generations in Boston, first church, which, of course, in New England, it was a congregational culture, that is to say. So every city had a first congregational church and a second congregational church. And a first congregational church, somewhere in the 1640s, 1650s, a businessman, I think his name was Robert Bolt, but anyway, a businessman was excommunicated, disciplined and excommunicated for greed. Now, everybody jokes about the fact that's the last time anybody in the church was excommunicated for greed. We'd excommunicated people all the time on sexual things, but never greed. And the reason was that the people in that church had gotten together and decided what's greedy. You know, one of the problems with greed and materialism is that it's a spectrum. It's not that easy to tell. Nobody ever thinks they're being greedy. You know when you're committing adultery, but you don't know when you're being greedy. The Bible condemns both. I mean, you know when you're committing adultery, you don't really know how, well, what's greed? Well, you're right, it seems a little bit subjective. So what did they do? As a community, they got together and talked about it and thought about it. And they decided in their situation, in their culture, in their society, in their economic culture, you might say, they decided that anybody who charged this much profit, in other words, if the profit margin was this big, they decided that they would all agree they were not going to charge more than that. If they could get more profit out of it, they wouldn't, they would spread it out, they'd give the customer a better deal, they'd give their employees better wages, period. And they decided to do that, and this man went past that and acknowledged that he had gone past that, and he was disciplined. And, you know, maybe you think, oh my gosh, thank goodness. talking about rules here. We're not talking about trying to pass in society a law that says you can't take so much more of a profit. But that's the government getting into, I mean, that's government regulation. And I'm not going to go there because I don't know enough. And it's probably bad. I don't know. Maybe if you're a Democrat, you think it's good. Maybe if you're a Republican, you think it's bad. I haven't figured that out myself. You know, exactly who thinks what. I'm saying this is a church. This is a group of people that were willing to get together and talk about their work. They said, we need guidance, and we're going to get it together, and let's talk about this, and let's think about what are our standards, and let's hold each other accountable to them, and let's hold ourselves to a higher standard as Christians in business. Let us be known as being incredibly good employers. Let us be known as really treating our employees really like human beings. Let us be known as really making sure that our customers feel like I get better value from what you do than anybody else. And they came up with a set of standards in a community. They held each other accountable, and somebody violated it, and it was disciplined because he'd agreed he'd be disciplined if he violated it. And so that looks like bad news. It looks like the Puritans. It looks like, oh, isn't that awful? And yet I see it as something that's almost a model for us, maybe not exactly the same thing. Maybe we shouldn't do something quite like that. It's a different world than Boston, a much more complicated world than Boston in the 17th century. But we need to be talking about our work in community and thinking about it in community. And we need to help each other in community because, frankly, times are not good. When times are good, you make money. You don't need each other. You're too busy for each other. When times are good, you have a tendency to just ignore community. When times are not good, that's when you mainly really need each other. So one of the reasons you're here is either to get more involved in or for the first time involved in the various ways through our Center for Faith at Work in which you can address those issues in the ways I have already named. And that's the end of my little address. But I think what we're going to do is have a Q&A time. Yes, I heard. That's a great question. Let me try to rephrase it. And about one-third of the way into it, I was saying, I'm glad you asked me that question because I need to make sure I make that clear. We should be working for God's approval. It doesn't mean we don't need any other kind of affirmation. And the perfect example of that, again, is in the book of Genesis. God makes Adam and Eve, right? Makes Adam, has a perfect relationship with Adam. And it says he's lonely. He needs human beings. And so God makes Eve. Well, that's another sermon. But what that means is God actually made us deliberately in such a way that we need others of our kind. So we do need love and affirmation as well. What I mean is unless God's, at this point, for most of us, God's approval is really not even on our charts. It's all about what do my peers think, what do my neighbors think, what does my family think. Many of us, let's face it, are driven to a great degree into our work by our family's expectations. Isn't that right? A lot of us are driven by peer expectations. And I'm just trying to say is God should be superior, but not the only one, because it's impossible. We're not made like that. But for most of us, God's not even there. He's not even a factor. That's all. So great question. You've got a mic for the next question. That'll help me. Next question. See how nice I was at the first question? I promise not to beat you up. That should encourage you. Okay. Yeah. So you're saying at a time like this, do we still need to give 10%? Is that what you're saying? My faith is to be challenged. Yes. Well, you know, John Lynn this morning here in this service did a great job of pointing out that the reason why in the Bible giving the first fruits was a risky, generous thing to do was that when you gave the firstborn of your flock, or if you gave the very first fruits and you didn't know how many others would be born to your flock and how much grain was going to come in, by giving the first fruits, it was an economically risky thing to do. You know, the savvy thing would be to wait until your whole, you know how many animals are being born to you this season and you know how much grain is coming in, and then you lop off exactly a certain amount and you give it to God and he should be fine. I think the idea is risk and sacrifice. say, or a mother, and I've got kids and, you know, the Bible also says, oh, no one anything. What if I've got debt over here? I've had people say to me, I can't pay my debt off because I'm tithing. You know, here's how much money comes in. And after I tithe and feed my family, I have no money to make good on the debt. And you know what I say? Well, it does say in Romans 12, oh, no one anything, which is actually a way of saying, if you have, it's like, if you promise to pay somebody back, you should pay them back. So don't hide behind the tithe. You know, don't say, well, here's one command of God that I have to obey. And this isn't as important. I am simply telling you this to show that you, there has to be wisdom. This is the reason why you probably have to have one or two close friends that you share this with. So you're not kidding yourself. So you're not totally diluted. A couple of friends that you really trust. You could talk about this, but generally what I've done as a pastor, I've said, I said, pay that man off, pay that man back and don't tithe until you've paid that man back and then begin to tithe. I mean, you have to be flexible about those things, but you need to try to, uh, the basic rule of thumb is sacrificial, risky, trusting God, but at the same time, uh, and for example, okay, for example, I think I told somebody this. I'm 58 years old. My biggest asset is PCA annuity fund. That's my, my minister's retirement fund, which is down 45%, uh, over what it was a year ago. So when you're, when you're my age, you say, oh my gosh, maybe I won't tithe this year. Maybe I'll start to put more money back into that. That would be wrong. If that's what you're talking about, you know, it takes more faith to tithe in situations like that. Um, yeah, it does. So, okay, good. That's an opportunity for me to grow in faith. If on the other hand, somebody says, I can't tithe and still feed the family and may, and, and pay back debts that I owe. Then I said, well, then don't because God, in a sense, it's all gods and God wants you to obey him with everything. And therefore it'd be better to pay off your other debtors and then come back. So it, I don't, it's a case by case thing. So I'm afraid of even giving you an answer, uh, publicly like this in general, you should still tithe at least, even when you just don't have the assets you used to have. But if, if when you're done tithing, you're just, you still got an income, you still got money to live on, then go tithe. Uh, in my case, it means I have to tithe, even though I'm tempted to want to take some of that money and put it back into the annuity fund. So I feel, I feel better about turning 60 in a year or two. Uh, but that would be wrong. On the other hand, if it means you can't tithe and still, and still makes, you know, uh, meet certain obligations and I say that have a schedule, have a plan, uh, try to get back to the tithe after you've done these other things and have one or two close friends that you can share this with so that you, you, you can be a little more sure you're not deluding yourself because when it comes to money, we deceive ourselves all the time. That's the best I can do in public. Okay. Thanks. Somebody else. There's one man who, uh, Richard Mao at, uh, Fuller Seminary has, I've, I've listened to some of his teaching on for business leaders. Uh, one of the things he says he believes is a Christian principle business leaders have to abide by is the principle that within, in God and in Christ, you see Christ, uh, absorbing more pain than, than he inflicts. Okay. In other words, he, he bears more pain than he gives. I mean, obviously to follow Christ, take sacrifice, et cetera, but he's, he bears more pain. All I can say is if you're in, if you have to give bad news to your employees, the employees need to have seen somewhere that you've borne a lot of pain for the sake of the corporation or the company or the, of the whole, uh, so that when you actually now have to do something like laying off or something like that, they, they have some idea. Uh, you know, you know, I mean, the only time that the only time Redeemer ever laid anybody off was, uh, at the, at the, in 2002 after 9-11 and we had to, um, lay, um, three people off. It was really, really hard. And we actually also had to cut some people back from full-time to part-time. And one of the things we did when we decided was that the pastors who made more money than the, you know, because the pastors, not all pastors, but generally back then the pastors made more money than others. We decided to take a pretty major cut in salary. Uh, the people in the middle, uh, didn't get as much or didn't get a cut in salary. myself here. And the people who were laid off realized there would have been more people laid off if we hadn't borne some of that pain. So that we thought was a kind of Christian principle there to say, we want you to see that we want to bear more pain than we're inflicting, but we are going to have to inflict some pain. So as long as it seemed like they saw that we were bearing a lot of pain too, and not just making them bear it all, then I think it helped. But it still was awful. By the way, it was awful. So I'm not trying to say, if you do it my way, everything will be fine. See, I mean, in a way, I know a little bit about the business world, but not much, only because I'm here. Yes, sir. Your talents can be used in such an enormous range of situations that in some ways, I'm not sure your talents necessarily are a great way to tell what kind of job you ought to take. So, for example, I know that the same talents that could make you a wonderful teacher, classroom teacher, professor, could also put you, could make you an incredibly valuable person in a corporation as well. Communication talents, the ability to, you know, maybe keep people in, you know, work people in a team. So my guess is the talents are so, in a sense, rudimentary. I do think some people tend to be visionary catalyzers, not very good about detail. Some people tend to be incredibly good at detail and administration, but not really very able to get up in front of people and get everybody ready, you know, to go in a certain direction. Some people are catalyzers. Some people are strategic thinkers and organizers. Some people are operators. Some people just are very, very good at keeping the machinery going, keeping, uh, dealing with people's, uh, issues and hurts and ruffle, you know, smoothing out ruffled feathers and keeping the waters going and, uh, you know, calm. And when I, there are those kinds of macro differences that in anything you do, whether it's a school in which you need administrators and you need teachers and you need presidents of a school, uh, in a business, you need, you need, uh, middle managers and you need, uh, you know, you, you need, you need salesmen. I mean, when I, when I look at those, those, those macro gift clusters, they can, they can work almost anywhere. They can work. You could be a social worker. You could be a teacher. You could be a businessman or woman. You could be a doctor. Um, so honestly, I'm not sure the talents matter. I think in some ways it's passion. What do I want to do with my talents? When do I see a need that I'd really like to handle? I mean, there are, what makes people artists very often is a, uh, you know, a passion, I think, to sort of say something and other people get up, have a passion for, uh, seeing broken people get better and other people have a passion, uh, to, uh, create something that's just never been before. I've been a lot of people who are, I think the best folks in, I've seen a lot of really good small business men and women just have a passion for creating something out of nothing. They've got the kind of, you know, I, I know some surgeons and small business, you know, having the God problem, you know, I want to bring something out of nothing. Uh, but this, what this means right now is this. I've talked to a guy just fairly recently who said, you know what? You could work on wall street or you could be a terrific public school teacher or private school. It could be a terrific teacher for adolescents and kids. And one of those is not going to pay as well. One of those has not got the high status. Uh, I said, I mean, I think if, if faith gets your, I certainly don't want Christians out of any profession. I don't want Christians to say, Oh, you'd be so much better to just go be a teacher on the streets of New York city than to, you know, work for some big investment bank. Are there any big investment banks left? I'm sorry. Middle size investment banks, small investment banks. Uh, there's nothing more noble about, about being a teacher than working for an investment bank. Nothing at all. And there's nothing. No, because the Christians need to be everywhere. We need to be salt and light everywhere. All those, all those kinds of work, if done well, comport with human flourishing. So let's not get moralistic about it. But on the other hand, don't get reverse, which is I would only want to be a doctor or an investment banker, never a teacher. See, Christians have got to be cleansed by their theology from this kind of sneering, sneering at the things below you. That doesn't pay anything. It's just a teacher sneering at the things above you. I don't want to be an investment banker. I mean, liberals sneer up, conservatives sneer down. Have you ever noticed that? Um, of ways. So once you're cleansed of the sneering by good theology, then you need to realize you can use your talents all kinds of places. So look at your passions. What kind of human needs excite you about addressing? That's a really stupid sentence. What human needs out there make you vibrate to them? Say, I'd really like to do something about that. Then see where you fit in the enterprise. Some people are leaders, some people are middle managers. So there we go. I can think I'd take one more. Yeah. Most places in the world, ministers are bivocational. The vast majority of places in the world, ministers are bivocational. Because most places, you cannot be a minister, preach and teach and that sort of thing, and get enough money from the congregation or from the people around you in order to do it, quote unquote, full time. You have to have another job. You have to have something else that you do. And at the same time, you minister. Now, one of the problems that Presbyterians have always had, by the way, I mean, get out my dirty laundry here, is Presbyterians sneer at bivocational ministry. They say, you know, I've had all this training, and you do need training. You realize ministers have to be counselors and communicators and exegetes of ancient texts if you're going to do a good job. And to have a great minister is just really worth so much. And you say, I should be paid for it. Well, the fact is that most of the places in the world, it just doesn't work that way. And even in this country, most ministers who are working amongst immigrants and the poor and the working class actually cannot make enough money from the congregation since they're bivocational. The reason Presbyterians never seem to work with those people is because of the snob factor. We don't want to be bivocational. Now, here's what I know about the bivocational folks. There is strengths and weaknesses. The weaknesses are you don't have as much time to maybe study your books and do your diligence. And sometimes bivocational people will say, I don't feel like I can quite muster the quality I want. But on the other hand, bivocational ministers say, I have, in some ways, I'm a better minister than you because I'm actually in the world. I'm actually out there. I'm in the workplace. I'm actually experiencing life with everybody else. And therefore, when I preach, I can preach better than you can because you're kind of in a little kind of hermetically sealed bubble. You know what? But they're right. If God calls you to be a bivocational minister, then there's all kinds of strengths and weaknesses of that. And if God calls you not to be, there's strengths and weaknesses of that, too. What's wrong with being a bivocational artist? What is wrong with saying that my heart is into being an artist and yet I'm going to just do this other job? It's my way of making ends meet. If you see it as part of being an artist, that way, bivocational ministers who are good don't see being a plumber as really being an awful distraction from their real work. But they see it as part of their work. They see it as part of what makes them good when they do preach. And you could see it as part of what makes you good as an artist. You say, oh, but if I had full time to develop my art. Yeah, I know. I mean, the amount of time, the amount of books and the amount of time I put into a sermon, a bivocational minister couldn't muster. But sometimes I envy them because I realize, even like today, I said, gee, I wish I really was in the business or in art. I mean, I wish I wasn't. I'm in a way I sense my distance. So I don't see any particular reason why you need to say, well, if I'm just really not going to be able to make ends meet, I'm just going to have to stop being an artist. If you can be a bivocational artist, why not? That's my best shot at that. So I'm going to recede like a wave, and something will come behind me, but I'm not sure what or who. Is it Catherine? Catherine. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
