TITLE: Found in Him
SCRIPTURE: Philippians 3:3-9
TOPICS: Justification Repentance Salvation
SERIES: Philippians
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/found-in-him/

============================================================

I'm going to read to you from Philippians chapter 3. I'm going to read to you chapter 3, verses 3 to 9. This is Paul speaking. Philippians chapter 3, verses 3 to 9. For it is we who are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, who glory in Christ Jesus, and who put no confidence in the flesh, though I myself have reason for such confidence. If anyone else thinks he has reasons to put confidence in the flesh, I have more. Circumcised on the eighth day of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews, in regard to the law, a Pharisee, as for zeal, persecuting the church, as for legalistic righteousness, faultless. But whatever was to my profit, I now consider loss for the sake of Christ. What is more, I consider everything a loss, compared to the surpassing greatness of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them rubbish, that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness that comes from God, and is by faith. Paul was a scholar. Scholars, a lot of you are in education, scholars are extremely cautious. Everything they say is very, it's footnoted. It's nuanced. They get at the fine shades of meaning. They're extremely careful in what they say. Therefore, Paul's statement in verse 7 and 8 and 9 is tremendously surprising, because Paul was a scholar. Paul was an educated man. Now, educated scholarly people are cautious and nuanced, and look what he says. He says, Whatever was to my profit, I now consider loss. I consider everything a loss. I consider everything rubbish, compared with the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. Paul has just gone through a list of his credentials, his achievements. They're very, very impressive, as we're going to see in a minute. This is what Paul is saying, though. He calls them rubbish. Now, you know, so often the biblical translators try to be more genteel than God himself. And they won't say what that word really is. That word is translated rubbish, but the Greek word that Paul uses is a word for excrement. So let me get across what Paul is saying, this brilliant, scholarly, careful person. He says, in effect, You know my three degrees from Harvard? You know my Congressional Medal of Honor? You know my two Pulitzer Prizes? All crap. I don't know how you're going to translate that. But that's what Paul says. You know my three Pulitzer Prizes, two Pulitzer Prizes, my three degrees from Harvard? They're all crap. All crap. What would move a scholarly person to say such a thing? Well, he says, it's because of the surpassing greatness of something. When the sun comes out, the glorious stars can't be seen anymore. And the things that in our eyes, accomplishments, money, influence, power, those things, which shine so brightly in our eyes, Paul says something has come out that is so brilliant he can't see those things anymore. Paul actually says, the surpassing greatness. He says, these things that used to be so important to me, the surpassing greatness has outshone them. And the word surpassing greatness is another Greek word, hyperekon, which means the super thing. Paul says, I have found the super thing. I found something so brilliant that the things that used to control me no longer have any power over me. The things that used to drive me no longer have any influence and control over me. What could this thing be that would lead this scholar to talk so intemperately? What could this thing be that would lead this person in a whole other direction? So he says, these things have nothing for me anymore. It's all here when he says, to be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own, but a righteousness from God, apart from the law. Now, that takes some unwrapping. A lot of people don't even like us to use the word. use another word, people will say to a minister like me. Make it more clear. You can't use another word. I'm going to make it more clear, though, because Paul is telling us that the secret that he's found is this. Righteousness is our most fundamental need, and righteousness is our most fundamental problem, and righteousness is the greatest gift you can receive from God. Righteousness is the most fundamental need, the most fundamental problem, and the most wonderful gift you can get, and that's the thing he discovered that's completely and utterly changed his whole life. Let me explain. First, he says here that righteousness is our most fundamental need. Now, a lot of people, when they hear the word righteousness, they think it means being good, being a good person, living a good life. Is that what you're trying to say? That's not what Paul's saying. Paul gives us a list of his credentials in verses 4, 5, and 6. You see when he says, circumcised on the eighth day of the people of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews, in regard to the law of Pharisee, as for zeal, persecuting the church, as for legalistic righteousness, faultless. Now, we could spend a lot of time going back to explain why these were great credentials for Paul in his time and place. I don't want to bore you. I'll just sketch this. When he says, I was circumcised on the eighth day, he means I wasn't a convert to Judaism. I was a Jew from the beginning. When he says of the people of Benjamin, he was one of the two tribes of Israel that were true to the house of David. So he's talking about his racial purity was extremely important in his time and place. Then he says that he was a Hebrew of the Hebrews. Many Jews were Hebrew on the surface, but underneath they were Greek. That means they were Hellenized. They were Greek-speaking people. They were Greek in their culture. But Paul had been raised up so his mother tongue was Hebrew. And he says, I'm a Hebrew of the Hebrews. I am culturally pure. I am racially pure. He's a Pharisee, which means he had high educational attainments. He was faultless in his righteousness. That means all the rules that the Pharisees had, he kept to them. He persecuted the church, which meant he was a leader. He was an activist in his movement. So you put all this together. He has these great credentials. But what is he giving you? Let me tell you what he's giving you. He's giving you his resume. It's a drop-dead resume. It's a great resume. What is a resume? A resume is a list of your merits. A resume is all the great things about you. A resume are your accomplishments, your skills, your great qualifications. It's a list of merits. But what is the purpose of a resume? It's to get you into some place that you're outside. A resume is an argument. A resume is a case. How do you get into a college? Well, the college, it has its doors closed. The resume is an argument why you should be let in. You wave that resume. Look at all my grades. Look at all these great things. If you want a job, jobs won't let you in unless you have the credentials, the resume. I've had this experience. I've done these things. I was a salesman over here, and I made this much money for my company. That's why I should get into this job. A resume is a list of your merits, but it's a list for the purpose of getting you in to someplace where you're outside. You can't get into jobs. You can't get into schools. You can't get in, but they'll open if your resume is great. So you have a list. First, Paul is giving us his resume. But let me point out to you that Paul is telling us that there's something more fundamental about this than just the way we get a job or get into school. Making lists of our merits, coming up with resumes as ways of getting in the places that were on the outside is something we do at every level and even the most profound level. All of our emotions, all of our heart, all of human society, everything is structured on this whole system. The system is you must amass a resume to be let in, otherwise you're shut out. Let me show you. It's not just that we use a resume to have jobs let us in. We also use resumes for friendships. One of the most frightening things about showing up at a college, when you first come to college, is that right away you have to worry about your look. What should I be wearing? Should I dress up, dress down? How should I look? How should I wear everything? Because people are sizing you. worse when it comes to romance people are sizing you up and you're sizing people up on a resume system you look at their looks you look at their figure you look at their income generating possibilities for the future you size people up along a resume they're sizing you up how are you going to get in you wave a resume look at how great i am look at how thin i am look at how smart i am look what a nice personality i have it's a dog eat dog world out there not just for jobs not just to get into schools but in all your friendship circles and romance and marriage but it gets worse than that the bible in a sense tells us that we even use the resume system on the way in which we look at ourselves in other words you don't just wave a list of merits so that jobs will let you in you don't just use a resume so that relationships will let you in but you even use a resume so that you let yourself in you will shut the door on yourself if you don't measure up you set standards for yourself things that make you feel good about yourself and if you have a lousy resume it's not just that jobs will close the door on you it's not just that friendships and relationships will close the door on you you close the door on yourself you beat yourself up you curse yourself you hate yourself on the resume system everybody opens or shuts doors that's the way that our human life is structured it's not just the jobs shut you out if your resume isn't up to snuff it's not just relationships you shut yourself out you know what we're talking about this is the righteousness that paul means see in verse three paul says these are the things that are his confidence these were his confidence these things were his glory it says we gloried in these things and the word glory means to boast your righteousness is what you boast in your righteousness is what makes you able to look yourself in the mirror your righteousness is what makes you able to take criticism because you're able to say well i'm really a good person but if your righteousness isn't up to snuff if you feel you flubbed up if you feel that you haven't come up to standards someone criticizes you and you go home and you hate yourself because your resume isn't good you shut yourself out everybody functions everybody needs it's the most profound need we all have is a righteousness and everybody has a different resume who knows why but we all have a different set but we're all trying to live up to something so my wife and i've years ago found out that if something was going wrong with the church my wife oh i was kind of getting shaken up i would get very anxious why she would she always looked more mature than me she said well honey we have to trust god but when something went wrong with the children and one of our children looked like they were on their way to being a juvenile delinquent which happens all the time you know very little things you suddenly say he disobeyed me who knows maybe 20 years from now he'll be in jail you you think about these things and whenever something would be wrong with one of our children my wife would be more shaken and i looked so much more mature i would say my dear you just you you have to trust god but we came to realize that even though my wife loves the church the success of my church is part of my spiritual resume see it's my righteousness i hate myself if i'm not a successful minister there's a way in which i make that my righteousness and it's even though my wife loves that it's not it's not the way in which she opens or shuts the door on herself how our church is doing but with her kids you know i love my children but it's a lot more see it's on kathy's spiritual resume how her children do it's something which she opens or shuts the door on herself on the basis of and whereas we both look so mature what really the point is that everybody's got a slightly different set of these things but fundamentally all of us seek to earn our own righteousness all of us use a resume by which we seek to face the world ourselves and god it's how we get in paul says everybody does it it's your most fundamental need you know you're naked and you're trying to clothe yourself with your righteousness you know in yourself you uh you've got to find some way to recommend yourself and so you're trying to cover yourself with your resume adam and eve they put fig leaves on but what those were were resumes they want they got to cover their nakedness they want to say this is why you should accept me we say that to god we say it to the world we even say it to ourselves we all have a set it's the most fundamental need we've got now secondly paul says therefore righteousness is your most fundamental need we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it to the world we say it fundamental need we've got. Now secondly, Paul says, therefore, righteousness is your most fundamental problem. What he says here, and what I'm going to press on you, and at first you're going to misunderstand me perhaps, sin is not the main problem that screws us up. Sin is not the main thing that keeps us from God. Sin is not the main thing that spiritually blinds us. Sin is not, I will even go so far as to say, sin is not the main reason that people aren't Christians. It's your righteousness. It's not your attitude toward your sins that is so fouled up and that so screws up our emotions and our psychology and our sociology and our spirituality, our relationship with God. It's our attitude toward our righteousness. Paul says here, the thing that made him a Christian was not he changed his attitude toward his sins. He always knew that sins were wrong, he always knew that if he sinned it was bad, and when he sinned he repented. He said, I counted all these wonderful things lost for the sake of Christ. That meant he had to completely reorient the way he looked at his good deeds, at his credentials, at his accomplishments. That's what made him a Christian. Christianity is not an add-on. Christianity isn't something you add to your life. Christianity isn't just a little power that you add to get you over the hump toward your goals in life. Christianity isn't a little salve that you add because you know you're a sinner and you do bad things so you need some forgiveness. Paul says here, you're not a Christian unless you have utterly changed your entire way of looking at everything about yourself. everything. He says, all the things I looked at this way, I now look at them in a completely different way. Let me explain. The Bible tells us that the gospel is so radical that what makes a person a Christian is not that they move from being irreligious to being religious. See, there's a tremendous number of people that think that the Christian message is, stop being irreligious and come to church. Stop not praying and start praying. Stop breaking the Ten Commandments and obey the Ten Commandments. And a lot of people think that's the Christian message. Just get religious. And as a result, a lot of people are not listening. And here's why. Because they say, most people, they used to be religious. I say, up until the time I was eight or nine or ten or twelve or fourteen, I went to some kind of church or synagogue. I was religious. It didn't work for me. And now they think that that's what the Christian message is. That now, you're irreligious, you need to be religious. That's not. Dorothy Sayers tells a story about a missionary. And you know, there's a lot of Christians, I'm afraid, that give people that impression. And I'm afraid there's a lot of Christians who, there's a lot of people in churches who think that that's what it means to be a Christian. That you were not religious and now you're religious. You used to do sinful things, now you stop and you repent. And they think that's all it is. Dorothy Sayers tells a story about a missionary, a very bad missionary, a very legalistic missionary, who was talking to some poor native chieftain in some primitive tribe somewhere in the world about Christianity. And the chief said, now let me get this straight. If I become a Christian, I can't kill my neighbor and cut off his head and shrink it. Yes, that's right. It means that I cannot kidnap his wives and take them into my harem and use them as my wives. I can't steal wives. That's right. And he says, I also can't loot their villages and burn them. That's right. He says, I'm 70 years old. I can't do these things anyway. I'm already a Christian. He says, I can't chase people. I can't rape women. I can't plunder villages. I'm already a Christian. And you see, a lot of people think that that's what it means to be a Christian. That's not what Paul says at all. Oh, no. Here's the gospel. The gospel is you come to realize that the reason that you've been irreligious and the reason that most people are religious is for the same reason, to try to keep control of their lives and to be their own saviors. See, we all want to keep control of our lives. We want to feel like we're in charge. We don't want to give up control of God. And the only way to keep control of your life is to believe God owes you. We all want to believe that we relate to God kind of like we relate to the president of the United States. We pay our taxes. We have things we have to do. But now that we pay our taxes, why aren't the streets paved? We've done our part. Now you do your part. And most people relate to God that way. And there's two ways to keep in control of your life. The one way is the irreligious way. And the irreligious way is to say, well, who knows if there is a God? And who knows if the Bible is true? And I'm going to go live my own life. That's irreligion. That's one way to keep control. But the religious way is to say this, I'm going to follow the rules. I'm going to be better than other people. I'm going to be very religious. I'm going to go to church. I'm going to plant a church. I'm going to be a preacher. See, it's possible to be a minister and do it this way. And then you turn around and say, I've been good. I've just said no a lot. I've refrained from many things other people are doing. Why isn't my life going right? You pay your taxes. You're doing your best, you think. And now you feel like God owes me. The way that you can tell is not that you repent of yourself. The way you can tell this is that when you do good things, it means that you feel now God owes you a good life and you're always angry because your life isn't going the way you want it. God owes you. But Paul says to simply repent of your sins just makes you an unsuccessful Pharisee. What makes you a Christian is to repent of your righteousness. What makes you a Christian is to say, I now see that even when I was religious, I was trying to be my own savior. I used Jesus as an example. I used Jesus as a model. I used Jesus as a hero. But I was my own savior because I believed that the things that I was doing well, my resume should be enough to open the door for me. That God would let me in and hear my prayers and so on. But now, the minute you become a Christian is when you say, I realize that my only resume would be that which God gives me. That God owes me nothing. Because as much as I've tried to live a good life, I've never come up to it. And deep in my heart, I know that. A Christian is somebody who says, I used to repent of my sins, but now I repent of my righteousness as well. In fact, I know in New York, we have an awful lot of people who always have three stages of their lives. Before they went to college, they were religious. And during that time, they repented of their sins. But they never felt any better. And they never felt close to God. And they always, you see, if you're a legalist, you either feel proud and better than other people because you're living up to your resume standards, or else you're anxious and guilty because you feel worse than other people. Either way, you're a mess. Either way, you're not helpful to anybody. You're either proud or you're guilty. You're proud or you're guilty. And then very often, because that doesn't work, people would move to New York and say, religion isn't helping. I used to be smug and a prig, or else I was guilty and anxious. And so when they get to New York, they get rid of their religion for a number of years. If they do come to a place like our church, they come to see that both religion and irreligion are both ways of trying to keep Jesus from being Savior. And then they begin to realize the only two choices are self-salvation or Christ salvation. But there's two forms of self-salvation, the religion or the irreligion. That's the reason why Paul here says, I had to count it all lost for the sake of Jesus Christ. I had to look at it in a new way. The hymn goes this way, and I don't know how you translate it because it's a poem in English. Lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in him, in him alone, gloriously complete. This is what it means to be a Christian. Not to say, oh, I seem a bad person. I need to try to live a better life. But to say, I see that I'm good, but I'm also very bad. But the important thing is, I've got to give him, make him both Savior and Lord. And I've got to find a whole new way of approaching him. I can't repent just of my sins, but also of my best deeds. And until you've repented of both, you're not a Christian. There's a great little historical snippet that comes down from us, a man named Nathan Coles. He was a virtually illiterate farmer in Middlebury, Connecticut, that heard George Whitefield preach in 1741. And he wrote about how he was converted. He saw Whitefield come, and he said he stood up there, and he writes in terrible handwriting, terrible grammar. He says, my hearing him preach gave me a heart wound. And by God's grace, my old foundation was broken up, and I saw that my righteousness could not save me. And that's the day he became a Christian. He'd been religious for years. Now, the last point. We said the first thing was, righteousness is our most fundamental need. Secondly, righteousness is our biggest problem. It's really the thing that screws us up and really keeps us from God. Lastly, therefore, righteousness is our greatest gift. So he says, this is really what it means to be a Christian. It says, the thing I most want, the thing I most rejoice in, verse 9, is to be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith. Christian is somebody who recognizes that God gives you the perfect resume. In New York, there's a lot of actors, actresses, and models, and part of their resume is always a headshot. And you know, it's amazing, whenever, I don't know what, those photographers are very skilled, because very often, if you see a headshot of somebody who comes to your church, you say, wow, they're gorgeous. They don't look like that in real life. How did they get them so beautiful? When God, Paul doesn't just say here, I want God's righteousness. It's not abstract. He says, I want to be found in him. What do you mean? What does he mean? He says, the beauty of the Christian gospel is that God finds me in Christ. That means God sees me in Christ. God comes upon me in Christ. He discovers me. In other words, Jesus Christ gives you the most incredible spiritual headshot. God looks at you and you're gorgeous in Christ. God looks at you and you're a thing of beauty in Christ. And then Paul says, this is the thing, which is more important than anything else, to have that and to know that. Why? Well, you know, in Ephesians 6, Paul calls this the breastplate of righteousness. The breastplate. To know that I am righteous in Christ. To know that it's Jesus perfect. Jesus lived the life you should have lived and he died the death you should have died. So that now, when you receive him as Savior, when you say, nothing in my hands I bring, simply to the cross I cling. When you say, accept me because of Jesus' righteousness. At that moment, you're found in him. If you know that, Paul says, it's a breastplate. It's a bulletproof, it's a bulletproof vest. You can take anything now. Look, for example, when you're disappointed, the next time you're cast down, the next time you're really hurt, I let Kathy and I, I gave you a kind of peek at Kathy and me. And I said, you know, my righteousness tends to be my church. Her righteousness tends to, everybody's got a righteousness. The next time you're cast down, the next time you're starting to be really devastated, you're really getting discouraged, really discouraged, you know what you have to say? Don't just say, oh Lord, change my circumstances. Oh no, you know what you have to say? You say, wait a minute. This is a good thing that I'm losing, but it's not my righteousness. If you are absolutely devastated by the loss of something, it's a good thing that you have promoted to being your salvation, the best thing. And the reason that you can't handle it is because you need to demote it. No matter how wonderful my church is, no matter how wonderful our children are, no matter how wonderful your career is, you want to do a good job. God gives you gifts. They're not your righteousness. And Paul here says, these things no longer have control over me. They no longer jerk me around. So, you see, I can lose something now and not have it devastate me. It doesn't mean I don't weep. I'm not a stoic. Look, a Christian isn't a stoic who says, well, I don't care about my children, or I don't care about my career, or I don't care what people think of me. Oh no, we still hurt. We still weep. But you know what? That's why Paul says, we're knocked down, but we're never destroyed. We're hurt, but we're not devastated. Don't you see, do you know, if this is your real righteousness, if you put this on, if you revel in being found in him, there is nothing that can pull the rug out from under your feet anymore. David says in Psalm 39, he says, my feet stumbled, but I didn't fall. That's what happens. And if guilt comes at you, what if you do something that's really wrong, and your conscience starts to say, close the door on yourself, what do you do? You say, what I've done is wrong. It's very wrong, but I do not presume to stand in the presence of God in my own righteousness. And what I did on Tuesday was very bad, but if I hadn't done it on Tuesday, that wouldn't really have made me any more worthy of God's presence. What makes me worthy of God's presence is the righteousness of my Savior, Jesus Christ. In him, I have the perfect spiritual headshot. In fact, the fact that I've sinned this week shows me the grandeur and the greatness of the righteousness of Christ. Don't you see when people criticize you, when you fail, when disappointments happen? Don't you see? It's a breastplate. If you have this, he said, nothing else matters. This is it. This is the one thing. This is the super thing. This is the hyper thing. This is the surpassing greatness. This is why he can say such intemperate things. Listen, just to close. Think about yourself. Think about yourself. Think about yourself. Think about yourself. Think about yourself. This is their surpassing greatness. This is why he can say such intemperate things. Listen, just to close, think about yourself. You may think that you're a Christian and not be. You know that. For example, is Jesus your example? Is Jesus your hero? Is Jesus your model? He can be those things and not be your savior. And one of the ways for that to be true is that you're devastated by disappointments you're clobbered by criticism. You're either a proud person who kind of looks down your nose at other people because they're not as good or you're anxious and guilty all the time. Those are signs that Jesus might be your model and might be your example, but not your savior. It was a great Welsh revivalist who suddenly realized that what made you a savior is not belonging to a church and not being religious. And he said to his wife one day, he says, Mary, I'm realizing, are you really saved? Are you really saved? And Mary said, well, of course, I'm confirmed in the church. And he said, well, of course, and you're vaccinated too. But are you saved? And what he meant is being confirmed in the church no more guarantees that you're a Christian than that you're vaccinated. Lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in him and him alone, gloriously complete. Let's pray. Father, as we close, help us to focus on the super thing. Help us see that righteousness is our most fundamental need and therefore it is the greatest problem we have. It's what keeps us, our attitude to our righteousness is what keeps us away from you, keeps us away from others, and even that which keeps us away from ourselves. And that until we receive your unspeakable gift, we will always be afraid to move toward others. We will always be afraid to move toward ourselves. We will always be afraid to move toward you. I pray, Father, that everybody here would not only understand this so as to be found in him, not having a righteousness of their own, but I pray that everybody here would understand this enough to live lives of joy and victory. And I pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
