TITLE: Four Things Christians Must Reclaim (with Q&A)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Missional Living
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/four-things-christians-must-reclaim-with-qa-2/

============================================================

Thanks, Tim. Tim mentioned earlier that the gospel rids us of pessimism, and that is good news for me because you're about to hear like 35 minutes of pure, unadulterated, very un-British optimism from me. But because I'm British, we're going to start with Harry Potter. And if you have not read the Harry Potter books, you need to block your ears for about 90 seconds now because this is the most terrible spoiler, and I would hate to ruin this beautiful story for you. But in Harry Potter and a Half-Blood Prince, J.K. Rowling sticks a knife into her readers' hearts. Professor Dumbledore is the Gandalf of the series, the only man whose power for good can match Lord Voldemort's evil. But in the sixth book, a weakened Dumbledore stands at the top of the astronomy tower, surrounded by his enemies, and he appeals to Harry's teacher nemesis, Severus Snape, for help. Severus, please. And Snape kills him. The scene is devastating. We never liked Professor Snape, but we hoped beyond hope that he was Dumbledore's man, and now his betrayal of his mentor is complete. It's only in the last book that we realize how wrong we were. When Harry extracts memories from the dying Snape's mind and pours them into the magical pensieve where you can dive into somebody else's past, and there we see that everything Snape has done has been driven by his passionate, hopeless, unrequited love for Harry's mother. We see Snape's anguish as Lily Potter is murdered by Voldemort, and how he thenceforth commits himself to Dumbledore. We hear Dumbledore telling Snape that he is dying from the slow workings of an irreversible curse, and makes Snape promise to kill him when the moment comes, and suddenly the meaning of Severus, please, is reversed. When our non-Christian friends look over at the Christian faith, they see an awful lot of things that look like Snape killing Dumbledore. They see a white-centered religion with a history of racism and scriptures that condone slavery. They see an anti-intellectual mindset and a contradictory Bible that's been disproved by science again and again. They see homophobia, the denigration of women, and a refusal to acknowledge that love is love. In this cultural moment, it's tempting for us to think that the sands are running out on Christianity. That the best thing we can do is batten down the hatches and cling on for dear life while the waves of secularization wash over us. But if that's what we think, I believe we've got it all wrong. The sands aren't running out on Christianity, they're running in. But just as our understanding of Severus, please, flips, when we hear Snape's whole story, when we look more closely at each of these devastating roadblocks, they become signposts to Christ. I believe we have an opportunity before us right here, right now. But there are four things that we need to do in order to grasp this opportunity. We must reclaim diversity. We must reclaim the university. We must reclaim morality and we must reclaim sexuality. But we must do all these things with humility and not by watering the scriptures down, but by lapping them up. So first, we must reclaim diversity. On February the 23rd of this year, Nigerian street preacher Oluwole Ilisanmi stood outside a train station in London, preaching to the commuters as they went by. Two white British police officers came up to him and gave him a choice, go away or be arrested. I will not go away, Mr. Ilisanmi replied, because I need to tell them the truth, and Jesus is the only way, the truth, and the life. Nobody wants to listen to that, said one of the British police officers. They want you to go away. You don't want to listen to that, Mr. Ilisanmi replied. You will listen when you are dead. You will listen when you are dead. And so he was arrested. What do we make of this? Are we encouraged by our brother's faith? I certainly am. Are we reminded that preaching the gospel always comes at a cost, and that we Western Christians have got far too used to a comfortable life, for sure. of Jesus while white Westerners stop their ears is a little parable for the religious world today. 40 years ago, sociologists thought that the tide was going out on religion. As the world became more educated, more scientific, more modern, religious belief would naturally decline. But in the last 40 years, not only have we not seen religion declining, but sociologists are now looking forward for the next 40 years and anticipating an increasingly religious world. So today, 31% of the world identifies as Christian, and that proportion is set to grow slightly by 2060 to 32%. Islam is expected to shoot up from about 25% to 31%, making it a very close competitor with Christianity. Hinduism and Buddhism are both expected to decline slightly. And the proportion of people who do not identify with any religious tradition, including atheists, agnostics, and nuns, is set to decline from 16% to 13%. The tide isn't going out on religion. It's coming in. This is surprising to our non-Christian friends. But perhaps what's even more surprising is that Christianity is the worldview of diversity. The first century Jewish man we worship broke through every racial and cultural barrier of his day, and he commanded his disciples to go and make disciples of all nations, and they began at once. We meet the first African Christian in the book of Acts, the Ethiopian eunuch of Acts 8. And Ethiopia actually went on to become the second officially Christian state in the world before St. Patrick ever went to Ireland, and a thousand years before the gospel came to America. Today, China is the global center of atheism. But experts believe that by 2030, there will be more Christians in China than in America, and that by 2060, China could be a majority Christian country. At that point, 40% of the world's Christians are expected to be living in sub-Saharan Africa. So what about in America? Black Americans are at least 10% more likely to identify as Christians than their white peers, and they pull higher on every marker of evangelical commitment, from regular churchgoing, to Bible reading, to core evangelical beliefs. Latina and Latino Americans are also more likely to identify as Christians. And immigrants of color are planting evangelical churches across this great nation. So I live in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and in Somerville, the adjacent city, English is the third most commonly spoken language at evangelical churches after Portuguese and Creole. Some white Americans think that immigration is eroding America's Christian heritage. In fact, immigration is a much-needed blood transfusion for the American church. Now this flips the paradigm for our non-Christian friends. When my friends hear evangelism, they envisage white Westerners forcing their beliefs down other people's throats. But when they realize that most Christians are not white Westerners, and increasingly most evangelists are not white Westerners either, the exclusive truth claims of Christianity can no longer be dismissed. When Mr. Ilisanmi said that Jesus was the only way, the truth, and the life, he was not saying, my culture's cooking is better than yours, but I was starving too until I found bread. So let's reclaim diversity. Because Christianity is the most multi-racial, multi-ethnic, multicultural movement in all of history. Second, we must reclaim the university. In 2015, I took a good friend of mine, who is an atheist Jewish science professor at Harvard, to an event at Harvard in which N.T. Wright, New Testament scholar, was in dialogue with the agnostic chair of the Harvard Philosophy Department. The title of the event was, The Bible, Gospel, Guide, or Garbage? And after the event, I said to my friend, I said, I know that you think that what I believe is crazy. His then-girlfriend, who is a much gentler soul than either of us, said, Oh, I'm sure he doesn't think that. He's a much gentler soul than ever. He's a much gentler soul than ever. Thank you. I said, I know that you think that what I believe is crazy. His then-girlfriend, who is a much gentler soul than either of us, said, Oh, I'm sure he doesn't think that. I said, Yes, he does. I believe that the entirety of human history revolves around a first-century Jewish man who died on the cross and was supposedly raised from the dead three days later. Crazy, right? My friend said, Yes. I said, The problem is, I think that you believe some crazy things as well. See, our non-Christian friends think that they are choosing between Christianity with all its crazy beliefs and a perfectly coherent secular worldview that does all the work for them that Christianity does for us without them having to believe in crazy things. My friends, there is no such belief system. For decades now, the idea that the world is becoming less religious and the religion is dying out has functioned in the university not just as a diagnosis but as a prescription. It's not just what will happen but what should happen. So what is going to happen when Western intellectuals realize that it hasn't happened? That the question for the next generation is not how soon will religion die out but Christianity or Islam. And that atheism, far from being the belief system of diversity and progress, is the belief system of white Western men and communist regimes. Feng Yang Yang is a leading sociologist of religion in China. And he says that the university is going to have to go through a paradigm shift, much like a scientific revolution, when the failure of the secularization hypothesis comes home to roost. In other words, between now and when my kids are in college, there's going to be an earthquake in the university. This should excite us, but it shouldn't surprise us. Because Christians invented the university, and universities like Harvard and Yale and Oxford and Cambridge were founded explicitly to bring glory to God. Christians have written some of the greatest literature of all time. Christians have dreamt up some of the greatest philosophy of all time. And perhaps most surprisingly to our non-Christian friends, and honestly to us as Christians as well, Christians literally invented the modern scientific method, not as an alternative to belief in a creator God, but because they believed in a creator God who was both rational and free. A few years ago, I met a Princeton professor named Hans Halverson. He's an extraordinary guy. He's one of the top four philosophers of science in the world. And Hans says that not only is it historically the case that Christians literally invented modern science, but that even today, science rests more securely on theistic foundations than atheistic ones. In fact, he says that atheism does not provide a philosophical grounding for science at all. Are there complex theological questions raised by modern science? For sure. But Christians have always been leaders in science, and Christians have always been on both sides of every supposedly science versus Christianity debate. So let's not concede science to atheism. Instead, let's find the thousands of Christian professors whom God has raised up in universities, in fields from philosophy to physics to psychology to history, and let's learn from them. Let's reclaim the university in this next generation not as a hostile takeover, but as a homecoming. Because Christianity isn't anti-intellectual. It's the greatest intellectual movement in all of history. Third, we must reclaim morality. Earlier this year, I reviewed this excellent book. It's called Atheist Overreach, What Atheism Cannot Deliver. It's by Notre Dame professor Christian Smith, and it's a serious academic work published by Oxford University Press. And in it, Smith evaluates whether today's intellectual atheists are giving us convincing reasons for their high moral beliefs. For example, their beliefs in universal human rights and justice, or their belief that people starving in the slums in Calcutta can make any moral demands on us here now. And this is Smith's conclusion. Atheists, it seems to me, are perfectly entitled to believe in and act to promote... only as an arbitrary, subjective, personal preference, not as a rational, compelling, universally binding fact or obligation. This news is deeply disturbing to our non-Christian friends. My friends believe passionately in human rights and human equality and care for the poor and racial justice and the equality of men and women. The question is, do they have any basis on the grounds of their atheism for these beliefs, and the answer is no. This realization dawned slowly for one of the few people who knew both me and my husband, Brian, before we knew each other. So our friend Sarah Irving Stonebreker is a history professor in Australia. She was a convinced atheist when she went to Cambridge to do her PhD. She was a convinced atheist when she went to Oxford to do her postdoc. But while she was at Oxford, she went to a series of lectures by fellow Australian Princeton philosophy professor Peter Singer. Now, Singer is a very smart man, and he's one of the few atheists who stares very frankly in the face the fact that if we get rid of Christianity, we can no longer trade on Christian ethics. And he says that rather than agreeing that all humans are equally valuable because they are human, that we need to evaluate beings, human or otherwise, on the basis of their capacities. For example, the capacity for self-awareness, less the capacity to suffer, etc. By Singer's calculation, a newborn infant is less morally valuable than an adult cow. As my friend Sarah listened to these lectures, she experienced what she later described as a kind of intellectual vertigo when she realized that her atheism cut against all of her deepest beliefs. She thought that Christianity was the enemy of human rights and racial justice and equality for men and women. But she gradually discovered it was the basis for those things, and so she gave her life to Christ. As we talk with our non-Christian friends, we must never imply that we think that we are better than they are. I believe that Jesus came to save sinners of whom I am the worst. And we must be very real about the massive, horrendous moral mistakes that Christians have made over the last 2,000 years, including we ourselves. And yet, rather than buying into the new atheist narrative that religion poisons everything, if we actually look at the data, even in America today, we find an interesting story. People who go to church once a week or more give 3.5 times as much to charity as their secular peers. They volunteer twice as much. They are half as likely to engage in domestic violence, and they're less likely to commit at least 43 other crimes. Christianity is the greatest movement for justice in all of history. So in this hurting world, let's reclaim morality, like divers pulling treasure from a wreck, and let's flee self-righteousness like toxic waste. Fourth, we must reclaim sexuality. When Snape killed Dumbledore, all doubt in the reader's minds as to whether he was on the side of good or evil died as well. And when we stand for Christian sexual ethics, we move over in our friends' minds from delusion to bigotry. Opposition to gay marriage for Christians is equivalent in my friends' minds to opposition to mixed-race marriage. It's morally repugnant, and it puts us on the wrong side of history. So how can we turn this devastating roadblock into a signpost to Christ? When Harry dived into Snape's memories, he found not a story of hate, but a story of love. And when we dive into what the Scriptures have to say to us about sexuality, we find that it's a love story too. This love song begins in the Old Testament as prophet after prophet compares God to a loving, faithful husband and Israel to his often unfaithful wife. And I think that it is a love story too. And I think the other end of the book was listening to the Tonightona in the Old Testament as prophet after prophet compares God to a loving, faithful husband and Israel to his often unfaithful wife. It takes a step forward when Jesus steps onto the stage of human history and declares himself to be the bridegroom. It comes into clear focus in Ephesians chapter 5 when Paul talks about human marriage as a little scale model of Jesus' love for the church. And it rises to a full-blown crescendo in the book of Revelation when the voice of a great multitude declares that the wedding of the Lamb has come and Jesus' marriage to his church brings heaven and earth back together. This is why marriage is male and female and why husbands and wives are called to different roles. Like Christ and the church, it's a love across difference. Like Christ and the church, it's a love built on sacrifice. Like Christ and the church, it is a flesh-uniting, life-creating, never-ending, exclusive love. Marriage is meant to point us to Christ. But it is also meant to disappoint us. Because even the best human marriage could only give us a tiny echo of Jesus' love for us. And let's not forget, Christian marriage was counter-cultural from the first. In the Greco-Roman world, men weren't expected to be faithful to their wives, let alone to pour themselves out in sacrificial love for them. It was fine for them to sleep with other women, and often with other men as well. No wonder Christianity drew more women than men in the first instance. No wonder the church has always been majority female. Far from being the epicenter of misogyny, Christianity is the greatest movement of and for women in all of history. And here's the irony. So the sexual revolution in the 1960s was sold to us as the liberation of women. For centuries, men had been finding ways to sneak around Christian marriage and have commitment-free sex, and now great news thanks to the pill women could as well. But in the past 60 years, despite growth in freedom and opportunity, women's self-reported happiness in America has actually declined. Why is that? I believe that part of the reason is that commitment-free sex is a poison chalice. For both men and for women, stable marriage correlates with multiple mental and physical health benefits. But for women in particular, increasing our numbers of sexual partners is actually correlated with negative mental health outcomes, including greater suicidal ideation, increased sadness, increased depression, increased substance abuse. Interestingly, a Dartmouth professor, who's not a Christian at all, did a study of sex and happiness, and he concluded that the happiness-maximizing number of sexual partners in the last year is, guess what? One. So let's not lose confidence in Christian marriage. But marriage is not the only relationship that is designed to point us to Jesus' love for us. Greater love has no one than this, said Jesus, than that he laid down his life for his friends. People sometimes say the Bible condemns same-sex relationships. I disagree. I think the Bible commands same-sex relationships at a level of intimacy that we Christians seldom reach. Paul calls us one body, knit together in love, comrades in arms. He calls his friend Anisimus his very heart, and he says he was among the Thessalonians like a nursing mother with her children. None of this is sexual. All of this is ours in Christ. And if we are going to reclaim sexuality in the next generation, we need to reclaim fierce, abiding, non-erotic, non-romantic love. I'm not saying any of this is easy or straightforward. I myself have been romantically attracted to women since childhood. If I were not a Christian, it's very probable I would have been married to a woman instead of married to a man today. I'm happily married to a man who have been for 12 years. And actually, I'm not actually as weird as I might sound from that. other reasons. It turns out I am the most typical kind of same-sex attracted person. A woman who is attracted to other women, but not exclusively so. So it turns out about 14% of women experience same-sex attraction, but only 1% are exclusively attracted to other women. For men, it's about 7% who experience same-sex attraction, and only 2% who are exclusively attracted to other men. And interestingly as well, people's sexual orientation can and does change over the course of their lifetime. Not always, but it certainly is not an infrequent occurrence. And this research has been pioneered by a woman named Lisa Diamond, who's a professor at the University of Utah, and she is herself a lesbian activist. And one of the things she concludes is that when we categorize people as gay or straight, we're not in fact cutting nature at its joints. We're imposing some joints on a very messy phenomenon. We need to recognize and reckon as churches with the fact that we have not typically served our same-sex attracted brothers and sisters well. We have let our brothers and sisters shiver in the dark, believing that they are weird and unwanted and unloved. And if you want to pour paraffin on sexual temptation, what do you do? You leave someone alone. But if we want to reclaim sexuality in the next generation, we need to make our churches places where same-sex attracted Christians are included and embraced. Our brothers and sisters who experience same-sex attraction are not an embarrassment. They're an asset. People today are blocking their ears to the gospel because they think we're homophobic bigots. Our same-sex attracted brothers and sisters, especially those who remain single because of their devotion to Christ, are our God-given SWAT team to burst through those defenses. Because there is no more powerful way to testify to Jesus in this culture. There is no more powerful way to point to the beauty of Jesus than to turn away from your own romantic and sexual fulfillment because you believe in a better love. So as we go out into our communities with the message of the gospel, we must reclaim diversity, we must reclaim the university, we must reclaim morality, and we must reclaim sexuality, but we must do all of these things with humility. we must repent of the ways that we have allowed racism to thrive in our churches. We must repent of the ways in which we have abandoned the life of the mind, and we must repent of the actual homophobia that has infected our churches for years. We need to take a hard turn toward the scriptures and a hard turn away from ourselves because Jesus is not a relic of the ancient world. He is our modern world's best hope. Thank you to you, Rebecca and Tim. We're going to start our second Q&A, and Rebecca, I will be directing the questions to you, but of course, Tim, please chime in if you have something to add. You're asking me when? Sorry. Okay. What are some ways you've shared the gospel with the LGBTQ community that have been helpful? A lot of questions are coming in about this topic. Yeah, I was showing some folks earlier today. I was actually visiting a church in Columbia, Missouri, a couple of weeks ago, and for various reasons, the LGBT community in that city was really up in arms about me coming. So I started off by using the best weapon we Christians have against our enemies, which is love, and inviting folk to have coffee with me and have an open conversation. I think one of the ways in is to actually take a big step back or deeper theologically. And so I think often we act like God found, or we're claiming that God found sexuality sort of lying around one day and decided to regulate it because he wanted to sort of make rules about these things. In fact, we believe in a creator God who made male and female and sex and marriage in the first place in order to tell us about Jesus' love for us. People typically haven't heard that, although I think it's profoundly biblically true. And so it just sort of shifts the territory of the conversation. Thank you. up some of the things I was saying sort of earlier in that presentation with some of the things at the end, and to say the kind of moral outrage that folks in the LGBT community feel about Christian sexual ethics depends on there being actual right and wrong, and atheism doesn't give you a grounding for saying that. So I think that's a place that we can touch. I think there's also territory to be touched on where LGBT folk are very concerned, rightly, about those on the margins, and those who are maybe being, you know, marginalized by society. Why do we care about people on the margins? Because Jesus told us to. Why do we care about racial diversity? Because Jesus told us to. There are all sorts of ways in which actually even the moral values on which Christianity is currently being critiqued are ones that Jesus has given us. So I think going back to those questions and issues, and I think the third, honestly, is finding those within our midst who have the credibility to speak on these questions. So friends who have really made some big sacrifices because of their faith in Jesus on these issues, and who can't be dismissed as homophobic bigots because this is their lived experience, not something that they're sort of theorizing about. So I think, yeah, I mean, point folks to articles or books by folks in those categories, or find your friends at church who can speak from experience and introduce them to your non-believing friends. Okay. So Rebecca, you shared about some of your rich experiences with friends in the university, and Tim, we know you've spoken on many college campuses. So what is your advice for Christians hoping to share their faith on college campuses in which there is a tolerance climate, yet intolerance toward Christians? To Rebecca, please. I think there is massive open space in the university. I mean, sorry, to frame this all, I'm like wildly optimistic. It's temperamentally who I am, but I'm also just like quite optimistic about the future of the church if we sort of get to work on some of these things. I've noticed that in, and I spent nine years in a parachurch organization working with Christian professors, helping them to articulate their faith in various contexts. And one of the things that's really interesting is that if you look at where the research is actually at, in terms of questions about like tolerance and evangelism, actually, like whether it's legitimate to share your beliefs with somebody else, even if they are highly unpopular, and to make a case, like try to persuade somebody to change their beliefs, that is something that universities should be all about. And there are plenty of very high up non-Christian thinkers who will say, yes, that is what universities should be all about. Now, if you then go and talk to student leaders or some of the administrative folks kind of trying to regulate the mess of student life, they'll often be like, oh no, evangelism, completely not allowed on this campus. That does not stand up in court, like actually intellectually, that does not stand up in court in the university. So I think we kind of lovingly and gently need to fight some of these battles and bring some of the best non-Christian thinkers to bear on these questions. Practically speaking, the biggest problem with talking to college students about faith is how busy they are. And also, it's impossible to give them something else to read when they're already feeling guilty about the fact that they're essentially lying through their teeth to everybody about how many books they're not getting read that are assigned. And I actually do think I'm being really practical about it. From what I can tell, it's just so hard for the students all feel very pressed, they feel behind, but they are isolated and really, really lonely, very. And so I would say just inhabiting a relationship with them and developing it is more important even with college students. You might think, well, they're college students, so they need more apologetics and they need more. Well, they will eventually, but probably in the very beginning, it's the relational has to take priority because you can't snow them with lots of information. They actually don't have the, they don't have any room for it. They're taking so much in. But on the other hand, the optimism, I share the optimism. It's the one time in your life when you really actually, college students think they're busier than they are. have no idea. And it's the one time in your life in which it's your job in a way to think about new ideas. So there actually is, there is room and a place for it. So yeah, I'd be optimistic too, even though it has to be relational. And a lot of the things that Rebecca said, Rebecca just, it was just the tip of the iceberg. There's a lot of ways to talk to people rationally and intellectually about the faith, but you do have to learn those if you're going to work with college students, because they're going to throw you the objections. Yeah, yeah. And just to build on that a second, we talked a bit about this earlier, college students are bigger to life hacks, right? Like they want to know what's going to make you happy? What's going to make life good? There is a lot of empirical data coming out of Harvard University showing that one of the things that makes you happy is going to church every week. Like literally, happier, healthier, longer lived. The things that Christians do, funnily enough, turn out to be quite well aligned with human flourishing. So maybe we can let people know that. People who go to church every week are five times less likely to kill themselves than people who don't. And we talk about suicide prevention on campuses. Like if everybody went to church every week or synagogue, but not the golf club, it's got to be church or synagogue every week, we could reduce suicide rates dramatically. Okay. All right. So we're going to get back to the topic of same sex attraction. Thank you, Rebecca, for saying the truth fiercely, honestly, and firmly. The question here is, what are some ways church can support our brothers and sisters who have same sex or bisexual attraction? Great question. So number one, and I think my guess is that all the Redeemer congregations are well up on this, for which I'm very thankful. I think number one is rather than assuming that everybody in the room is straightforwardly straight, assume that that is not the case. If it is true, which, you know, research seems to suggest that, say, 14% of women experience same-sex attraction, and you have 100 people in the room, then if half of them were women, I'm doing amazing maths here in my head, seven of those women experience same-sex attraction. So I think, firstly, we need to say, okay, this is something that is part of my community's experience, even if it's not part of my immediate experience. I think, secondly, we need to say, we're kind of all in the same boat. I mean, I'm not going to ask you to raise your hands, but imagine if I said, raise your hand if you have ever been attracted to someone you're not married to. My guess is, pretty much all of us, whether we're single or married, will be able to say, yes, I have sometimes been attracted to somebody I'm not married to. And to some extent, whether that is to a man or a woman is, like, kind of beside the point, the question is, will we submit our attractions to Christ? So I think if we recognize we're all kind of in the same boat, and we don't create Christian culture where it's easier to confess a pornography addiction than same-sex attraction, which, sadly, in a lot of churches is a reality that's much easier to talk about your porn addiction than about your desire for other men, for example. And we're kind of all in this together, recognizing, you know what, we're a bunch of messed up folks in all sorts of ways. And I think we need to live into the biblical ideals of Christian community, which, as I said, are embarrassingly intimate. I mean, imagine if Tim talked about being among you guys like a breastfeeding mother. You'd be like, oh, that's a bit weird. Like, breastfeeding, that's a very intimate thing. That's how Paul describes being with his people. And I think we need to lean into that and recognize how much love we need to have. I'm going to tack on a tiny anecdote to that, because I met with a gender non-conforming lesbian couple a couple of weeks ago, and we had a hard conversation that ended up better. And subsequently, one of the women said to me, I feel genuinely sad for you that you will never experience love and passion with another woman. And I sent this, it was a tweet, I sent this tweet to one of my best friends, and she texted back, she said, she's wrong about the love. I said, yeah, I know she's wrong about the love. I didn't feel sad for me at all. I think I probably have far more love from my close female friends than the average woman in a lesbian relationship, quite frankly. We need to do all the love stuff that the Bible calls us to do. Okay. So, uh, traditionally... I'm just going to hug you now. I know, I know. seem like Redeemer disciples deeply on race, science, and homosexuality. So, how would you suggest our Redeemer churches practically teach and disciple in these areas in the future? Yeah, I should, I should, you should not make Rebecca talk about that. And in some ways, I shouldn't either. I'm not the pastor of the church. But the, I do, I sort of make, well, no, okay. I actually think that we do not connect doctrine to cultural issues. So, for example, when you talk about creation, and when you talk about how God created the world, when you talk about sin, and how human beings fell from, and we call it the fall, when you go through creation, fall, redemption, restoration, you can teach it in an abstract way. The Bible says this, this, this, and not connected to the cultural issues of the time. The fact of the matter is, you can't really, you shouldn't really talk about Genesis 1 and not talk about gender. Because the very second that God created human beings, he created them in male and female. In other words, gender comes in immediately. So, the, the, I, of course, the, the, all the issues that you just mentioned actually have to be ordinarily talked about, not only in the preaching, but also in the way in which we teach and train. I would say, in general, Christian instruction, Christian doctrine, Christian teaching, just ignores those issues as if they were political or something, and they're actually not. So, you actually have to incorporate what, what the culture says about race and about power, and about history, and about gender, and about sexuality. They actually ought to be in our ordinary way of, it shouldn't be a special, like, okay, we're going to talk about creation, fall, redemption, restoration, and then we're going to talk about race, sex, power. They should be incorporated. They should be, they should be part and parcel. I have to admit that we don't have, we're going to have to produce a lot of that ourselves, because there aren't publishing houses and places and books that you can go to to talk about that. But, no, I do think, listen, I started Redeemer, and I was on top of it for most of its life, and so any failure there is, to some degree, a sin of omission on my part as a leader. And I think, I think there's a sense in which we've relied too much on traditional materials and things that have been written in the past that actually don't connect doctrine to cultural issues. We should. I'm not commenting on Redeemer specifically, partly because I massively admire Redeemer, and I don't, I'm not close enough to know any of the bad things, so, you know, I only know the good things. I think the scriptures give us incredible riches on all of these questions, if we pay attention to them. And, for example, on questions of gender, it's easy for us to conflate biblical views of gender with traditional gender roles. It was funny, I was reading a book recently by a transgender activist, and he was talking about a guy coming home from work as a manual laborer and cooking a meal for his family and saying, he's switching gender expressions there because cooking is a female gender expression. What was one of the first things that Jesus did after the resurrection? He cooked for his friends, right? Like, he baked the fish. Biblically, we don't have any mandate or need to say, well, cooking is a female gender expression. Like, if it's good enough for Jesus, the ultimate man, it's good enough for every man in this room. Looking forward to your cooking later, gents. And when it comes to race, I mean, gosh, the New Testament is the most emphatically anti-racist document in all of history, as far as I can see. And I think sometimes we lose sight of quite how aggressively anti-racist the New Testament is because our racial barriers are different from those of the time. So we hear Samaritan, and we immediately think, oh, the good Samaritan, like, Samaritan gives us all the feels in a positive way when we hear that word. Like, at the time, the Samaritans were like a hated racial and ethnic and religious group for the Jews. So the idea of a good Samaritan was, like, profoundly paradoxical. Abraham was called out of Iraq. he was coming from. All these ways in which, because we don't actually translate the Bible into our own sort of language and cultural terms, we don't see how aggressively anti-racist it is, but it really is. Okay. So, we're... So much. Do you want another hug, Kelly? Okay, we're going to get back to gender. How would you, Rebecca, approach a friend who believes they can choose their own gender, male, female, or whatever else they prefer? I am just starting to get very interested in transgender thinking. So, I say that to say, any words out of my mouth are, like, shooting from the hip, rather than my actual proper consider thought. So, I probably shouldn't say anything. But, like, it's fascinating to me to see how different strands within the transgender movement are moving. So, there are some folks who are saying, I, you know, for example, I could be fully anatomically female, and yet in some, like, objective sense, male. So, not just that I prefer a male gender expression, but that I, despite my sort of full anatomical femaleness, am, in fact, objectively male. Some folks are saying, I may have the primary and secondary sexual characteristics of a female, but actually, in a scientific way, my brain is masculine, and that something sort of happened in utero where there was a kind of misfiring or complication that meant that, in fact, I have a male brain, which is very interesting conceptually if we think about the sort of history of feminism. We've spent a long time saying that, actually, men and women are fundamentally the same, albeit anatomically different. And within the transgender movement, there's one thread which is saying, actually, no, there's a male brain and a female brain in some sense. And then there's this third move. I've recently been reading a transgender woman named Andrea Chu on these questions. A third sort of strain arguing that it's not about a biological reality, it's not about who I innately am, it's about what I want. And so there's all sorts of ideological conflict, actually, within the transgender movement, and there's all sorts of ideological conflict between transgender folks and traditional feminists, and there's actually also some significant conflict sort of ideologically between some transgender folks and some sort of traditional gay and lesbian folks, because the conversation's going in all which ways. So I think talking to a specific individual, I would want to hear what do they mean when they say that they are identifying as male stroke female or non-binary. I would want to understand where they're coming from specifically. Ask some good questions, listen, and learn from their experience. Recognize that, for some people, this is a very deep part of their human experience, and it's sometimes easy for those of us who don't. I mean, I've never experienced gender dysphoria myself. It's sometimes easier for those of us who haven't to be kind of dismissive. I think that's a very un-Christian approach. And I think, finally, and I'll shut up in a second, we need to recognize that some folks are born intersex. I have a friend with two little kids in this category, where they are born with chromosomally male, but with majority sort of female biological manifestation, at least as babies and small children. So we need to recognize there is complexity there, but at the same time that the Bible gives us real categories of male and female that are theological categories and not just sort of constrained by culture or even our sort of biological ideas. Okay, we have time for one last question. Given that this event is about missional living, is it possible that not all Christians are meant to evangelize? No. No. Not all Christians are equally gifted at anything that we're commanded to do. Some people are. In other words, the Bible says we're all supposed to be ambassadors. There's a famous place in Acts chapter 8 where after Paul, I mean, after Stephen was stoned to death, he was executed, there was a persecution in Jerusalem, and it says all the Christians except the apostles. All the Christians except the apostles. meaning that the only people that stayed behind were the apostles. Every other Christian, it says in Acts chapter 8 verse like 4 or so, it says every other Christian was preaching the gospel. That can't mean that they were all doing public speaking. But we're all supposed to counsel each other even though we may not have the gift of counseling. We're all supposed to evangelize even though we may not have the gift of evangelism. We're all supposed to do mercy, take care of people's physical needs, but some people have the gift of it. So there's the gift and the role. Not everybody has the gift, meaning you may not specialize in it. It may not be one of the main things you do. But the role is a command and therefore, yeah, all Christians should be sharing their faith. Okay, that's all the time we have for questions. Thank you so much for everyone who sent questions in. Please join me in thanking Tim and Rebecca.
