TITLE: God Promises to Send David to His People
SCRIPTURE: 1 Samuel 1:4-11, 2:6-10
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling Identity Hope
SERIES: The Life of David 2009
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/god-promises-to-send-david-to-his-people/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from 1 Samuel, chapter 1, verses 4 through 11, and then chapter 2, verses 6 through 10. Whenever the day came for Elkanah to sacrifice, he would give portions of the meat to his wife Peninnah and to all her sons and daughters. But to Hannah he gave a double portion because he loved her and the Lord had closed her womb. And because the Lord had closed her womb, her rival kept provoking her in order to irritate her. This went on year after year. Whenever Hannah went up to the house of the Lord, her rival provoked her till she wept and would not eat. Elkanah, her husband, would say to her, Hannah, why are you weeping? Why don't you eat? Why are you downhearted? Don't I mean more to you than ten sons? Once when they had finished eating and drinking in Shiloh, Hannah stood up. Now Eli, the priest, was sitting on a chair by the doorpost of the Lord's temple. In bitterness of soul, Hannah wept much and prayed to the Lord. And she made a vow saying, Oh Lord Almighty, if you will only look upon your servant's misery and remember me and not forget your servant, but give her a son. Then I will give him to the Lord for all the days of his life and no razor will ever be used on his head. The Lord brings death and makes alive. He brings down to the grave and raises up. The Lord sends poverty and wealth. He humbles and he exalts. He raises the poor from the dust and lifts the needy from the ash heap. He seats them with princes and has them inherit a throne of honor. For the foundations of the earth are the Lord's. Upon them he has set the world. He will guard the feet of his saints, but the wicked will be silenced in darkness. It is not by strength that one prevails. Those who oppose the Lord will be shattered. He will thunder against them from heaven. The Lord will judge the ends of the earth. He will give strength to his king and exalt the horn of his anointed. This is God's word. Through the summer, we're going to be looking at the life of David. Now, as a congregation, we've visited the life of David before, but did you know that there's more information in the Bible about David, more text about David than any other figure except Jesus? And what that means is two things. Number one, it means that there's always more material that we haven't visited as a congregation that we ought to look at. And it also means if the Bible thinks that David is that important, then we ought to be acquainted with him. And we're not going to understand what the Bible's message is, what the Bible's wisdom is. And so today we're looking at an introductory chapter, a short but very famous story about a woman named Hannah. And this is the introduction to the book, 1 Samuel, which is about David. We're going to look at what happens to her under four headings, all right? Hannah's tears, Hannah's turn, Hannah's song, and then what we learn from all of this. And unfortunately, that rhymes, but I promise I'll never do it again. See, it's Hannah's tears, Hannah's turn, Hannah's song, and what we learn. And it was completely, you know, circumstantial, and I promise never let it happen again. You're New Yorkers. You're too cynical. You don't want rhymed outlines. Give me a break. Okay. Number one, Hannah's tears. If we want to understand the story, we've got to understand why she was crying. Elkanah had two wives, Peninnah and Hannah. Peninnah was having children, bearing children. Hannah could not. She was unable to bear children. And as a result, Peninnah taunts, mocks Hannah until she can't eat, until she's weeping all the time. Now, I would like you to learn two things from this. Here's the general thing. Robert Alter, who's a great Hebrew scholar. Robert Alter, who's a great Hebrew scholar. says is this. He says, throughout the Old Testament, especially Genesis, but throughout the Old Testament, polygamy is never depicted in a positive light. Over and over again, it's seen as a disaster for families, and especially for women. And therefore, anyone reading the Old Testament and thinking that it supports polygamy simply hasn't learned how to read a text yet. I mean, if you want to see that polygamy is a disaster, is a terrible idea, all you have to do is read the Bible. And yet, of course, I continually run into people who say, well, the Bible said there's nothing wrong with it, and I want to know, what are you reading? Now, that's the first thing. Here's the second thing. Why is Hannah weeping so much? We've got to put this into context. In ancient societies, in all ancient societies, everything, the family, the country, everything depended on the fertility of women. See, first of all, the more children a family had, the more money it had. Because, see, the more children you had, the more workers in the shop or the more workers in the field. And as a simple matter, the more children you had, the greater the economic prosperity of that family, period. Secondly, the more children you had, the more likely you were to actually live to old age with a certain amount of comfort. For reasons I don't understand, they didn't think of 401ks back then. Nobody had thought about it until us brilliant people came up with it. There was no such thing as any kind of benefits for old people. Old people were cared for by their children. And since a lot of children died in infancy, unless you had a whole lot of children, you had no future security. But then most of all, actually, unless a country had lots and lots of children, more and more, when militarily they were very vulnerable. You had a lot of people because you, and then when there was a need, you had a lot of people in your army. And if you didn't have a lot of people in your army, you were conquered. It was as simple as that. And therefore, everything hung on the fertility of women. And therefore, a pregnant woman was a cultural hero. You've got to keep that in mind. And that's the reason why Walter Brueggemann, who's a Hebrew scholar, says this. He says, barrenness in any Hebrew text is the effective metaphor for hopelessness. Barrenness means there's no foreseeable future for your family, for yourself, or for your nation. Without children, there was no human power to invent a future. Now, you've got to keep that in mind. And then you realize that what Peninnah is doing is she is the voice of the culture. She is saying to Hannah, you know, if you can't bear children, you are nothing. You are hopeless. Now, do you understand why she's crying? You put that into context with a natural and very normal kind of desire that many women have to have children. You put on top of that, that kind of cultural voice, and you realize she was really in terrible straits. Because you know that word irritation? Do you see that word irritate in verse 6? Way, way too weak, an English word to convey what the Hebrew word is. The Hebrew word means to roar or to thunder. It's a word that's usually used to describe the sound of a hurricane. Have you ever heard a tornado up close? It's unbelievable. And that's what her interior emotional life was like. She was roaring in agony because she wanted children and she couldn't have them. That's why Hannah was crying. And before somebody gets on their high horse and says, oh, how awful those ancient cultures were, how oppressive they were, would you stop for a second? Yeah. Collective cultures, collectivistic cultures make the family the ultimate thing. And if the family is the ultimate thing, then women hated themselves unless they were married and pregnant. But we live in an individualistic culture in which individual advancement is the ultimate thing. And in our culture then, all that matters is individual achievement and looks and beauty and money. And in our culture, you hate yourself if you don't have those things. There is no such thing as a non-oppressive culture. Every culture comes to you. You know, there's a penina out there and every culture comes to you and says, oppressively, you're hopeless. You're nothing unless you have these things. Every culture does. suck you into its meaning systems. So that if you accomplish what the culture says you need to accomplish in order to be saved, quote unquote, then you're a Peninnah, filled with arrogance, taunting, mocking. Or, if you fail, and you don't live up to what the culture says, then you're Hannah, roaring on the inside and weeping. But that's what cultures do to you. They make you into a taunter or a weeper. And every culture is trying to do it to you. So that's what we learn from Hannah's tears. Secondly, I want to show you Hannah's turn. Something very interesting. Notice in verse 7, Peninnah is speaking to Hannah, mocking her. But then notice in verse 8, Elkanah speaks to her. And he says something very tender. What's he saying? He comes to her and says, look, okay, you don't have children. But shouldn't my love replace children? And what he is saying is, build your life around my love. Don't build your life around what's fitting into society by having children. And in verse 9, you notice what happens? In verse 9, it says, when she heard all this, it says, Hannah stood up. You see that? Once they had finished eating and drinking in Shiloh, Hannah stood up. Period. Now, why is that of any interest to us? The reason it's interesting is because in Hebrew, it literally says, she arose. And that is an idiomatic expression that means she made up her mind for decisive action. Whenever you see a place where it says, he arose, that doesn't just mean he happened to stand up. It means more. It actually means that she made up her mind and she was going to do decisive action. And Robert Alter, the Hebrew scholar I mentioned, says in this passage, the fact that she doesn't respond to Peninnah and she doesn't respond to Elkanah, but instead goes to God, goes to the tabernacle, means what? She is refusing their voices. You see, Peninnah represents a sociological hope. Hope, base your identity on having children. Base your identity on the fact that you fit into society. But Elkanah represented a psychological hope. Build your life on my love. Build your life on romance. Build your life around me. Get your identity from the fact that I love you. But she doesn't want to be enslaved to what society thinks of her. And she doesn't want to be enslaved to even her husband's love. She doesn't want to build her identity on that. She goes to God. As Robert Alter says, it is narratively significant that she answers neither Peninnah in seven or Elkanah in eight, but arises and decisively goes to God. And she's turning away from them. She's turning away from the sociological and the psychological hope, and she's turning to God. Now, what does she do when she gets to God? And in verse 11, we read this. Oh, Lord Almighty, if you will only look upon your servant's misery and remember me and not forget your servant but give her a son, then I will give him to the Lord for all the days of his life, and no razor will ever be used on his head. Ah, now what's going on here? At first look, it seems that she's bargaining, right? It seems like she's driving a bargain. It looks like she's saying, okay, God, I'll trust you if you'll do something for me. I'll trust you and I'll put my faith in you as long as you give me a child. That's what it looks like. But that's not what she's doing. Let me show you why it's not what she's doing. First of all, what's the response to this prayer? Well, we didn't print it all. It's a long passage, but here's the response. Here's what happens. In verse 18 and 19 of chapter 1, we read this. And then Hannah went on her way and ate something, and her face was no longer downcast. And early the next morning, they rose and worshiped before the Lord and then went back to their home in Ramah. And Elkanah lay with Hannah, his wife, and the Lord remembered her. So in the course of time, Hannah conceived and gave birth to a son, and she named him Samuel, saying, it's because I asked the Lord for him. Now, did you listen carefully? Actually, if she had bargained, it would have been prayer, pregnancy, peace, right? It would have been, I'm going to make prayer. Lord, if you do this for me, I'll trust you if you give me a son. And then she gave birth to a son, and she gave birth to a son, and she gave birth to a son. peace, right? It would have been, I'm going to make prayer. Lord, if you do this for me, if you give me, I'll trust you if you give me a son. And then she gets pregnant and then her roaring is over inside, right? Her unhappiness is over. Her face is lifted up. She has peace and joy. So it should be prayer, pregnancy, and peace. But that's not what you hear. That's not what happened. What did it say? There was prayer and then there was peace. Her face was lifted up. It was no longer downcast. She's given it to God. It's over. She's not watching to see if he takes his part of the bargain. It's not a bargain. You want to see a bargain? Go back to Genesis 29 when Rachel says, give me children or I die. That's a bargain. That's driving a hard bargain. I want children or I die. You better give it to me. That's a bargain. But what she's doing is she's getting rid of her absolute need to have children. It's fascinating. It's amazing. You know, here's what she's actually doing. Listen carefully. When she says, if you give me a child, I will give him to you and no razor will touch his head. What she's saying is this. The priests of the day, the priests who served in the tabernacle and did the services and spoke and did all the things that we ministers do today, the priests inherited their jobs. They were Levites. They were of the tribe of Levi. They didn't have land. They didn't have anything else. They lived and worked there at the tabernacle. But if you wanted to be a priest voluntarily and you weren't of the tribe of Levi, you could. You could be a non-inherited, non-Levitical priest voluntarily and that made you what's called a Nazrite, N-A-Z-R-I-T-E. And a Nazrite was someone who voluntarily, who was not of the tribe of Levi, was given to the ministry and who lived at the tabernacle from the time he was little and grew up there and served the Lord. And the sign that you were a Nazrite was you didn't cut your hair. Now, do you realize what she's doing? Let's think of all of the social and emotional reasons why a woman in that day would have a child. The one was the possibility, she says, if one is, I have a child, I fit into society. Now I'll be accepted. Now Peninnah will not say I'm hopeless. But wait a minute, if you give your child away into the Lord's service, you won't be able to go every day to the marketplace with the other mothers, with your little child tagging along behind you, playing with the other children, talking about your children, he won't be there. You won't be fitting in. If you give him away, you won't be getting that. He'll be invisible to society. Oh, here's another reason to have a child. And that is, in those patriarchal days, in that patriarchal society, one way to really make sure your husband loved you was give him a son. Because if you gave a man a son, then he had someone to teach the craft to and teach his work to and give his name to. Oh, that was it. It's all through the Bible. If a man had a son, then he loved his wife. But guess what? This child, if he's given to the Lord, will not be the heir. He goes off to live at the tabernacle. He's not the heir of Elkanah. Well, another reason why you have a child is just the emotional richness of having a child. He grows up and he loves you and you love him and he's your friend and his love means more than anything and your love means more than anything. But wait a minute, he's gone. What happened? Here's what happened. Hannah is going before him and when she makes this offer, what she is saying is, I am not resting my heart anymore in what society says. I'm not resting my heart in my culture and my social fitness. I am not resting my heart in my husband's love. I'm not even resting my heart in the emotional wealth of having a child. I am resting my heart finally in you. I'm putting my hope in you. That's what she's saying to God. Here's what she's saying. Let me paraphrase. Oh, Lord, she says. Up to now, I've always wanted a child for me. Now I want a child for you. I wanted a child for my sake. Now I want a child for your sake. And oh, Lord, if before this moment I had gotten a child, it would have made me a slave, a slave to my social status, a slave to my husband's love, maybe a slave even to the emotional relationship with my child. And I would have smothered him. And I would have been anxious. I would have lived my life out through him. But that's over. I'm giving them to you. I still want a child, but not for my sake. I want for your sake. And whatever you do now that I've made that offer. was saying to him, oh, Lord, it's safe to give me a child now, so may I have a child, please? And the Lord said yes. How did she get the strength to do that? Where did she get the freedom to do that? You know, there's plenty, and you know that even without that cultural pressure that she had back then, there are plenty of women who would love to have a child who can't, who don't, who haven't. There's plenty of men and women who would like to be married who haven't. There's plenty of people who have got big holes in their lives. Hannah figured out a way to deal with it. How did she do it? Don't you want that same kind of freedom? Don't you want that same kind of freedom from dysfunctional family systems? Don't you want the same kind of freedom from the cultural meaning system? Don't you want it? Here's how you get it. Thirdly, let's look at Hannah's song. The secret to how she did it is the theology of the song. Now, all of chapter 2 is Hannah's song. Once she got the child, she makes a song. And we don't have the whole thing printed, but here's what you need to see about the song. The song, first of all, discerns a pattern to God's salvation and discerns a person. It discerns a pattern and a person, okay, briefly. First of all, the song discerns a pattern. Earlier in the song, here's the part that we didn't print or read. In verse 4 and 5, she says this, The bows of the warriors are broken, but those who stumble are armed with strength. Those who were full hire themselves out for food, but those who were hungry hunger no more. Are you seeing the pattern? She who was barren has born seven children, but she who has had many sons pines away. And then, of course, she goes on. See, in verse 8, he raises the poor from the dust. He lifts the needy from the ash heap. It is not by strength that one prevails. Now, what's she talking about? She's saying there's a pattern to God's salvation that I see. You know what the pattern is? The pattern is God works through weakness, not through strength. He works through poverty, not through wealth. And a little later, Isaiah, looking back on Hannah and looking back, he can see the pattern even more carefully when he says, Sing, O barren woman, you who never bore a child, burst into song about shout for joy, for more are the children of the desolate than of her who has a husband. Here's the pattern. Look at Isaac. Look at Samson. Look at Samuel now. Look at even John the Baptist. Over and over and over again, when the people need a savior, when the people, the community's in trouble, and the people need a leader who's going to rescue them, and they cry out to God. God always chooses not the beautiful, not the fertile, and not the included, but always goes to a woman, not a man, who is unwanted, barren, and excluded, and miraculously opens her womb, and out comes someone to lead and rescue the people. Do you see the pattern? See, Hannah starts to see the pattern. God works with the marginalized. He works with the weak. He works with the excluded, not with the inside or the outsider, not with the strong, with the weak. He works with a poor, barren, rural woman like me. Here's the pattern. But she doesn't just see the pattern. She also sees a person, because look at the last verse. He will give strength to his king, and he will exalt the horn of his anointed. You know what the word anointed means? It's the Hebrew word Messiah. It's a word that means the anointed king, the chosen king, the one who's going to deliver and rescue. Now, when Hannah was singing, there was no king in Israel. There was no anointed king. And so, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, she's foreseeing David. And indeed, her son Samuel will anoint David as the true king of Israel. But she's really looking beyond that. And you know how we know she's looking beyond that? Because centuries later, there was another young girl who... she was an outcast because of that in those little towns in that traditional culture. And yet, when an angel appeared to her and explained what God was doing, she broke into a song, which is a more famous song than this. It's called the Magnificat, but it's based on this song. Mary knew in her heart that Hannah was her foremother, and you know why? Because when Mary sang the Magnificat, she bases her song on Hannah's. This is Mary singing, my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior. He has brought down rulers from their thrones. He has lifted up the humble. He has filled the hungry with good things, but he sent the rich away empty. He has helped his servant Israel, remembering to be merciful, even as he said to our fathers. Mary's son is the climax of the pattern of God's salvation that Hannah knew, that Hannah experienced. Because don't forget this. Isaac and Samson and Samuel and John the Baptist even, they were born to barren women by the power of God, but Jesus was born to a virgin woman by the power of God. There, more clearly than ever, God is saying, my salvation is by my strength, not by your strength. You cannot accomplish your salvation. Only I can. But here's what's even greater about Jesus. Isaac and Samuel and Samson, they got up and they took power and they saved their people from social and political oppression. But Jesus lost power. See, Jesus was like Hannah herself and like Mary. He was marginalized. He was excluded. He wasn't beautiful. See, he was beaten. He was tortured. He won through losing. He saved us through defeat. He paid the penalty for our sins. That's the Messiah. The Messiah, like Hannah, like Mary, see, like all these unwanted, infertile, excluded women. Jesus is just like them. He's the ultimate example of them. And this is how God works. He works through weakness. He works through the marginal. He loves them. Because the salvation is by grace. It's not for the people who think that they're so strong. It's for the people who know they're not. It's not for the people who think they're on the inside. It's for the people who know that spiritually they're bankrupt. And the only possible answer is the grace of God. That's how Jesus did it. That's how Jesus does it. And now we know actually why Hannah was able to do what she did. You know why? When you and I read the Bible, we see a bunch of disconnected stories, do we not? A lot of little moral fables about how to live life. But as we always say here, that's just not true. The Bible is a single story. And here's what the story is about. We have turned from God, and our whole world is a mess. But God came to Abraham, and he says, Abraham, I want you to be faithful, and I want you to establish a family, and then a bigger family, and then a community. And out of your descendants will come the salvation of the world. Well, I'll fix this world. Now, all Israelite women knew that that is what the Bible is about. All Israelite women knew about that promise. That somehow, in some way that they couldn't understand, out of the community of Israel, the descendants of Abraham, someday would come salvation. And so if you were a woman in Israel, there was really two ways you could have a child. One is you could say, I want a child for cultural status. I want a child for the love of my husband. I want a child for the love of my child. I want all these worldly reasons. Or a woman could say, I want to participate in the salvation of the world. I want to bear children into this community of faith, out of which someday is going to come the salvation of the world. And that's what she did. She connected her work, because that was her job. In those days, in ancient society, that was her job. She connected her work to the gospel. She saw the purpose of God in the world, and she says, I'm going to build my life on that. I'm going to do everything I do, even have a child, for that. And she did. And you know what we learned from all this? Three things quick. Number one. Look, I know this has been, my wife said this morning, huh, a sermon that's basically a chick flick. Well, okay. I'm sorry if you males have felt left out. You know, that doesn't happen to you very much. And she did not injure. She did not injure. don't care what you want in life. You want to produce art? Do you want to make money? Do you want to be loved and attractive? Do you want to achieve something in a particular field? Oh, those things are good things, but your culture is coming to you, and it wants to make you make those things your hope, the thing you build your life on, the thing you build your identity on. It wants to suck you into its meaning system, and that will be a disaster. And you know what Hannah was saying when she said, I don't want to have this child for me. I want to have it for you. You know what she was saying is, if you don't give me a child, that's fine with me because I've decided your love is enough, your honor is enough. I don't care about the culture if I know you're pleased with me, and I don't care about family if I know you love me. It'll be enough. And when she did that, weirdly enough, it was safe for her now to have a child. That doesn't mean, you know, you've got to remember, you know, sometimes Jesus calms a storm by getting rid of it. Sometimes Jesus gives you the faith to walk on the water through the storm. You know, whenever you come and say, Oh, Lord, you know, I really am not having the career I want to have, so I give it up to you and your honor is enough and your love is enough, that doesn't mean he's going to suddenly give you the career. He knows best. But I'll tell you one thing. If you don't do that, if you don't make this, if you don't do what Abraham did, putting Isaac on the altar, if you don't do what Hannah did, putting her unborn child on the altar, you're going to make a disaster of it. And the only way you're going to be able to do that is if the beauty of what Jesus Christ did on the cross, his poverty, his pouring out of himself, his suffering, his voluntary marginality, all the things he did for you, if that's not beautiful enough to you to attract your heart, then your heart's going to be attracted to other things. You're going to make them your hope, and it'll be a disaster. So you've got to do what Hannah did. You've got to say that prayer. And here's the second thing. This is really only the second thing, the only other thing I'll say. What we learn from this is that your suffering is never meaningless, but you'll probably never in your lifetime, within your lifetime, figure out quite what that meaning is. Your suffering is never meaningless, but you'll never really in your lifetime figure out quite what that meaning is. Because look at Hannah. If she hadn't suffered, if she hadn't suffered childlessness and the badgering of Peninnah and all the roaring on the inside, and if it hadn't brought her to the place where she realized, I'm going to go to God, I'm not going to go to my husband, I'm not going to go to her, I'm not going to go to my culture, I'm going to God. If she hadn't suffered, she wouldn't have become the great heart that she was. She wouldn't have dedicated her son to the Lord's service. He wouldn't have become the leader that Israel needed. He wouldn't have ever anointed David as king, and on and on and on. Do you think Hannah knew that? If it wasn't for his suffering, Israel wouldn't have been saved. Do you think Hannah knew that? Of course not. In her lifetime, no, she wouldn't have known it. Do you think Hannah thought, did she say, I tell you what, I am a poor, obscure, rural Israelite woman, and I'm going to just say to God, I'm just going to, I'm going to commit my heart to you no matter what. And 3,000 years later, hundreds of people will be gathering in New York City just to learn about me. I'll be famous. I'll be world famous. I'll do it. Of course not. Because you see, if you do it because you're sure somehow your suffering is going to turn into some kind of great and glorious and wonderful thing that God's going to do, you know, then you're actually not committing yourself to God. You're basically, you know, bargaining again. But the point of the matter is, all things work together for good to them that love him and are called according to his purpose. You will never know just what God is doing with your suffering, but your suffering is not meaningless. It's never meaningless. So do what the psalmist did in Psalm 73. In the midst of all of his pain, not knowing what was going on, he said, whom have I in heaven but you, and on earth there is nothing I decide but you. In other words, he says, I'm going to hold on to you, even though I don't know what's going on, and God will use it. Do you want to be like Hannah? You'll never be like Hannah unless you look at the one to whom she points, the ultimate impossible birth, the ultimate son of promise, the ultimate removal of shame, and the ultimate Savior. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for... Thank you, Father. You made her into a great heart. What she teaches us, but most of all, who she shows us, the anointed one, the one who didn't get up on a horse and pull out a sword and ride to victory, but the one who, like her, was excluded, unloved, and who all by himself, he gave himself to you in the dark garden. And he says, nevertheless, not my will but thine be done. And he saved us. Father, make us like him. Make us like her. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
