TITLE: God Incarnate (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 1
TOPICS: Doctrine Christmas and Advent Jesus' Birth
SERIES: To Know the Living God; The God Who Can Be Known
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/god-incarnate-part-1/

============================================================

Our scripture reading this evening is from the book of Matthew, chapter 1, verses 18 through 25. This is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about. His mother Mary was pledged to be married to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be with child through the Holy Spirit. Because Joseph, her husband, was a righteous man and did not want to expose her to public disgrace, he had in mind to divorce her quietly. But after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins. All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet, the virgin will be with child and will give birth to a son, and they will call him Emmanuel, which means God is with us. When Joseph woke up, he did what the angel of the Lord had commanded him and took Mary home as his wife. But he had no union with her until she gave birth to a son, and he gave him the name Jesus. This is the word of the Lord. At Christmas, we sing, O come, O come, Emmanuel, because Emmanuel is the name given to Jesus in one of the two annunciation texts. There's two places, one in Matthew, one in Luke, where an angel announces the birth of Jesus. So at Christmas, Emmanuel is one of the names of Jesus that we speak about, that we talk about. And all I want to do tonight is to meditate with you through this particular text, this particular little story and account. I want to meditate with you what Emmanuel means. Now it means, it tells you right there, God with us. So what I'd like to do is I'd like us to consider that Jesus Christ is, he's God, he's us, that means he's human, and he's with us. He's God, he's us, and he's with us. What's that mean? Well, let's look. First of all, the name Emmanuel means he's God. Now what Matthew does is he takes a passage from Isaiah chapter 7 that, and he quotes it, he says, the virgin will be with child and will give birth to his son and they will call him Emmanuel. Now for centuries, Jewish religious leaders and scholars saw that it was a prophecy, but they didn't think that it was to be taken literally. They thought it was talking about some great leader who would come and help Israel, and through the work of this leader, God would be more present with us. So it was a figuratively speaking, through as great human leader, God would be with us. But Matthew is saying, no, it's literally true. Jesus Christ is God with us because there was no human being that created the pregnancy that brought about that life in the womb of Mary. It was God himself. This is literally God. Now stand back for a second. Matthew, a Jew, says, Jesus Christ is God. John, the apostle writer, the apostle and the gospel writer says, Jesus Christ is the word, and in the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. Paul, a Jew, says in Colossians 2, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Jesus bodily. All of it, not just a third of it or a half of it or part of it. All of it, all the Godhead, all the divine substance. Peter, if you were here last week, it's Peter, the apostle Peter, another Jewish man, begins his epistle, his letter, his second letter, saying, according to the righteousness of our God and Savior, Jesus Christ. God. Jesus Christ is our God. And all through the gospels, Jesus is constantly forgiving sins, which only God can do, and everybody knows it. And he's always saying, I'm going to come back to judge the earth. Only God can do that, and everybody knows it. And at one point, Jesus actually says, before Abraham was, I am, and takes the divine name, I am, upon himself. So over and over and over again, then Jesus Christ, a Jewish man, says, I'm God. And hundreds, literally thousands of his Jewish followers said he was God and came to worship him as God. The reason I mentioned that these were all Jewish is this, that on the... group whose religion, whose worldview, whose understanding of God made them the least likely to believe that a human being could be divine were the Jews. Eastern religions understand God as sort of a force in everything, so the idea that God is in us or in a person or a lot in a person isn't a big problem. You know, the Greeks and the Romans had legends of Zeus or Mercury or, you know, or people like that coming down into human form and that kind of thing. But the Jews wouldn't even pronounce the name of Yahweh. They wouldn't even spell it, you know. And yet Jesus Christ, by his life, by his claims, and by his resurrection, convinced his closest followers that he was not just a prophet come to tell you how to find God, but he was God come to find us. Every other religion differs from Christianity here. Every other religion was founded by someone who was a prophet or a sage or a teacher, a prophet who came to tell you how to find God. But Christianity says, no, our founder, Jesus Christ, is God come to find you. Now, he's God. That's the claim. And what does that mean? Let's be practical. It means three things at least, more than that, of course, but three things we have the time to talk about here. Crisis, grace, and hope. First of all, the claims that Jesus Christ is God himself come in the flesh, incarnation, that's what Christmas is about. The claim that Jesus Christ is God come in the flesh creates a crisis. How do you think of it that way? Here's the dictionary definition of a crisis. It says, a crisis is a stage in a sequence of events at which the trend of all future events, especially for better or for worse, is determined. A crisis is a fork in the road. A crisis is you get to the place where you have to choose this or this, and it makes all the difference. If you go this way, you go in a completely different direction than if you go this way. And the claim that Jesus Christ is God is a crisis. You know how you can see that? In the Bible, in the Gospels, when you actually see Jesus moving about and doing things, speaking, ministering, he's always putting people into motion. You know, Jesus is like this giant billiard ball who, when he comes into contact with anybody, even just giving a sermon or giving a talk, immediately everybody's in motion. What kind of motion? Well, all kinds. Some people are so furious at him, so angry at him, they're rushing at him to try to throw him off cliffs and kill him. So some people are so mad, they're rushing at him. Other people are so scared and terrified, they're running away from him. You know, get away from me, I know who you are, you know. Or, thirdly, they're throwing themselves on the ground and bowing the knee and saying, command me, and worshiping and adoring him. But everybody's in motion because of his claim. Because if he is who he said he is, then you have to just, you have to throw everything down and center your whole life on him. And if he's not who he said he is, then he's someone, there's someone to hate or someone to rush away, run away from. But the one thing, you see people running to him and running away from him and throwing themselves down. But one thing you never see in the Bible, ever, when anybody actually confronts the real Jesus or hears him, nobody ever stands on their feet and shakes his hand and says, that was a wonderful lecture. It really gave me something to think about. And let me, let me be bold, please, let me be as respectful as I can as I say this. And yet, New York City, in fact, America, in fact, the world is filled with people who are just, they just believe in Jesus, but it hasn't revolutionized their lives. They just believe in him, oh yeah, but it doesn't completely revolutionize their lives. Why is it that it's not, there's been no crisis? Why is it that they haven't been, you know, pushed down into anger or pushed down into terror or pushed down into absolute obedience and surrender? Why are they right here saying, oh yeah, I believe in Jesus? Either it means they actually have never had any, they have no idea what he actually says, or they have no intellectual integrity. So you see, Jesus being God is a crisis. Ah, but Jesus being God is a comfort and a hope. You know why? It's grace. See, the incarnation is that God himself has come to earth. Why? Well, other religions say that God sends prophets or a prophet or a sage and tells you, here's how you must live, here's how you get enlightenment, here's how you please God, here's how you must live, here's how you connect to God. But the Christianity says, no, that wouldn't be good enough. do. Therefore, God had to come himself and do what we couldn't do for ourselves. He does not send someone. He does not send a committee report. He does not send a preacher, a prophet just to tell you how to save yourself. He comes to save you. And that means grace. Or put it this way, the Bible's narrative of the world is that God did not originally make the world into a place the way you see it now. There was no disease originally when God made it. There was no death. There was no hatred and strife and war and poverty and conflict. It just wasn't there. Why do we have it? Because the Bible says we've turned away from God. God. But has God abandoned us? No. The incarnation, Christmas, means God has landed. He has not abandoned us. He's come back. Oh, he hasn't come back as a judge. Not this time. Not when he came at Christmas. He didn't come with a sword in his hand to smite evildoers, smite sinners, because if he came with a sword in his hand to smite sinners, there'd be nobody left. We wouldn't be here. He didn't come with a sword in his hand at Christmas. He came to have nails put through his hands. He came to save sinners so that someday he can come back and wipe the world clean of all evil and everything that's wrong with it. And so Christmas means God has not abandoned us. God has come back. God has landed. Or put it this way. The ideal has become real. The ideal has penetrated the real and will eventually transform it into its likeness. Do you hear that? I mean, when you and I think of ideal and real, we say, come on, be realistic. There's the ideal, and the ideal will never be realized here. This is the real world. But Jesus Christ has punched a hole through the concrete slab between the ideal and the real. And the ideal came down into earth. Not to put everything right yet, but by the entrance of Jesus Christ and the gospel and the Holy Spirit, that Christmas is signaling that God has landed and that someday he's going to put everything right. So the fact that Jesus is not just a teacher who comes to kind of give us good advice, but he's God himself come to rescue us, is both a crisis and an incredible comfort and hope. That's point one. Point two, Jesus is not only God, he's also us. He's human. He's not just divine. He's human. The doctrine of Christmas, the doctrine of the incarnation, is that Jesus Christ was truly and fully God and truly and fully human. I am not going to give you 10 or 15 minutes on that point because that's actually next week's sermon and text. Because that is the other side of Christmas. Jesus is not, the Jesus who was born in the manger is really God and we just looked at that. But he's also really human. But let me give you a foretaste of what we're going to talk about next week, just so you go away with a little bit of a balance in your mind. There's two things that the humanity of Jesus Christ means. And one is infinite consolation and joyful humility. Here's what I mean by infinite consolation. If you have suffered something, really suffered something, you feel pretty lonely. When you're feeling happy, things are going well, you feel like part of the human race. And when something really bad happens to you, you feel very lonely and you feel like people don't understand. And sometimes people are trying to console you and you don't want to hear it. And then when you actually meet somebody who's been through exactly the same thing, exactly the same thing, you trust them. You say, you know, you understand. And so you pour your heart out to them and they talk to you and you listen to them and you give great credence to their opinion. They've been through this, right? If you're just going into, you know, a perfect example of that is you always feel like, well, I'm a pretty good person. I mean, I had thyroid cancer almost eight years ago. And, you know, being a pastor, I've held an awful lot of people's hands when they got bad news. And then suddenly I got bad news. And it was, you know, it's different. And, but when you are four days into something like that and you reach and you talk to somebody who's several years into it or through it in some way, you say, you understand. Ah, wait a minute. You realize only Christianity teaches that God became not just a human being, but a human being who was born in a manger, a human being who knew poverty, a human being who knew betrayal, who knew, who knew, who knew suffering, who knew death. In other words, whatever you've gone through, and this is actually a subject of next week's sermon, God has been through it. meaning of Christmas, that God became flesh, he became vulnerable, he became someone who suffered, that does not immediately tell you what the reason for your particular suffering is. So if you're suffering and you look at Christmas, that doesn't tell you what the particular reason for your suffering is, why it's happened to you. It doesn't really answer that. But Christmas does show you what the particular reason for your suffering isn't. It isn't that God doesn't love you. It isn't that God doesn't care. It isn't that God's so remote and indifferent because he's God and he's up there and how could he care about you? Because he came down and plunged himself into our humanity. He's God with us. And therefore he understands. And you can go to him. And you can trust what he says. There's another thing, and that is, as I said, joyful humility. And it actually has to do with what Jeff was sharing with you. If you think about this, traditional Christian theology says that when God became flesh, when God came to earth in Jesus Christ, he did not empty himself of his deity, but he did empty himself of his glory. In other words, when Jesus was walking around, he was still God, but he emptied himself of his glory. Now, what does that mean? Well, what it means is, when Moses even got near the outskirts of God, he was practically dying up on the mountain. When Jesus walked down the road, you didn't even have to put on your sunglasses. In fact, Isaiah 53 said he wasn't all that great to look at. He was very ordinary. Again, we're going to talk about that next week, but here's what this means. Jesus Christ, God, emptied himself of his what then? His deity? No. Put it this way, of his glamour. And as a result, Christians must never be starry-eyed about glamorousness. It means, for example, Christians should never be snobs, never be people who just want to social climb and get up into higher echelons of sleek and beautiful. In fact, J.I. Packer, in his book on knowing God, has a chapter on the incarnation, and he puts it like this. He says, the incarnation meant, means God laying aside his glory, an acceptance of hardship, isolation, ill-treatment, malice and misunderstanding, and finally a death. So the quote-unquote Christmas spirit means reproducing in human lives the temper of him who for our sakes became poor. It does not shine out in the snob or a person who aspires to higher social standing. The Christmas spirit is rather that of those who, like their master, live their lives on the principle of making themselves poor, spending and being spent to do good to others and not just their own friends. In other words, the fact that God became human and emptied himself of his glamour means you should not only be wanting to hang out with the pretty people, you should not only want to be hanging out with people who are networked, who can help you, who can open doors for you. You need to be willing to walk to the place of the people without power, the people without beauty, and the people without money. That's the Christmas spirit because God became one of us. Now lastly, Jesus Christ is God. He's with us. He's God. He's us. And he's with us. Now the word with means relationship. And where I want to end our thinking tonight is this. To say Jesus is God with us goes beyond just saying he came to earth. God with us means in relationship with us. With is the word for relationship. There's a place in Mark where it said Jesus Christ chose 12 apostles and he appointed them so that they would be with him. That's all it says. With him. What's with him mean? Living with him. Having, being in each other's lives. Now, what does it take for God to really be with you? What does it take for you to really have Jesus as an intimate friend and have his influence and his power and his love and his joy really in your life? Not just believing in him. What does it take to be with him? And the answer is, this text's answer is courage. This text, unlike Luke 2, which ends in joy, you know, remember Luke 2? God, you know, I mean, Luke 1 and 2, the angel comes, tells Mary, end of the Christmas text in Luke 2 is, you know, angels singing from heaven, glory to God in the highest, it ends on joy. Matthew 1 and 2, this particular text, ends with danger and actually bloodshed. Look what happens when Jesus Christ comes into the world, according to Matthew 1 and 2. First of all, shame and exclusion and rejection. Mary's pregnant. Joseph knows she's not pregnant from him. He decides he's going to, even though they were engaged, he's going to sort of put her away, as it were. He's just going to say, okay, break the engagement, that's that. The angel shows up and says, no, marry her. She's pregnant through the Holy Spirit. But you know, if Joseph marries her, everybody in that town, in that very, very small town, in that very, very shame and honor society, will know that this child was not born nine months or 10 months or 11 months after getting married, after they got married. They'll know she was pregnant when they got married. And that will mean either they had sex before marriage or she was unfaithful to him. And they're going to be shamed. They're going to be rejected. They're going to be second-class citizens forever. And when, when, when the angel says to Joseph, marry her, he's saying, if Jesus Christ is coming into your life, you're going to be rejected. You have to kiss your stellar reputation in your town goodbye. And that's just Matthew one. In Matthew two, you have the slaughter of the innocents. Herod the great trying to destroy the Messiah that was predicted to be born in Bethlehem. And he goes, and just to make sure he didn't lose it, that he gets the Messiah. He just goes in and slaughters all the kids. There's the world's violent hostility toward the gospel. In the beginning, in Matthew one, you just have the sort of more mild version of hostility to the gospel. What is Matthew one and two saying? If you want Jesus Christ into your life so that he's with you, it's going to take courage. It's going to take courage, three kinds of courage, according to the text. If you want a more intimate friendship with Jesus, three kinds of courage. Number one, it's going to take the courage. You're going to need courage to take the world's disdain, to take the world's disdain. Can you imagine what Joseph, you know, all of Joseph's friends are going to say, what in the world? Why did you marry her? Either you did that or she did, she was unfaithful to you. Can you imagine Joseph trying to tell him the truth? Oh, I can explain, he says. She's really pregnant through the Holy Spirit. No, of course, it wouldn't work. In other words, the truth isn't something his friends will understand and therefore they will always think ill of him. And if you want to be a Christian, especially in New York City, you will pretty much face the same thing. If you are an out of the closet Christian in New York City, in whatever social circles you're in, in whatever professional networks or vocational fields you are in, you're going to have a lot of people who just will not understand and you can't make them understand why you are the way you are. And they are going to, you're going to have to kiss, in many cases, your wonderful reputation goodbye. And yet, why do you think Jesus Christ came into this world through a pregnant, unwed teenage girl? In a patriarchal shame and honor culture. God didn't have to do it that way, but I think it was his way of saying, put Jesus Christ into your life and I'll be your honor. It doesn't matter what the world thinks. I'll be your honor. I'll be your vindication. So first of all, you have to have the courage to handle the world's disdain. Secondly, you need the courage to give up your right to self-determination. See, if you want Jesus really in the middle of your life, you've got to obey him unconditionally. You've got to give up control of your life. You've got to drop your conditions. The way that comes out in the text is that the angel tells Joseph what he has to name his boy. Now, you know, in that culture, in that time, in a patriarchal society, it was absolutely the father's right to do, the father could do anything he wanted with the children, you know. He could do anything he wanted, and especially naming them, which was a sign that he had complete control over his children. It was his right, and the angel takes that away. Why? You know why? He's saying, if Jesus is in your life, even if Jesus is an infant, he's saying to Joseph, you are not his manager, this child who's about to be born. He's your manager. Now, constantly, people have said to me over the years, I'm interested in being a Christian, but not if I have to do this, or not if being a Christian means that, or not, you know... I'm interested in being a Christian. like to be like, you know what they're doing? They're trying to name him. They're trying to say, well, I want a Jesus Christ who's like this. In other words, they're trying to name him. But I'm sorry, he names himself, and he'll name you eventually, but you don't name him. You have to give up the right to have control and to say, well, I'll obey you if, or I'll do this if. See, as soon as you say, I'll obey you if, that's not obedience all. What that's really saying is, you're my consultant, not my Lord. I'll be happy to take your recommendations, and I might do a couple of them. No, no, no, no. If you want Jesus with you, you have to give up the right to self-determination. And then lastly, most important, in fact, the most fundamental, you need the courage to take the world's disdain if you want Jesus with you. You need the courage to give up the right to self-determination, give up the control of your life. But thirdly, you have to have the courage to admit you're a sinner. What is Jesus' entire mission? It tells you right there, he will save his people from their sins. Wait, I thought Jesus came to empower us and love us. Yes, yes, yes. But primarily to forgive us, because everything else comes from that. If you are not, my dear friends, if you're not willing tonight to say, I am alienated from God, I am a moral failure, I don't love God with all my heart, soul, strength, and mind, and I don't love my neighbor as myself, and therefore I am guilty and I need forgiveness and I need pardon before I need anything else. I'm a sinner, I need to repent. If you can't do that, I would like to say to you that's a lack of courage. It takes enormous courage to admit that, because it really means throwing your old self-image out and getting a whole new one through Christ. And yet that is the foundation for all the other things that Jesus can bring into your life. All the comfort, all the hope, all the joyful humility, and everything else. Now where are you going to get the strength to be courageous like that? I'll tell you how. By looking at Jesus himself. Because, listen, if you think it takes courage for you to be with him, it took infinitely more courage for him to be with you. And every week we're looking at an attribute of God, and only Christianity says one of the attributes of God is courage. No other religion has a God who needs courage. But Jesus Christ needed incredible courage. Why? Because in Jesus Christ, God became vulnerable. He became killable. He became torturable. He became betrayable, deniable. And he was for you. And he thought it was worth it. And when you see that courage, where does he get that kind of courage? You know where that courage comes from, don't you? Have you ever seen a mother bear? Get between a mother bear and her cub. And even though you have Tommy gun, machine guns, she'll come after you. Why? Where does she get the courage from? It's love. Love. Why was Jesus so courageous to do what he did for us? Love. See him doing that? That'll give you the courage to put him into the center of your life. And then you'll have all these blessings. Let's pray. Our Father, how grateful we are that in Jesus Christ, we have God with us. Let us this Christmas season meditate on those things until we become more and more conformed to the image of your son, Jesus Christ, who came to save us from our sins. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
