TITLE: God’s Promise to Noah
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 9:1-17
TOPICS: Creation
SERIES: Genesis 1998
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/gods-promise-to-noah/

============================================================

Though it would be a lot of fun to get into them, are not the main one. They're very important, but they're not the primal ones. The first relationship is the relationship with non-human life, with the earth, the environment. The second relationship, he outlines, is a relationship with human life, with all other human beings. And the third relationship, he tells us about, is a relationship with him. A personal relationship with him. So, that's pretty comprehensive. That kind of covers everything, right? Let's take a look. The first two we have to be self-controlled about, because they're extremely interesting and kind of controversial and kind of interesting and neat. But listen, let's be basic but clear. The first issue, our relationship to the earth and to non-human life, the issue of ecology, in other words, our stewardship of the environment. The one thing you immediately catch, if you're reading this, is that this sounds a lot like what God has said to Adam. This, in a sense, is God coming to Noah and saying the same thing he said to Adam before sin and brokenness and the fall. And what we see is God is actually saying, though we're in a situation of brokenness, though we're in a situation of sin, though the relationship to the environment is very strained. You notice verse 2, it says, the fear and dread of you will fall upon all the beasts of the earth and all the birds of the air, upon every creature. In other words, our relationship with animals now is still strained now. It's very strained. It's not what it was. They're scared of us, you see. But what God is saying is you still have this responsibility to care for the earth. He's really saying, even though sin and brokenness has come in, the responsibility I gave to Adam in the very beginning is still the responsibility of the human race. But here's what's really weird and really fascinating. When in the very beginning, I read it to you, it's not printed here, in chapter 8, when the Lord says, I will never again curse the ground because of you, though every inclination, because of man, because every inclination of his heart is evil from childhood. In spite of that, I will not curse the ground. And then, what is, who's he talking to? Well, he's talking to Noah, but not only Noah. The thing that is remarkable through here, it happens in verse 9, in verse 12, in verse 16, in verse 17, is God is not just making a covenant with human beings, he's making a covenant with every living creature. This is the only place where God enters into a covenant relationship with every living creature on the face of the earth. If he only said it once, we would have, I don't know what we would have thought. It's so weird, but he comes up in verse 9, 12, 16, and 17. And in verse 13, he even goes beyond that. And in verse 13, he says, I have set my rainbow in the cloud. It will be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. Not just the living creatures on the earth, but the earth. Now, here's what's so strange. You say, well, what's so strange about that? I'll tell you what's so strange. In the Bible, a covenant relationship is a saving relationship. See, God already has a relationship with the earth and with all the living creatures as creator. We know from other places in the Bible, he sustains them, he created them, he holds them up. But now God is actually changing his relationship. He's entering into, he's beginning a covenant. And a covenant is always a saving relationship. He is not at this point saying to the earth and to the environment, I am just your creator. He is saying, I'm your savior. Whenever God enters into a covenant with a party, he is saying, you are in danger because of sin and I'm going to save you from it. Now, somebody says, what? God is going to the earth and the animals and saying, you're in danger because of your sin? They've sinned against God? No, no, no, no. God does not have to enter into a salvation, to a covenant. He doesn't have to become the savior of the world because of its sin. He has to become a savior of the world because of ours. We're bad gardeners. Somebody needs to save the garden from us. We are, you see, in chapter 8, that's where he says, at verse 20, never again will I curse the ground because of man, even though every inclination of his heart is evil. God says to us, take care of the mountains and the trees and the brooks and the earth, and we won't. Now, how our sin hurts the earth is complex. On the one hand, it's very simple. Most of us know today that we're very selfish and we are abusing the earth. But if you go back to Romans chapter 8, verse 19, it says, promised myself and I just promised you that this isn't the main thing, that the relationship of our sin to the earth is very complex, that there are ways in which the earth, it says there is groaning under the weight of our sin, probably not just directly because of our abuse of the environment, but probably also indirectly because nothing in the world works right because we have refused to take our right place in it. But here's the key, God says, I love the mountains, I love the trees, I love the bunny rabbits, I love the beetles, I love everything I've made, and I am not just this creator, I'm its savior, and I am not going to let it be cursed because of the sin of the gardeners, of the vice regents, of the human beings that I've put into this world to take care of it. If you are going to rape and pillage the earth, I won't let that happen, I'm going to take care of it, I'm going to be the savior of it. Now, you know what, listen, in our contemporary world, if you ask somebody, why should we care for the environment, why should we try to conserve and be good stewards, why should we care about the water and about the air and about the, why should we do that? In the west, they're going to tell you, well, because if we hurt the oxygen, you know, it's strictly pragmatic, if we hurt the oxygen supply, where will we go? The earth is a spaceship, we've got to take care of it. Utterly pragmatic, in other words, if things get bad enough, we better stop. And if you go to the east, they give a very, very vague, and I don't want to knock it because it's much, much better than what the west has right now, but a general vague sense, everything is sort of sacred. If everything is sacred, though, is anything sacred? I mean, if you and I are no more sacred or less sacred than a tree, is anything sacred? But here's the point, Christians have the most radical reason possible to care for the environment. God says, I am not just his creator, I'm his savior. I love it. It is in danger. I am out to preserve it. I am out to sustain it. I am out to save it. And I would like some cooperation from people who understand my mission. It's amazing. He loves the mountains. He loves the trees. He's the savior, not just the creator. He wants to liberate. And this is in Romans 8. It says, not until our salvation is complete will the nature's salvation be complete, and it will actually glorify God in all the incredible ways that he meant for it to be. Do you realize the mountains, as great as they are, they must be more beautiful when they're finally liberated. The seas are going to be even more beautiful. I mean, I spent a lot of time listening to the waves, praise God, this summer. Have you ever noticed that you can praise God better in unison with that? And yet it's nothing, God is on a mission to say, I love the earth. I'm in a covenant with it. I'm the savior of the earth. And Christians have this unbelievably radical reason to care about nature. And that's number one. Number two, then he moves on and talks about, this passage is also very eye-opening, when it comes to a relationship with others. If you get into verse six and seven, we now move from the issue of ecology to the issue of justice. From our relationship with non-human life to our relationship with human life. And when you get to the relationship to human life, here's what he says. He says, I will demand an accounting of your life blood. I will demand an accounting from every animal and from every man, too. I will demand an accounting for the life of his fellow man. And whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God, God has made man. Now, right away we get distracted, and I won't let you. Because right away we say, ah, wait a minute. Whoever sheds the blood of man, by man shall his blood be shed. What are the implications of that for self-defense, war, capital punishment? Now, I can tell you this. You cannot, I know, because I've heard pacifists and just war theorists. I've heard people for capital punishment and against it. I've heard people argue over these verses, and they are inconclusive all by themselves. You hear me? All by themselves. It does not say, God is not saying here, you see, this is what the pacifists will say. It is not saying, if somebody kills someone, you go and kill them. It's not saying that. All God is saying is, I will hold it accountable, and he's predicting. And it's very hard to know. And all by itself, this is not what it's about. It's not here to teach us that. What is it here to teach us? It is here to teach us. The second part of verse 6. The reason that every single person's lifeblood is so precious that God does not just hold human beings accountable, but in some way which... accountable. This is a way of saying human beings are incredibly precious. Why? Because they image God. Now, this word image is in a way deep, and yet in a way it's simple. God is saying, human beings have got a soul in such a way, they've got a nature in such a way that they mirror me. They reflect who I am in a way. They show forth more of my glorious attributes than even the mountains and the ocean in all their grandeur. They image me. They know me in some way. They reflect me. We can't get into all that, but here's what God is trying to say. What he's saying is, every human being, old or young, smart or stupid, or retarded, male or female, rich or poor, every single human being is so precious that I will even hold animals accountable for abusing them. This is the incredible principle of justice. This is saying that every human being has got to be treated as something holy. What does that mean? My word. Listen, John Calvin put it this way. Before I quote John Calvin's Institutes, let me just point out that again. If you go to people and say, why should we care for the poor? Why should we fight against racial injustice where you're treating one group below another group? Why should we be against abuse and oppression? Why should we be against this? Now, I happen to know that the reigning theory of justice in the law schools of the West is what's called positive law as opposed to natural law. Now, positive law, and this is a big oversimplification, but positive law basically says we can't believe anymore that there is a God who speaks. We can't, who's to say what God's law is? Who's to say what right and wrong is? Therefore, justice is what the will of the people is. If the people pass a law, then it's just. But you see, if the will of the people, the will of the majority, it's basically John Stuart Mill utilitarianism, which says, you know, the greatest good for the greatest number. And of course, there's a huge problem with that because if 51% of the people vote that it's to their good to kill 49% of the people, by definition, that is just. Because there is no way to judge the will of the people. There is no way that the majority can ever say the majority is unjust, which is really what you have. It's called evolution, the strong eat the weak, and it's enshrined as positive law. Now, somebody says, okay, well, what's the Christian alternative? Ah, somebody says the Christian alternative is justice. The basis of justice is not majority rule. The basis of justice, therefore, would be what? The law of God. Yeah, but not exactly. And here's the reason why. That's not what's given to us here. God does not say the basis of justice for every human being is follow my law and my law says this and this and this and this. Here's the problem. Whenever I watch the action films, you know, every summer you watch action films. Whenever you watch action films, one of the things you always have is you have a villain and the villain is horribly unjust. He tramples people. He treats them as things, you see, not as precious. And because he's breaking the law over and over and over again, by the time you get to the end of the program, the hero always treats the villain unjustly. The villain always smashes, abuses, laughs in his face, you see. In other words, does all the things to the villain that were done to him and we cheer. Because if the only reason that we suppose, if the basis of justice is obey the law, when you see a person who disobeys the law and acts unjustly, you finally say, well, and you go after him. But this is telling us that everybody has to be treated as sacred because even the unjust, are in the image of God. That's why John Calvin, a very, very interesting passage. This is what John Calvin says about this passage, actually, in the Institutes. I think it's about this passage. But anyway, here's what he says. He says, the Lord commands all men without exception to do good, but the great part of them are most unworthy if they're judged by their merit. But here, scripture helps in the best way. Whatever one you meet who needs your aid, you have no reason to refuse help. You say, he is contemptible and worthless, but the Lord shows him to be one to whom he has deigned to give the beauty of his image. You will say, he has deserved nothing from me. He deserves something far different from me. But it is that we remember not to consider men's evil intention, but to look upon the image of God in them, which cancels and effaces their transgressions. And with its... You know, see, what's Calvin saying? The basis of justice is that human beings image God, everyone, and you can never treat one as sub the other. Now, look, I've got to go on, and here's why. Do you see what we have here? Christians have far better, far more radical basis, far more solid foundation, and far more burning motivation to work for social justice, to work for racial justice, to take care of the weak, of the marginal, of the poor, of the oppressed, of the elderly, of the sick, of the dying, and to be a steward of the environment than all the people, than anybody else, than anybody else. If you go to the average person, and there's a lot of people in New York City, who are just flat out for caring for, they're in mission, they're in mission, they're in mission to care for the environment, they're in mission to care for the oppressed, they're in mission to do justice for all human beings. And if you sit down and you ask them why, they don't know. They say, well, you just know it. But you see, if you say, is there a God? Well, who knows? In other words, intellectually, they believe this world is an accident. They believe human beings are just sort of a chemical accident. They believe everything is relative. Therefore, they have no basis for what they're doing, but they image God. God. That means they know people are valuable because they know there's a God. They don't admit it, but they know it. They image. They relate. And yet, they don't have the right worldview. They don't have the right theology. They don't have a motivation that's really full-blown. But you and I do. And listen, you know there's a place where Jesus actually says, unless your righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Pharisees and the scribes, you cannot enter the kingdom of God. What's he mean? He says, the Pharisees and the scribes, not understanding grace, not understanding the gospel, are motivated to be good and decent. New York City is filled with people, not understanding grace, not understanding the gospel, and they're living incredible lives. And Jesus Christ says, you will be held much more responsible than they. If all you do is live comfy little lives, only concerned about your career, only concerned about getting your agenda done, only concerned about marrying the right person, only concerned about getting a family, and you know, here and there, you'll do a few good works. You should be people on mission. We shouldn't be living for ourselves. God sends us out in the world to do these things, and all sorts of people who don't really understand are doing a better job than we are. Really. We must be people in mission. But what if the sermon ended there? What if God's sermon, and that's what it is, it's even got three points. That's the reason all my sermons have three points. What if God stopped with the first two points? What if God said, here's the life I want you to live. I want you to live a life of stewardship of the environment. You know, I want you to live a life of, you know, justice to other people. If you stop there, you'd feel excited for a while, but eventually you'd be crushed. Because you can't live like that. You know, verse six, verse six is a rudimentary form of the golden rule. Love others the way you want to be loved. Do unto others what you will want to be done unto you. Nobody can live like that. Every other religion does stop there. Every other religion stops there. And says, live like this. And other religions have very, very good, thank goodness, praise God, other religions give you very good reasons to take care of the environment and to do justice. It's a good reason, because there's not enough Christians in the world, and there's certainly not enough consistent Christians in the world, to make the world a livable place, if we were the only ones doing that. Praise God, there's all sorts of other reasons, besides the gospel, to live lives of, you know, ecological and stewardship and justice. Lots of other reasons. And mainly because people, even if they don't understand, they're still imaging God. They're still living as if there's a God who created human beings. They don't treat them as chemical accidents, even though they believe it. Nobody treats, they don't, nobody, almost nobody does that, even though they believe it. Scientists that say, this is all you are, they can't, because they're imaging God. Thank goodness. And yet, if God stopped there, where all the religions did, where all the religions do, we'd be in trouble. God moves on and tells us one more thing. He says, I also want to tell you how to have a relationship with me, not just a relationship with the environment, not just a relationship with your fellow man. Amen. Thank you. here in verse 12. And God said, this is the sign of the covenant I am making between me and you and every living creature with you. A covenant for all generations to come. I have set my rainbow in the clouds and it will be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. I have set my rainbow in the clouds and it will be a sign of the covenant between me and the earth. Now, when he uses the word sign, this is very significant. By the way, that's a tautology because the word significant is the same thing. The words, a sign in the Bible, for example, a baptism in the Lord's Supper are signs, signs of the covenant. Well, we're about to do the Lord's Supper. Yeah, I'm going to read the words of institution and Paul's going to say, remember what the Lord said, this is the cup of the new covenant. A sign is a symbol. A sign is a picture of the salvation that is putting you into a covenant and personal relationship with God. Now, rainbow isn't the only one, but it is one. And every covenant sign is a depiction of the gospel. And if you think about it enough, it symbolizes the gospel and it's chosen to symbolize the gospel in its various features. And if you think about it enough, it'll take you, it is the gospel, it'll take you all the way in. Would you like to know how to have a personal relationship with God? Number one, look at the cloud. Number two, look at the rainbow. And number three, find the rainbow where the sun and the clouds come together. Number one, first of all, the reason God gives us a rainbow is because there's never a rainbow without clouds. I'm sorry. There's never a rainbow without a storm. You don't have a rainbow on a perfectly sunny day, not a cloud in the sky, no storms around. You don't say, oh, maybe there'll be a rainbow today. There's never rainbow without a storm. Never. And see, when Noah comes out, there's probably lots of clouds around still because God says, this is my sign, which indicates that he's pointing or indicates, you know, here's my sign. And so there's still clouds in the sky. And I'll tell you why there's still clouds in the sky. Let me tell you why. There's all, there's no rainbow unless there's clouds in the sky. And you know what the clouds represent? This. Noah got out of the ark and immediately God says, I know murder's about to stop, start. So here's what I have to say about that. What? My wife wrote a junior curriculum some years ago for fourth to sixth graders. And in the lesson on Noah's ark in the junior discover, which is sort of like a little, uh, uh, homework page. There's a question, boys and girls, what was in the ark with Noah? His family, right? Boys and girls, what else? The animals, right? Boys and girls, what else? Food, right? Boys and girls, what else? Grain, poop, right? Lots and lots and lots. But, but, but what else? Okay. What else? Sin. Listen, Kathy's dad used to say, this crucifixion, all this atonement, new birth stuff, why doesn't God just take the top 10 percent? Just, why does God just accept into heaven the top 10 percent? Okay, you know what? In this case, God took the top 1 percent. In this case, God took the top 0.0001 percent. And ultimately, the flood as a way of salvation was a failure. Short term, it kept civilization from becoming incredibly horrible, gave us a sort of a fresh start. But the fact of the matter is, see, what everybody else thinks, what all the politicians will tell you, is the problem with the world are bad people. But God wiped all the bad people out. God wiped all the mediocre people out. God took everybody out, but the very best people in the whole world. And God immediately expects murder to start, and it did. Because, you see, in the ark was sin. The old approach is, try real hard, be a really good person, bad people go to hell, good people get into heaven. That doesn't help a thing. See, the cloud is, there's still sin in the world, there's still evil in the world. The problem with the world is the human heart, everybody's heart, even the best people. And God is still a just God. Because God says, I will hold you accountable. I have to, I'm a just God. Now that's the first step. You have to look at the clouds. If you want a personal relationship with God, I have to move on with us. If you want a true copy of God, I'm a just I will hold you accountable. I have to, I'm a just God. Now that's the first step. You have to look at the clouds. If you want a personal relationship with God, let me be real practical. Do you see the cloud? That is, you say, yeah, I'd like to have a personal relationship with God. Do you realize that the biggest problem in your life is your sin? Do you realize the biggest problem in the world is not other people, but your sin? You, your heart, you're the problem. Do you see that you can't save yourself? Do you see that there's a, you have a problem with a just God? Do you see that? Now, if you say, that's, yeah, you know, I thought, I thought that, I didn't know that that many people believe that anymore. I didn't know that people with more than a third grade education believe that anymore. I, you know, I don't know all the reasons I can't go, you know, I can't answer all your, your very legitimate concerns right now. I'm telling you, according to the Bible, according to the gospel, you'll never see the rainbow unless you see this. You'll never understand, you'll never, you'll never have this personal relationship unless you see you're a sinner. Unless you see that you're a hopeless sinner. Unless you see that deep in your heart are all the murders we thought we got rid of when we got rid of the bad people. Secondly, first you have to look at the cloud, and secondly, you have to look the rainbow. Now, what is the rainbow? Why, why would God create, choose a rainbow? Well, first of all, very clearly, the rainbow never comes before a storm. It comes after when a storm is in retreat, and so the rainbow represents grace. It represents the, the wrath going away. The rainbow is beautiful. It's ravishing like God's grace, but those are probably, you know, that's usually why people say, oh, that's why the rainbow, it's beautiful, and it's coming after the storm. But here's the main thing. It doesn't say in Hebrew, I have put my rainbow in the, in the cloud. It doesn't say that. See down here, verse 12, 13, it says, I have set my rain, it doesn't say that. And whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow, it doesn't say that. It doesn't say rainbow. It says bow. And I looked it up in my Hebrew concordance. The, the, the word that's translated here as rainbow is used 75 times, at least in the Old Testament, every single time, it's talking about a war bow. Talking about a bow with which you kill people. It's talking about a weapon. And then I looked at some of my favorite commentators, like Meredith Klein and Alec Mateer, and even Gerhard von Rod, who's not my favorite commentator, and he said the same thing. This is what, this is what Meredith Klein says, and it kind of got me. When the Lord's, when, when God says my bow, the word translates geseth, the usual meaning of which is the weapon. Thus, the recurring rainbow imposed on the retreating storm by the shining of the sun is God's battle bow laid aside, a token of grace staying the lightning shafts of wrath. God has said, the bow of my wrath, the bow of justice, I've laid up, I've put it away. I'm not going to wipe you out. I'm not going to do it. How can he say that? Well, of course that's grace. Of course that's beautiful. And let's, before I get to the third step, you see, the first step, if you want a relationship with God, is you have to see that you're a sinner. The second step, you have to see you're lost, no matter how good you try to be. Okay, the top 10%, the top 1%. Secondly, you have to find this beautiful. Jonathan Edwards has helped me a lot. Edwards spends so much time in his works and his sermons and his books trying to describe the difference between a real Christian and a nominal Christian, a person who says they believe, but a person who's not vitally been changed. You know, a nominal Christian versus a person with a vital relationship with Christ. And here's what he always says that's really hit me. Basically, he says the difference is this. Nominal Christians use God, find God useful. They say, and this is their concern, what do I have to do? What do I have to do so you'll answer my prayers? What do I have to do so you'll bless me? What do I have to do? Just tell me, what do I have to do? Because a nominal Christian finds God useful, but a Christian finds God beautiful. To find God beautiful means not, what do I have to do so you can get me the things that I really want? To find God beautiful means you are amazed and you stand before the thing you find beautiful and you're happy just to have it. You don't want it as a means to an end. You're happy to have it for itself. That's what ravishes you. That's what lifts you up. That's what fills you up. And here's how you know you're on your way to a relationship with God. When you hear that God has laid up his bow, you don't say, okay, now what do I have to do? Instead, you say, how did that happen? You're amazed. You're ravished. You're excited about it. Well, how did that happen? Well, here. The third thing you have to understand, if you look at the rainbow to understand... have to look at the cloud and see you're a sinner. Secondly, you have to look at the rainbow and see the beauty of grace. It has to be something that excites you. Let me be real practical. If tonight, when I talk about the idea of God laying up his bow of wrath, you know, Psalm 18, Psalm 7, Habakkuk, very often in the Bible, talks about God. He's a just God. He's a warrior God. He has the bow of wrath. He brings the fiery lightning, you see. He will punish evildoers. He will punish unrighteousness. He'll wipe it out. But he says, I have put it up. I have set it away. I will never wipe you out. And if you say, okay, right, that's his job. Isn't he a God of love? You're not on your way. Because you don't find it beautiful. The rainbow is beautiful. You don't, you're not amazed. You don't say, how did that happen? If you say that, and you want to know that, and you begin to feel that, you're on your way. But how did that happen? Number three, not only do rainbows only happen in clouds, not only are rainbows beautiful, but thirdly, rainbows only happen where the sun has penetrated into the heart of the darkness. darkness. The rainbow only happens where the light and darkness come together. The rainbow only happens where you see the mercy and judgment have come together, where the sun has penetrated all the way into the heart. God says, when you look into the heart of wrath, that's where you'll see the rainbow because the sun has come in. What is this all about? Where is it that God's mercy and judgment came together? Where is it? Well, Charles Spurgeon, the Baptist preacher, I read a sermon by him just today on the rainbow. And Spurgeon, I think it's cute, but I also think he's right. He says, you know, we should have known. Noah should have known. Noah probably said, how can he do that? We should have said, how can they do that? He's a just God. How can he just lay it up? But Spurgeon says, we should have known. Because when you look in the sky and you see God's bow laid up, you'll see it's not pointed down. It's pointed up. The arrows won't come toward us. They're going to go into the heart of God. Interesting. And you see, there actually is a hint of that here. Did you see it? It's very weird. And maybe you said, what was that in there? Why would God bring this up? Verse four, but you must not eat meat that has lifeblood still in it. That's the first time this is mentioned. And you know why? God is preparing them for what will come on later. God's going to set up another picture, another sign of the covenant, the tabernacle. And nobody can go back into the presence of God except through blood sacrifice. And God is preparing them by saying, I'm going to create a culture in which the blood is seen as sacred because it represents the life. And I'm going to show you that the bow of my wrath, I have not just stopped being just. I have sent my punishment not into you, but into the heart of somebody else. You see, there was another storm many, many years later, many years ago now. The storm of God's wrath, an earthquake, and right in the heart was a thing of beauty. It was Jesus Christ giving his life for you. And you know why it's such a thing of beauty? Because at that point, the reason the rainbow, Jesus is the rainbow, is because at that point, that's where God's mercy and judgment came together. It's on the cross, when our punishment was poured out on him, that God's judgment and justice was fulfilled because sin was being punished. But at the same time, his love was being fulfilled because we were being saved. He took our punishment. With his stripes, with his blood, we're healed. Do you see that? Does that excite your heart the way the rainbow excites your eyes? Do you see the rainbow is not just something that happens, it only happens in the middle of a cloud, in the very heart of wrath? Listen, one last thing. The rainbow represents the fact also that God's grace never happens on sunny days. Some of you are in the middle of some terrible things. Some of you are in the middle of some awful things. And you're starting to feel like, what is this for? I'll tell you why. Because God says, look up into the heart of the cloud, look where the sun is striking the cloud, and you will see a sign of my grace. God can show you this. I believe that this is actually promising us that even the bad things in our life are there now to wake us up. Even the clouds are there to show us the rainbow. Even the awful things are mercies, if we'll hear them, to destroy the idols in our life, to get us to stop trusting the things that we trust. You see? into the air, but right into the heart of someone who stood there in your place so that now any cloud that comes at you, don't be scared. You see, ye feeble saints, fresh courage take. The clouds ye so much dread are big with mercy and shall break with blessings on your head. They're just there to get you to come to him. They're there to show you where grace really is. They're there to show you what really is beautiful. The things that you thought were beautiful can never pick you up and hold you up. This is the sign of the covenant, and this is how to have a relationship with him. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask, as we go to the other sign of the covenant, or another sign of the covenant, the Lord's Supper, that you would, as we take up this sign of the gospel, the brokenness of the bread, the poured out cup, this sign of the brokenness of Jesus Christ for us, this sign of grace in the midst of wrath. We pray that you would make this so real to us that we would be changed. We ask that in Jesus' name. Amen. You heard what I just said. This is a sign of the covenant, too. Actually, the rainbow all by itself wouldn't be a good sign, all by itself, because it just shows us something grand and beautiful. What's good about this is it shows us how Jesus Christ became something very common, something very mundane, but there was a miracle in the middle of it. Let's confess our sins together. Turn to the confession. Let's confess our sins by reading this together. Almighty and most merciful Father, we're thankful that your mercy is higher than the heavens, wider than our wanderings, deeper than all our sin. Forgive our frivolous attitude toward life, our callousness toward suffering, our envy of those who have more than we have, our obsession with creating a life of constant pleasure, our indifference to the treasures of heaven, our neglect of your wise and gracious law. Help us to change our way of life so that we may desire what is good, love what you love, do what you command, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
