TITLE: Gospel Identity (Q&A)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/gospel-identity-qa/

============================================================

So this is an opportunity for us to have a conversation with you, Tim, and to talk a little bit further about questions that our panelists have sort of thought through as they've listened to the last talk. I'm going to give an opportunity for each one of our panelists to actually share, introduce themselves, tell us who you are, a little bit of your history here at Redeemer. I'm David Yoon. I'm a member of Redeemer Westside. I live on the Upper Westside now, and I've lived in Manhattan since around 2001, and I've attended Redeemer since 2005. Hi, I'm Yvette Knight, and I started attending Redeemer in 1998. I became a member in 2000. And yes, Tim was doing Q&A at the time, and sorry I didn't go to all of them. I live in Queens. I'm originally from Jamaica, but it's Jamaica in the Caribbean, not Jamaica, Queens. Good morning. My name is Jim Oliver. I attend Redeemer Eastside, and my wife and I have been living on the Eastside for about five years and love the community up there. Great. So there will be opportunities for you guys to share some questions. Let me just sort of like tee us off and give you some questions so you can think through a little bit some questions. But I'll give you a question, Tim, just to get us started. So one of the things that sort of came up last night was the fact that Christians in America, because of a particular identity, are often, there's a little bit of sort of mistrust. There's a little bit, you know, I think Christians have had a little bit of a different, sort of like a public perception is a little bit different than it has been in sort of like generations past. And one of the things, one of the conversations that's going on about that is sort of how Christians can continue to sort of shape and have their identity formed. And in some ways sort of, preserved is not the right word, but how we can continue to actually do our activity of shaping and forming identity, particularly in a society that's so individualistic and so porous and so on. And so I guess my question for you, Tim, is how would you sort of situate, what are your thoughts on the Christians as a community and the ways that we can live together to actually form identity? So in other words, what is the place of the church in the way that we form identity? Well, every time somebody asks me a question that I virtually sure I'll get back to after lunch, I'll say that. So my response to you can be brief. I will actually elaborate somewhat on it later. One of the main ways we get formed is there's a whole field called the sociology of knowledge that was developed the last 30 or 40 years. And the basic idea is you tend to find most plausible the ideas of people who you admire the most and spend the most time with. It's basically a way of saying you are profoundly shaped by your community. Your values, your way of thinking is profoundly shaped. You would think that's not rocket science. Why would all these PhDs and whole institutes be developed around it? It just seems like common sense. But actually, we all tend to think we're more objective than we are or that we can change our hearts through individual decisions. In other words, I don't like the way my heart is. I don't like my habits. I'm just going to read. I'm going to pray, Christians say. I'm going to make changes in my life. And we think just as individuals, we can change who we are. And partly because the modern culture tells us you actually became who you are through your individual choices, not through external validation or community, which is not true. Non-Western cultures understand to a great degree that who you are basically depends on your family. That's one of the reasons why families are often, in the non-Western world, get very ashamed when a person in their family does something terrible. Because they know that couldn't have happened unless there was something wrong inside the family. Americans would say, oh, that's terrible. That's not mine. That person did it. That wasn't me. That's my brother or my sister. That wasn't me. And non-Western people would say, yeah, well, how did that person become that way? They became that way in the family. So why won't the family? So the main point is who you spend your time with, and I don't mean on Facebook, will have enormous formative influence on you. And therefore, you really can't have a job here and fly off every single weekend somewhere else and once a month show up at an event or even something like this and think that this is forming you. It's just not. You have to habitually be with a group of people that you admire and respect and who are essentially loving one another. identity. So I want to open up this time for you guys, so if questions you can bring them. I guess I'll start. So outside of this room, a discussion of modern identity often goes hand in hand with a discussion of the concept of power and privilege. Christianity and the Christian identity is often identified as an identity of privilege. And I was hoping you might expand a little bit about the relationship between identity and privilege. Yeah, but first of all, certainly, it's a bit of a parochial. You might say, it's a rather narrow vision of Christianity to think of Christianity as necessarily going hand in hand with power and privilege. In Europe, Europe developed an idea that every nation needed to have a state church. So every, you know, Norway is Lutheran and Scotland is Presbyterian and Italy is Catholic. And when you do that, there is no doubt that Christianity ends up getting in bed with power. Then what happens is people feel that if I'm going to have a good job, I've got to at least doff the hat to Christianity. I've got to go to church even if I don't believe. And so I would say in the Western world, Christianity has done that. And therefore, and that's wrong, of course. I mean, there's nothing in the Bible that lifts that up. In the rest of the world today, generally speaking, that's just not the case at all. Well, there are many, many, a lot, there's all sorts of indigenous forms of Christianity that work very well among the poor. And so I guess I would say that power and privilege can come into a gospel identity. Well, it can pollute it. In other words, it can mar it. It can distort it. And it often happens in certain parts of the world where Christianity got into power and then it kept its power partly by saying, if you want to be seen as a respectable person in town, you've got to go to First Baptist Church or First Presbyterian or Christ Episcopal or something like that. But that's really not what you see in the scripture. That's, I think, the better thing. And a real Christian identity actually gives dignity to people who are outside of power. And historically, we can see that. So I would take people to that. You know, you can always ask yourself questions about, you can always look to certain movements where Christianity was clearly a big part of liberating an oppressed people. And it gave the oppressed people dignity, but not the same thing as privilege. Thank you. My question, I hope, ties last night's presentation to today. And I am the person of color on this platform. And lately, race has become a major source of creating identity in our society. I think it's always been there, but I think it's been heightened lately. And so, you know, because of the way society speaks into who our identity is, the issue of race can become an element of shame or it can produce some anger. Yeah. The flip side of that, though, is that, you know, people will then make comments about, I don't see you as black. And ironically, that also leads to anger and a little less shame, but a lot of, what do you mean? My question to you is, how do you take both positions and then form a gospel identity out of the two poles of this issue? Okay, there's, okay, on the one pole, if you take color, race, and you turn it into an identity, I've hinted at this already. Yes, I talked about it last night. If I do that with my social status, if I do it, or even, like, for example, if a woman in the traditional identity says, I'm nobody unless I'm a mother. What makes me somebody is I'm a mother. Well, she's going to suffocate her children, and there's all kinds of problems with that. If you say, I'm nobody unless I'm wealthy, that creates oppression. You know, I have to do anything to make a profit. But... my ultimate pride is i am this is my race that does lead i think also to distortion what will happen is it me it it will still weirdly enough it'll lead you to demonize so um uh you know if even if you are have been an oppressed race and you say the main thing about me the most important thing about me is i'm black that's my top identity you're going to have to despise people who don't acknowledge your identity or who you feel like is racist and then i'm not sure quite frankly if race is the highest thing and not god if race is your highest identity i don't know what you do say to white people who say okay well whiteness is my identity then what do you say you can say well it's not fair because you've been in power and we haven't but that you know what happens if there's nothing higher than race i think it gets into trouble but yvette what what and i listen i'm really glad you asked me this about this if somebody at redeemer comes to you and say you know yvette i just love you i don't even think of you as black now here's what you have to do first of all and actually i'm going to say here's what you do in your gospel identity yvette okay uh everybody's walking on eggshells if you weren't a christian and that say that white man wasn't a christian let's say it was a white man you would either uh give him a very sharp answer or you would just say oh forget about it and you just be quiet and just walk away uh but because you're both christians what you can say is you know because of our common bond um i know what i'm about to tell you is going to it's going to tax you as a white person but as a christian i want you to be patient with me because i know white people feel like they're always getting charged with being racist but i want you to know that as a black person what you just said was really pretty offensive to me because how can you say that it is part of who i am it's not the main thing christ is the main thing but it's part of who i am you can't erase that and and so i said if i wasn't a christian sister i would walk away or i would i would just let you have it but i'm going to so i'm going to be more patient than than my non-christian blackness would have let me be and you're going to be more patient than your non-christian whiteness will let you be and we're going to talk and when that's done because you're both if by the way if if the if the brother does stay patient with you which i hope he will then you've actually you've flexed your gospel identity you've uh you finally said something to a white person you've wanted to say a long time and they actually listened they're actually saying oh i didn't know that and you what you're doing is you are actually uh equipping that person to be an agent out there in the world for better understanding you're actually making that person that guy into exactly the kind of person that this whole society needs and so uh on the other hand you know even inside redeemer i mean obviously inside redeemer both of you could sort of go into your your you could be letting the other factors be more important than christ and you just say you know yeah that's so i i'm really glad you even asked the question because actually you're to even ask the question in this room shows that you are operating out of your gospel identity yvette thank you so good work um question on uh social media uh i know um you've said that that's uh sort of an impediment to uh the gospel identity i was wondering if um if you uh can envision that ever being constructive uh as a constructive part of the gospel identity and what that would look like uh because you also said yesterday that it's hard to live in a modern world without having some form of modern identity yeah that's right yeah that's good um and um you know like social media is like the ultimate manifestation of uh modern identity and it is that influence grows i mean is that just the end of the world or is there maybe even like a like a place uh you know for it in the gospel no touche uh you're right i mean i you cannot i can't blame social media and say it's intrinsically bad uh it clearly was crafted by people with a modern identity so i actually uh david mentioned this last night i i think uh david isgrove quoting mark lilla is social identity gives you a chance to gives you the opportunity to kind of create identities in a way that 40 years ago you couldn't do so you've got pictures you've got uh you know there's all sorts of ways in which you brand yourself so i i guess i would that's it's so you I'm thinking, I'm old enough to remember, 40 years ago, how would you have done that? There's no way to do that. Obviously, the way you dressed was always a way of marketing yourself to some degree. It's always been that way. But so in a way, it plays into the modern identity, but it doesn't have to. I, it's not intrinsic. It's, it's just, it was forged and it's, it's being used that way. But there's, there's no particular reason why, for example, though it's hard, I think, in 140 characters on Twitter to say nuanced things. That's the big, to me, that's the biggest problem. When I even gave you, weirdly enough, and I will get back to this after lunch, the gospel identity is in some ways more, weirdly, more complex and nuanced. So when I become, when Christ goes to the top of my identity factors, the most important thing to me, it doesn't eliminate the other factors. It doesn't eliminate my race or my background or my, all those other things. It just, it rearranges them. And so what it does, I even gave that example of, if a woman had to choose between this great career and this husband, which is the one. And I'm saying, you know what? And I could imagine in four or five different circumstances, I as a pastor could imagine giving the woman different, different answers. Because it depends a great deal on what is that career? I mean, how useful is that for the human race? How important is it for God? What really is this, what is this guy really like? You know, how strong, how strong a believer is he, for example? And there's all kinds of questions that would actually mean that the answer is complicated. Whereas I do think the older traditional identity was, it's very simple. You know, you take the man and the, and the modern idea is very simple. You take the career. Christianity in weird ways is more nuanced than these. It's less, it's less reductionistic. And that's what I hate about Twitter is I can never say even, you know, we, we, we, we clip things for my Twitter account. We clip things that I have said, but it's always out of context. It's always out of context. And so there's always three or four people who say, what? You know, on, on, and I sit there and I go, you know, I can't answer them. I couldn't possibly, you gotta be there on it all day. And then I say, but yeah, I would say what too. I mean, if I didn't, if I hadn't heard the sermon that came from. So all I could say is it's, it's, it's, I think it's a struggle, but no, it's not, it's not all evil. And I would love to see, and I've had people show me here, here's somebody using it in a good way to get the word of God out and to actually express the gospel identity. Sure. I mean, don't ask me, I'm not the expert brother how to do it, but I would certainly not say it's, I would certainly say it's possible. So. I mean, I think the thing with social media is that, you know, it's, it's, it's easy to sort of talk about how it sort of feeds some of the, the challenges of, of establishing a modern identity. But I also think you can say that, you know, social media also has given voices to voices that typically are not actually in the conversation. Uh, so it actually gives a little bit of a sense of, you know, what are some of the cultural forces that are going on? Some of them, frankly, are what forces that we kind of sometimes wish weren't there. Um, and I think that, you know, social media is a little bit, anyway, it has, it has the, the effect of sort of exacerbating some of the challenges of the modern identity, but it also has the effect of sort of like highlighting particular, because, you know, you think of like all the social movements that we've seen on social media over the last six months, it helps to highlight, well, these are some very pervasive issues with regard to identity that actually should be addressed. And they're not necessarily expressions of individual sort of like modern identity formation. Right. And I do think Christians, I, I actually do think Christians because of the secure, because our identity is rooted in grace. Uh, I do know plenty of religions. It's not. Um, so if there's, there's the, if you're following the rules, you're in, if you're not following the rules, you're out because you're, you're based in grace. It does make, I do think I mentioned this, that's the last thing I said, there's a flexibility. So, you know, William Wilberforce, I know said, look, I'm, I want to abolish slavery. I, I, I envision a world without slavery and that comes from my Christian, uh, uh, convictions, but anybody else who wants to help me find a world without slavery, regardless of your beliefs, you're an equal partner. I mean, that was, and I think, I think Christians can do that because we're saved by grace because we don't feel superior like everybody else's, you know, we don't feel like we've got to keep our skirts clean because, uh, we don't need to feel ceremonially pure because our identity is not based on purity and performance and things like that. So I actually think that when through social media, I see a lot of folks out there, a lot of things out there. I said, wow, you know, and actually, even though that's not Christian in inspiration, that's not Christian in inspiration. a Christian could say, yeah, I'm for that too, for somewhat different reasons. And actually, it'd be a witness to say, I do think, I personally believe in God, and I believe God wants a world to be like the same way you want it to be, in this spot, in this way. And actually, that's a way to witness, I think, to the truth of God to them. Not saying, well, you're not, you know, saying, well, I'm in the Christian party, you're not a Christian, so I really can't have anything to do with you. A lot of questions. To go back to your talk from last night and today, you mentioned that God is the decisive validator, in terms of our gospel identity. I guess my question for you is, how do you see that validation manifesting? So, how does that work? You know, do we look to our pastors? How do you get, oh yeah. Yeah, do we look to our community group? What exactly does that look like when we're looking for validation from God? That's a great question. And I'll drop, I'll start by dropping the other shoe and then go wherever. The other shoe I'd have to drop is, there's always some subjectivity in this. But having said that, no, you don't look to your pastor. Don't you dare. Though, you know, I have to say, in the beginning, in the beginning, there's a tendency, I mean, I once heard somebody say, first I came, first I came to love my, yeah, interesting. First I came to love my teacher, then I came to love my teacher's Bible, then I came to love my teacher's Bible's Lord. And that's it. In other words, in the very beginning, there's a tendency to almost experience God through whoever has helped you get into the faith. It could be a friend, it could be a preacher, something like that. There is a danger to stop there. Because then what you really have is you're doing exactly what the modern identity says you mustn't do, which is you've put this power in the hands of some authority figure, and they're imperfect. They're imperfect. They're not perfect. Especially if that authority figure is seen to have feet of clay, then there's people who say, God doesn't seem real to me. So you've got to get past your teacher to the Bible. Now, here's where I'm a great Protestant. I love, here's where Protestants are good, I think. What Protestants say is, if your pastor says, you may not commit adultery. And if you're thinking of committing adultery, I'm just going to come down on you. It's not because that's not the pastor's authority, it's the Bible's authority. It's God speaking through the Bible. If the pastor says, on the other hand, you must eat meatloaf on Thursdays to be part of this church. Why? Because we want to have a common life together. Don't get any ideas. And you can't eat Chinese on Thursdays either. I didn't grow up eating meatloaf, so I can't really relate to that. It's a different common life than what I grew up with. This is a racial problem we're having here. But in other words, as soon as a minister goes beyond the Word of God and tries to bind a conscience with something the Bible hasn't said, Protestants say, no, no, that's wrong. Because it's true that a church can say, we require one another to live according to the Bible, but it's basically the Bible speaking to us. And what you're trying to say is, it's not the minister, it's not the teacher, it's not the other Christians, that God is speaking through His Word. So a high view of the Bible is crucial for this whole Christian identity to work. Because if the Bible tells, you know, it's a great line in 1 John, if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts. All right, well, where is God going to be greater than my heart? The answer is when, you know, I go to, you know, Ephesians, there's a place in Hebrews 13 where it says, I will never leave you, I'll never forsake you. There's multiple, literally, it actually says, I'll never, ever, ever, ever, you know, forsake you. I have to read God saying this to me, and I can't just hear it through a minister, I've got to see it in the Word. And when I see that in the Word, then, you know, I'm getting it from Him. But beyond that, of course, it's not the Bible itself, it's the God speaking through the Bible. So I do think that's how it works. First, I came to love my teacher, or there's usually some human mediator, as it were, then I came to love my teacher's Bible, then I came to love my teacher's Bible, and then I finally, I now am face-to-face with a decisive validator. I had a related question. You know, as you're... said, as you're trying to attain gospel identity, you know, there's a lot of practice, a lot of devotion, and a lot of things that you're doing to get there. How do you avoid, like, maybe falling into, like, becoming, like, you know, religious and, you know, becoming more like a slave to the rituals? Because, like, sometimes in our, like, in our group, sometimes we talk about, oh, I haven't had a chance to look at our devotionals. You know, I haven't done it in a while. I got to start reading the Bible more, which are obviously all great things. It's just how do you avoid, how do you, you know, keep in mind that you're saved by grace, but. . . With great effort. No, actually. . . Without, like, you know, pulling into the ritual. No, this is an extremely important question for the whole issue of formation. One of the reasons why a lot of Christians push back on any church that says, we want, well, what Redeemer is doing. We want, you know, daily devotion, weekly worship, relationship, be in community far enough that you're accountable. Hospitality, Sabbath, the practices we're talking about, the pushback is that's legalistic. And actually, it can be. There's no doubt about it. It's easy to, I mean, our hearts, the default mode of our heart is self-salvation. The default, we're always sliding back into. That is the non-gospel identity. We're sliding back into, because I'm a good person, why isn't God coming through for me? I mean, even though, my goodness, you know, my, you know, personally, if I'm sitting with anybody who says, why is God allowing all these bad things to happen to me? I'm just going to weep with them, and I'm going to pray with them. If they ask me about 50 times, the first 49, I'm going to say, I don't know. And I'm going to weep with them. And the 50th time, I'm going to say, well, is there any possibility that you think that you don't deserve this, because you've lived such a good life and you've prayed every day? See, one of the dangers with, you see what I'm saying? One of the dangers with doing the practices is you start to feel like God owes me, which means you're sliding back into a non-gospel identity. And so, actually, you've already answered your question. I love questions in which your answer's in the question, which is how do we do that? And the answer is, how do we keep remembering we're saved by grace? And I said, we have to keep remembering we're saved by grace. We've got to keep reminding ourselves. I mean, you can't stay, if you just dump the practices. The salvation by grace thing stays nothing but a proposition in the head. Actually, there's a place, I didn't quote him because it feels a little weird to always quote John Calvin. I don't know why. I'm often quoting John Calvin, but because Calvin has such a nasty brand in the modern world, I often don't use his name. But it's Calvin in the Institutes that says that you can't have Christian doctrine flitting around in the top of your brain and not actually shaping the depths of your heart. He says that somewhere in the Institutes. And without the practices, and that's what we're going to talk about really pretty much the rest of today, salvation by grace is nothing but a, it's a bullet point on a slide. It doesn't actually come on down and really shape. So the practices shape you. And it's true that the devil will use that. I'm sorry, I'm Presbyterian. I still believe in the devil. The devil will try to do judo on you. See, judo is you use the enemy's forward motion against him. And so you're on your way into practices and the devil will turn around and say, hey, you know what? You're really pulled together Christian. These people, they're not having their devotion every day. So it is possible to slip into a non-gospel identity, but you'll never have a gospel identity without the practices. You look like you're ready, Yvette. Go ahead. So it's usual when we attend these conferences, you know, we get a lot of information and, you know, we take it and we feel emboldened. Can you speak a little bit more to this issue of the coexistence of boldness and humility, particularly when we go out there and, you know, we're hyped up? Well, yeah. You okay? It's public speaking. It's hard. There are ways in which I – I don't know, Yvette. That's just a great – it feels like that question could take either a very brief answer or two weeks of answer. So it's going to have to be very brief. Okay, first of all, maybe – let me – here's an additional, maybe a bit of a help on this. I think that – or the, to be too outgoing or to be too reticent. Okay. So weirdly enough, by the way, and this is going to completely throw you, my wife, who's very introverted is much more willing to speak out and be bold and just, you know, go at it and tell it like it is. And I, who am an extrovert, I'm much, much less willing to do that and much more likely to want to, I want everybody to be a happy. Um, and I think one of the things I realized early in my life was, uh, and Kathy is too, that, that the, the half of gospel identity we seem to have isn't real because the part that's just temperamental is really part of some other identity. It's just a temperament. You know, she feels better when she's, when she's, uh, telling it like it is. And I don't, uh, so, you know, it would look like, well, I got the humble part and I've, she's got the bold part. And all we have to do is add the other part. That's really not true. That's the most important thing is the humility that comes from, uh, the gospel is not like the humility I have, which tends to be just keep your head down and don't let anybody be unhappy. That's not, that's not humility. And the boldness she has is like, I just, you know, I don't want to be inconvenienced by anybody. And I want to let you know that's not boldness. So I do think you have to be careful. Your temperament tends to, uh, look like it favors one half or the other half. It actually doesn't, the reality is it doesn't favor either. They come or they go together and you've got to be very careful about the counterfeit. And that's one tiny little practical hint, but there's to answer your question fully would be good to go on and on. And I think we're probably, I probably shouldn't, but that at least that's a little bit, a little bit of an answer. I think we're going to have time for one more question. Well, you may, you may get into this in the afternoon session, uh, but in terms of how we practically live out a gospel identity and community. So when we all go back to our community groups and our churches, how would you encourage us, uh, as Christians trying to live into a gospel identity, to hold each other accountable, to work together, uh, to, to, I guess, practically live this out? Well, you know, I don't think I, uh, hmm, that's a good question. And I'm afraid I don't probably have it. And at least it's not my notes. So there's almost no way I'll get to it. I, it would probably be a good idea. Look, the account of, all right, the accountability is one of the five practices we're pushing up. It's not, there's, by the way, the practices that Redeemer's, uh, presenting to you this year, giving you tools for are not the only ones, but they really are well, well, well chosen. They're, they're very fundamental. And so look at the accountability one and, uh, accountability for what? Well, now obviously you might say, well, of course I, you know, I, uh, want to be accountable for major, I don't want to fall into egregious moral lapses, but it would probably be, uh, better if whoever you're accountable to sat down and thought out in light of everything you're learning here, well, what does a gospel identity look like for me, for us? Um, I do think, and it's something we didn't get to is I, I don't, I do believe that the journeys are a little different for different people, millennials, older people, Asian people, African American people, uh, Hispanic people, their, their journeys are all a little different. Uh, I'm not saying you need to segregate yourselves, but I do think, uh, you might, uh, to be accountable, you ought to make up a profile. Where, where do we struggle? Generally, most of us are better with some aspects of it and not other aspects of it. Look at the fruit of the spirit, look at the other things we're talking about and actually say, this is, let's, let's not just hold ourselves accountable on, you know, not falling into pornography or not falling into, uh, this or that, but let's actually talk about the more fine, you know, finely tuned, uh, features of the gospel identity and hold ourselves accountable for that. So I'd go to the third of the four, the five practices and, and, uh, try to.
