TITLE: Gospel Identity
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/gospel-identity-2/

============================================================

Okay, so we're back to work, and we have to review, just like class, right? Just like classwork. We had a review. We were looking last night at the modern identity and what that is, and we're going to be contrasting it with the gospel identity and the traditional identity, but we've got to do a little bit of, before moving into what the gospel identity is, we've got to do some recapping here, especially since I know in these in-town conferences not everybody heard everything last night. An identity consists of your fundamental core trust and the source of your value and worth. So your fundamental core trust is what are you living for, and the source of your value and worth is how you evaluate whether you are realizing what you live for. In other words, your identity is based on living for something, and then your self-worth is based on whether or not you're achieving it. And we said that there are basically two kinds of identities that are neither of them are Christian. One is the ancient and today traditional non-Western identity, and one is the modern identity. And the traditional identity is outside in. You go outside to find some greater good, greater than you. So it's God or your family or community. You go outside to find a greater good. Then you come inside and you align your insides with the outside so that you're sacrificing for that greater good. Modern identity is exactly the opposite. It's not outside in. It's inside out. You go inside. You decide what is right or wrong for you. You decide what the good is, and then you come outside and you demand that the world and the community align with you. It's exactly the opposite. You demand recognition for who you are, and you demand that the world align with you. And who validates you? What is your source of self-worth? In traditional, it's society and the family in particular. Society gets to say whether you're a good or bad person, whether you're a worthwhile person, and especially your family. In the modern identity, you and you alone have the right to validate yourself. Now, to show you how different all other worldviews are and all other identities are from the modern identity. Now, in a minute, I'm going to turn around and show you how the Christian gospel identity is not the same as traditional. But in this case, I'm going to try to show you how Christian identity, as well as all other traditional identity, is similar, is different than the modern identity. Scott, put up one slide. Every culture has got to explain why human life is not what it ought to be. Everybody knows human life is not what it should be. And therefore, every culture has to give you some story to explain that and give you some idea of what could make it better. So every culture has got to have a story. So on the left side of the slide, you see something has knocked life out of whack. And the question is, every culture says, how do you get to the right side so that life is restored to order? So if something's made human life not what it ought to be, what will make it better? What will restore it to order? Now, above the line are what we call protagonistic forces. These are forces that if they prevail, life will get better. Underneath the line are antagonistic forces. Forces that if they prevail, life will not get better. And so what you want is you want to, your life ought to be above the line. What you should be doing should be aligning with protagonistic forces. And if you do that, if you stay above the line, then your life will get better. Now, what's above the line? A sacred order. What that means is every other culture, they disagree. And Christians too. Christians, Muslims, Hindus, ancients. Every other culture has always said there's a sacred order. There's some kind of transcendent set of moral absolutes. And if you connect with them, rather than living as a selfish, autonomous individual who just lives any way he or she wants. If you become an autonomous individual, that's what's wrong with the world. Everybody doing what is right in his or her own eyes. If you unite with, you connect to the sacred order, that's what will make things better. And so even though Christians, by the way, and Jews and Hindus and Muslims and ancient people, even though they disagree quite a bit on what that sacred order is and how you relate to that sacred order, quite a bit. At least if I'm, as a Christian, talking to a Muslim and trying to actually say to the Muslim, why don't you become a Christian? At least we're actually... are. Next slide. The modern identity, the modern way of looking at things, says this. What will make the world right is if everybody has the right to decide what is right or wrong for him and her and be free to live any way they choose as long as they don't harm somebody else. And what's bad about the world, what is really going to screw up the world, is if you tell me that there's some sacred order that I have to submit to. So actually, it's the exact reverse. The modern story is the problem in life is the idea there's a sacred order, or put it another way. Ancient culture said what you need to be saved from is selfishness and self-centeredness. Modern culture says, you know what you need to be saved from? You need to be saved from the idea that you need to be saved. We need salvation from the idea there is a salvation. Because if there's a salvation, then I can't live any way I want. And that's what's wrong with the world. And therefore, you know, if I talk to a Muslim and recommend Christianity, the Muslims say, you know, you're wrong. But if I talk to a secular person with a modern identity and suggest they become Christians, they say, this is evil, this is what's wrong with the world, the very fact you're even talking to me about it. You're crazy. And as a result, we see the two identities are radically different. Yeah, you can turn it off there, okay? Not to confuse you. That was probably completely opaque. I hope that helped five or six of you. Now. But let's talk, again, for a second about the examples. You know, John was already talking about the fact that in popular culture, the modern identity comes across through stories. And we have no heroic narrative left except the story of discarding a traditional identity and moving into a modern identity. So the Frozen story, Elsa, is what she's doing. She's moving out of a traditional into a modern identity. I've been told by Jen this morning that Moana is the same story. And even though I've got granddaughters, I haven't seen it yet. It's inevitable, okay? It's moving from a traditional into a modern identity. The Book of Mormon, the Broadway show, is moving. It's like the Mormons start off, of course, with a traditional identity, but the ones that see the light move into a modern identity. It's the only, you know, did you ever see the movie Babe? The pig that wants to be a sheepdog? Everybody says, you're a pig, you can't be a sheepdog. But in the end, the pig becomes a sheepdog. And that's the heroic narrative. Last night, by the way, this is really going to culturally enrich a lot of you young men, you young single men. It's going to enrich you very much. Last night, because we have granddaughters, we have bought them things out of a, in the past, out of an American Girls catalog. Now, most people in the world know what American Girls is. It's just that you young single men have no idea. Let me explain. American Girls sells dolls and other presents for little girls. Now, years ago, what was the role of a doll? Dolls were sold as a way of helping a woman into a traditional identity. It's a way of saying, by the way, and those of you who have raised children know, you know, nurturing children is a lot of work. And it's hard, and it takes sacrifice. And so, originally, dolls were there to help a little girl at least learn a little bit about a traditional identity. That's not true anymore. This is what the American Girls catalog says about the fact that you can, there's all these various dolls, and you can choose every one of them. And here's what it says. Choose a doll from the American Girls catalog, quote, to let her know, using these dolls, that her individuality is something to celebrate every day. Every little girl has her own story. The stuff that makes her, her, set apart from every other girl in the world, and given the chance to express exactly who she is, how will she share her very own inner star? Now, the idea is, there's something unique about you. You're different than anybody else. Every single one of you has this little inner star, and you choose the doll to help you express yourself. It's exactly the opposite. By the way, there is no greater pressure than to tell any kid, you are absolutely unique. There's something about you that no one else, it's not like no one else in the world, and you can be anyone you want to be. But no culture's ever put that kind of pressure on a person, ever. And so, anyway, the catalog knows its stuff. We know it used to be dolls was a way of helping a woman get into a traditional identity. By the way, I'm not necessarily saying that was good, because I'm here for gospel identity. I'll talk to you about that in a second. On the other hand, now, the catalogs all know this, we're using dolls to help you into a modern identity. There's a book called Identity and Social Change. Identity and Social Change. It's an academic book. I don't recommend it. I'll give you plenty of other books to recommend. a bunch of books this morning and this afternoon. But this was an academic book, and it was critiquing modern therapy. And there's one page that's just astounding. It says, at the essence of modern psychotherapy is this. The therapist says to the client, don't let anybody define you. Don't let anybody give you... Your self-worth should not depend on what anyone else says about you. You decide what is right or wrong for you. You define yourself. Don't let anybody else define you. And what the academics pointed out is, do you realize the irony of this? What the therapist is doing is imposing on the client a very arguably white, western, and certainly a highly individualistic understanding of identity. And therefore, the therapist is doing to the client exactly what the therapist is telling the client not to let anybody ever do to them. And, by the way, they're saying, don't let anybody validate you. And yet, of course, what the therapist is doing is becoming the decisive validator in a person's life. And it's hypocritical. It's contradictory. And yet, in our society, we just see that and we say, of course. But if you're Christians and you don't want to be conformed to this world but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, Romans 12, 2, you've got to see what the culture's doing when it's doing it to you. Otherwise, you'll keep the doctrine up here in your head and in your heart. You'll be shaped by modern identities. You know, the saddest thing I know is last night we said the modern identity is unstable because it's based on your feelings. Your feelings are always changing so you never are quite sure this is what I really want. It's fragile because you really can't validate yourself. You do need other outside affirmation but since you've not given that right to anybody else, it's fragile. You're always, always insecure. It's crushing because now you have to live up traditional identity was you fit in. Modern identities, you have to stand out. You're your own unique star and it puts tremendous pressure on you. It's fragmenting because no one, you can never completely commit to anything because you've got to keep all your options open because individual happiness comes first. You know, and it's exclusive because if your race is your highest identity, you have to despise other races. If your politics is your highest identity, you have to despise other politics. You know, no matter what it is, it tends to be exclusive and in the end, it's hypocritical because you say, oh, I'm not letting any moral absolutes out there define me but you actually are. You just don't want to admit that you are. I won't let any group of people define who I am but you are. You just won't let it admit it. And I've had people who have actually listened to me go through that list and they've looked at me and they said, yeah, yeah, yeah, I believe I have to define right and wrong myself. I don't believe in God and yes, I am often lonely. All the time I'm lonely. Yes, I am changing. I'm always unsure of myself. Yes, I do pressure myself but at least I'm free and the only thing to say is freedom is now your God and your God is a tyrant. Freedom, you say, I'm free. No, you're not. You're freedom. Your definition of freedom is now enslaving you and you are not free at all. It's the only thing to say. Modern identity. So what's a gospel identity? And a gospel identity, first of all, we've got to now take about five minutes to talk about how a gospel identity, you obviously already see it's not the modern identity. I put it up there. But it's not the traditional identity either. Now, dare I do this? Lots and lots and lots of you, so lots of you, have been through gospel and life or what's also called Catalyst One. Catalyst. And in Catalyst, the second session is on the gospel and it's built around the story of the prodigal son. So in two minutes, I'm going to summarize that because those of you who have never been through that session, if you want to get the most out of this weekend, you ought to find that somewhere. Ask somebody and just go through it at least yourself. If you've been through it, I don't want to belabor it. But that story of the parable of the prodigal son, you've got a father with two sons and one has a bohemian and the other has a bourgeois identity. Okay, I just threw that out there so those of you who think, I've always heard Tim talk about this, now you're going to say, wait a minute, I've never heard that before. So I'm just trying to help you pay attention, which isn't easy if you've heard me say this 20,000 times. But the fact is, a bohemian identity was a proto-modern identity in which you said, I want to live the way I want to live. Father, give me my money. don't care what you think. That's sort of a bohemian. That's a proto-modern identity. The older son in that story, however, has a bourgeois identity. That is, hardworking, obey the parents, stay home, do everything right, be incredibly moral, follow all the rules. And the gist of Jesus' parable is to lift up both of these identities. Essentially, one's a modern identity, one's a traditional identity, and say, not only are they both wrong, not only are both people lost, because neither of them actually love the Father, they're both using different ways of getting the Father's things without loving the Father. Which is another way of saying, a traditional person who's being very moral, doesn't really love God, you're using God to get God to bless you. But you are your own Savior and Lord. And, of course, the modern person who says, I don't want to have anything to do with God because I want to live my way, of course, that person's being their own Savior and Lord. And Jesus is saying in this parable that to be traditional and very moral and even go to church and take notes on Tim Keller's sermons does not make you a Christian. Because it depends on why you're doing it. And so many people today, I've got to tell you, in professing Christians today in many parts of this country have traditional identities rather than actually gospel identities. They're basing their identity on the fact that I am a moral person, I'm a good person, I believe in Jesus, and I'm trying to live like Jesus. And that's a traditional identity. Because you're doing it through your performance. And, by the way, that's one of the reasons why a lot of people in this country are not going to be acting today like I'm going to be talking about. A gospel identity creates high humility and openness to difference. And you say, well, that's not how I understand a lot of Christians. Maybe it's because they don't actually, I'm not saying they're not believers. I'm saying they're operating out of a traditional identity. By the way, it's also possible in New York, especially, to come to church, raise your hand in worship, get really excited by the worship services and still have a modern identity. And that's what happens when you come and you cry and you say, I think God loves me. And you're still sleeping with your girlfriend, your boyfriend. And you say, well, I guess maybe the Bible says it's not so good. But I need to be happy. That's a person who's got a modern identity. And maybe they are Christians. But the point is, they've got a modern identity inside a Christian profession. And a lot of other people have a traditional identity inside a Christian profession. But they're not living out of the gospel identity. And Jesus' point in the parable of the prodigal son is to say, don't, in fact, as you know, he comes down harder on the older brother. Because in the process of the narrative, Jesus has the younger brother repent and come into the father's feast of salvation. But at the end, the older brother does not yet. And as Jesus' way of saying, in some ways, the traditional identity is more spiritually dangerous because people who come to church and adopt the morality and adopt the Christian doctrine and still have a traditional identity don't know what they're doing. They don't realize they're alienated from the father. They don't realize they don't understand the gospel. And in some ways, it's actually more dangerous. But now, having shown you that the gospel identity is not just a traditional identity of saving yourself and your good works, what is it? And two things. Let's talk about the basis of it, you know, and the who and the what of it. Who is your validator, your decisive validator in a gospel identity? And what is the basis for that validation? So let's, who and what? So let's take it in reverse order. What? What's the basis for the validation? And here's what it is. The Christian identity is the only identity in which your identity is received, not achieved. Every human being desperately needs assurance that they are received, that they're loved, that they're accepted. And we desperately need that assurance of love and of value regardless of the ups and downs of our performance. Every other culture, traditional, modern, every other century, every other religion basically gives you an identity, traditional or modern, based on your performance. You're either living up to what your parents say or to what the community says, or you're being honorable and dying in battle for the glory of your people. Or you're figuring out what your little inner star is, and then you're trying to live according to that. And your dream is to do this, and your dream is to do that. I'm trying to realize it. Tremendous pressure. And your self-worth goes up and down all the time depending on how well you're doing. Only Christianity says no. Yeah. Or put it this way. Christianity says yeah. Yeah. The good has to be achieved, but you can't do it. The good, there is a transcendent. There's a sacred order. And it must be achieved, it must be honored, but you can't do it, because if you try to do it, you'll always be insecure, radically insecure. the time you have all these other problems. You basically, modern identities, traditional identities, all, to some degree, are fragile, to some degree. All of them are certainly crushing. How about Christianity? It's unique. 2 Corinthians 5.21, 1. God made him sin who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. What's that saying? First of all, it says, God made Jesus Christ sin. Didn't mean he made him sinful. That means on the cross, he treated him as if he'd done every single thing that we've done. On the cross, he was treated as sin. He was made sin. He was treated as sinful. Well, what does that mean? When I become a Christian, when I stop basing my identity, in my moral performance, modern or traditional, and I say, Father, accept me because of what your son Jesus Christ has done. Accept me not because of what I have done or what I can do or what I ever will do, but because of what Jesus Christ has done. At that moment, what's 2 Corinthians 5.21 say? It says, God made him sin. He treated Jesus as if he'd done everything I did so that I might become the righteousness of God in him. What's that mean? The minute I believe in Jesus Christ, yeah, eventually I hope I will become a better and better person. I will be. I think I will be. But the very moment I become the righteousness of God in him, what's that mean? Well, Jesus didn't become sinful. He was treated as sinful. It means I don't become immediately righteous. It means now God treats me as if I'd done everything Jesus has done. And that's why that incredible line in John 17. And by the way, I, you know, I engineered things. So the very last two or three sermons I was ever preaching here regularly for you as your senior pastor was, was in John 17 is where Jesus Christ says, I want the world to know that you love them, my disciples, even as you love me, even as, even as, even as, not kind of like, you know, Father, I want the world to know that you love them kind of like you love me. No, even as, even as, here's what it means. It means that God now is your decisive validator, not your family, not the community, not the guild of warriors, certainly not you yourself. And the only eyes in the universe whose opinion counts, looks at you in Jesus Christ and finds you more valuable than all the jewels that lie beneath the earth. And here's the reason why that works. So the what of Christian identity is the basis is not your performance. It's Jesus performance, which means it's received, not achieved. No other culture, no other, uh, uh, culture even offers an identity like that. But secondly, it means the what, which is that's the what now the who, uh, who's the, who's the decisive evaluator? Who's the decisive, you know, uh, validator? It's God. And see, you must not give that right to, I think most modern people realize if I give the right to any human being to be my decisive validator, I can't trust them. And you're right, modern people, you're absolutely right. Here's what you need in a validator. If you want to have a self-esteem, if you want to have a sense of self-worth that is absolutely infallible, that can't be, that cannot be changed, that cannot be, it's not up and down. It's so stable. It's more stable than anything you've ever done. Hey, I know there's people in this room who've been back and forth, especially if you were raised in the South, uh, you know, the United States, that you had a traditional identity. You were pushed into a modern identity by the culture. Now you're trying to be a Christian. And so you know what I'm talking about. If you give that ability to decisively validate you to any human being, they're going to misuse it or they might actually go away. I, I, you know, the place where this guy, you must never give this right to any human being. The place that this came through to me was an old, I don't know where it is anymore. I was listening to an old cassette tape of a David Martin Lloyd Jones sermon from the 1950s. And at one point he was preaching on broken cisterns at someplace in Jeremiah, where he says, only God will supply your needs and you must not look to what's called, he called broken cisterns, which was an image for, as you know, uh, you know, you, you supposed to supposedly a cistern gathered rainwater. So you had something to drink, but if the cistern was broken at the bottom, it kept leaking out. And what Dr. Lloyd-Jones said is anybody you look to besides God to be your validation, including yourself. if you have a wonderful spouse? And he was thinking about his own wife. He says, what if you have a wonderful wife, men? And she is the reason why you feel good about yourself. She's the one who affirms you. She's the most important thing in your life. She's the main reason you know you're okay. And he says, how will she help you when you're looking at her in a coffin? And he says, how will she be able to help you when your heart is breaking? And it just went through me like a shaft, and I said, oh no. I cannot let any human being, including me, be the decisive validator of my self-worth, my worth and my value. But here's the other thing. And the more you esteem the validator, the more life-giving the validation is. Isn't that right? If here's somebody you respect a little bit, and they say, you're great, it feels good, doesn't it? Here's someone you respect enormously and says, you're great. Some of you, there's very few of you know this, but one time I preached a sermon in front of Ed Clowney, who was kind of a mentor and professor of mine. And afterwards he says, you know what? I think I'd probably preach the text that way too. The reason I can still remember that is one of the two or three times in which I said, oh my word. Because he was like, you know, I had this incredible respect for him. So the, put it this way, unless you're esteemed by somebody who you esteem, you will have no self-esteem. But God, not Ed Clowney, or not anybody you could think of, but God. The praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. When someone you adore, adores you, it's like heaven. You know why? Because that's how it works. And when someone you literally adore, you know that they look at you, and they see a beauty, and they delight in you. The eyes of God. To know that, and to the degree you know that, to the degree that's a reality, which is, by the way, what practices are about, and that's what we're going to be talking about the rest of today. To the degree you know that, and that only becomes real to your heart through practices, through devotion, through worship, through accountability, to that degree, you will have the most stable and deep and powerful identity that there is. Now, what I'm going to do now is, for the last seven minutes here, is I'm going to start what I'm going to go into more detail on after lunch, which is, there are four really unique aspects to this identity. I've already kind of given you what the unique, it's unique, but let me give you four things that are really great about this identity. I mean, just absolutely, incredibly great. And here's what they are. I'm mainly headlining them here. And, by the way, those of you who are doing the Q, you know, Q&A thing, the discussion afterwards, you might want to ask me to drill down on them because I've got to drill down on them. Here's what they are. There's four of them. The first one is maybe something you've, I would think a lot of you have heard me say before, but it's worth talking about. What's unique about, there's four unique greatnesses about the Christian identity, the gospel identity. One is the coexistence of boldness and humility. The coexistence of it. Any identity that's based on performance, means you feel bold and confident if you're living up to the standards, but not very humble. You kind of look at other people that aren't living up and you say, huh. On the other hand, if you're not living up to your standards, if you feel like a failure, then you're very humble and you're very sympathetic to other failures, by the way. You know, one failure sees another failure, you say, hey, let's talk. You know, because I know you're not going to come down on me and look at me and say, why are you a failure? Well, you can't say that because you're a failure too. So if you're a failure, then you feel humble but not confident. But one of the weird things about the Bible, and this is something only the last couple of years I've realized, do you know how many places, Philippians 3, Romans 3 and 4, 1 Corinthians 1 and 2 and Galatians 6 are all about boasting. You know, the famous places in Jeremiah 9, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, let not the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him who glories glories in this, that he understands and knows me. The Bible does not say that for you to become a Christian, you have to humble yourself as a sinner and there's no more boasting. See, one of the things you have to remember in ancient times, boasting was the way you got the soldiers to charge the enemy. Right? So, how do they charge the enemy in Henry V? For Harry, England, and St. George, you British people. I know some of you are going to get up and start singing. But, okay, so, you know, what is a boast? A boast is what you the New Testament says that when you become a Christian, you boast, but you don't boast in the things you were boasting in before. You don't boast in your wisdom or your riches, you don't boast in those things, because then you're up and down all the time. You actually lose your confidence. You're either confident and therefore arrogant, or you're humble and therefore not confident. But only the Christian identity gives you both at the same time, because you're a sinner who deserves to go to hell. And as a result, your salvation is not based on being good or better. You know, you look at other people, and even though they're not Christians, they might be better than you. Why? Because your salvation is not based on you being better than anybody else. So it humbles you, but it gives you that affirmation, because you can't lose that affirmation. I read recently something that said, deeply insecure people do three things. One is, they try to dominate. Two is, they try to do anything to get approval. And three is, they just withdraw. And you see, the first one is boldness without humility. And the second two are humility and feeling bad about yourself without the boldness. But in Christ, you've got that coexistence of boldness and humility that is absolutely unique. Number two, I'm just giving you the headlines. There's a unique approach to emotion in gospel identity. Traditional identity says, stuff your emotions. It doesn't matter what you feel like, do your duty. Okay? And modern identity takes the feelings and makes them almost into an absolute. I mean, basically, your feelings control you. If your feelings say, I've got to do this, well, I've got to do it. Break any promise, do anything, my feelings, my feelings. So the traditional is, totally stuff the feelings. The modern is, you know, let the feelings rule you. But here's the, I mentioned this last night. One of the big bombshells in intellectual history was St. Augustine's book, The Confessions. Because it was the first time in history, up to that time, that somebody spent an entire book going in and looking at their feelings. Looking at their desires. You see, ancient people said, feelings are just trouble. Just, you know, just forget them. But Augustine understood that the gospel meant this. That our problem is not our desires. In fact, God has created those desires. Our problem is we desire God too little in relationship to the other desires. And that's the reason why they're unruly and out of order. The answer is not to give in to them or to stifle them. But to reorder them by having more passion for God. Oh, listen, let me get this down to earth. If I don't love my, if I don't love God more than I love Kathy, my wife. If I don't love God more than Kathy, I will not love Kathy right. You know why? I'll put so much pressure on her. She's got to affirm me. She's got to be okay to me. What if she's having a bad day? She's still got to affirm me because I'm having a bad day. Only if I love God more than Kathy will I really love Kathy well. Which means not that I stifle my love for Kathy. Nor that I make an idol out of Kathy, which is very, very easy to do. In fact, you know, the trouble with bad marriages is they're bad. The trouble with good marriages is they lead to idolatry. So we're stuck either way. Let's just go home. But what happens is when the gospel identity, to the degree you live into that identity, because you see that the one who you adore adores you, and that begins to suffuse your life, then what happens is when I actually experience God's love, truly experience it, not just believe it in my head, but actually experience it, to the degree I experience it, the other loves are in place. And then I'm actually not driven by them. Let me just give you one last example here. A big part of a Christian identity is that Christ comes first, and it doesn't eliminate the other parts. It doesn't eliminate your race. It doesn't eliminate your love for your job. But it demotes them so they don't run you anymore. They don't just destroy you anymore. So, for example, let me show you how weird the Christian identity is, the gospel identity is. A hundred years ago, if you're a woman, and you know I could have this career, or I could have this husband, but I can't have both. The culture a hundred years ago would have said, you've got to take the husband and forget the career. You know why? Because you're nothing unless you're a mother and a wife. Family was the ultimate, right? Today, if a woman has a distinction, said, I can have this career, I can have this husband, but not both, your culture will say, you've got to take the career. Why? Because your independence is the ultimate thing. See that? You've got to have it. But if you're a Christian, and actually now, your career and family are just things. They're not identities anymore. They're just things. They don't drive you anymore. They don't drive you anymore. You a Christian woman, and you could have this career, or this husband, marry this guy, but you can't have both, what's the right answer? And you know what the answer is? It depends. It does, on a lot of factors. I'm not going to go into them, and don't ask me about that up here. Because there's too many situations. But you realize what's happening now that you're a Christian? You can actually make a decision. Because you've got a gospel identity. And these things are just things now. You see how wild that is. The last two, by the way, I'll just name them, and then we're done. Because I'm over my time. The four things, which we'll get back to after lunch. What's so great about gospel identity? A unique combination of humility and boldness. A unique approach to emotion and desire. Thirdly, a unique cultural flexibility because of gospel identity complexity. There's a unique cultural flexibility. The gospel will make you more culturally flexible. And then, related to that, number nine. I meant letter D, excuse me. Number nine, letter D. The fourth one is, the gospel gives you a unique openness to difference. A unique openness to people who are not just culturally different, but religiously different. A unique openness to people who are deeply different and who even oppose you. The gospel, I think.
