TITLE: He Came to Himself
SCRIPTURE: Luke 15:11-20
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Fellowship of Grace
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/he-came-to-himself/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading comes from the book of Luke, chapter 15, verses 11 through 20. Jesus continued, There was a man who had two sons. The younger one said to his father, Father, give me my share of the estate. So he divided his property between them. Not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a distant country, and there squandered his wealth and wild living. After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in that whole country, and he began to be in need. So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs. He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything. When he came to his senses, he said, How many of my father's hired men have food to spare, and here I am, starving to death. I will set out and go back to my father and say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired men. So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion for him. He ran to his son, threw his arms around him, and kissed him. This is God's word. We're looking at the parables of Luke chapter 15, and of course the biggest, longest, and most famous of them is the parable of the prodigal son. We're looking at that in particular for several weeks, and what we're studying in Luke 15 is not just simply how the grace of God changes my individual life or your individual life, but how the grace of God creates a new kind of community, a new kind of human society, how it creates new kinds of relationships. Now this particular parable, as famous as it is, is often not understood to be what it is, which is a story about the meltdown of community and the restoration of it. So for example, the family, which is the most basic human community, has unraveled in this story. The younger son of the father has asked for his inheritance early, before the father dies. We looked at this last week. In that culture, to ask for the inheritance, when your father is still alive, is to wish him dead. He takes the money, he leaves, he repudiates the family, he repudiates his father. So the family is unraveling. That's not the only community that's unraveling, because as you see, this young man, who is an Israelite, goes off into a foreign country, and at the very end, before he returns, he's feeding pigs. And this means he's also repudiated his nation and his faith community. But the rest of the story, after the first couple of verses, is about how the community began to get restored. And the key theme we're going to look at tonight that is crucial for the restoration or the renewal of community is the theme of repentance. Repentance. If you were here a couple weeks ago when we looked at the first famous parable in Luke 15, the story of the lost sheep, we're actually told that God loves repentance. Now, even though the word is not in this text, what we have when the younger son decides to go back to his father is an example of repentance. And we want to look tonight at the importance of repentance, the anatomy of it, what it's actually made of, the key to doing it, and the kind of community that results from it. Okay? The importance of it, the anatomy of it. The key to it, and the kind of community that results from it. Hey, first. And more briefly, the importance of it. But, boy, think now about, this is a story. So, what is the key factor that begins to heal the younger son's insides, what brings him to his senses? What is the key factor that begins to restore the family? The father all along has been loving his son, right? But what is the fuse that detonates the father's love into radical action in the son's life? It's repentance. The term came to his senses. See in verse 17? He came to his senses. That's a Semitic idiom that refers to repentance. And even though the father loved the son already, what triggers his love, what detonates his love into radical action is the repentance of the younger son. And if the father here represents God, which he does in the story, then we're being told no less than this. If you want the love of God and the power of God to explode into your life... to explode into your life is repentance. You notice how often Jesus says, repent and believe the gospel. Repent and enter the kingdom. Repent for the kingdom of God is at hand. You know what he's saying? He was saying, if you don't repent, I have nothing to give you. I have nothing to do for you. You can't even begin to enter into my realm. Repentance is the key to everything. When Martin Luther began the Protestant Reformation, he nailed his 95 theses to the Wittenberg Cathedral door. And the first of the 95 theses was, when our Lord and Master Jesus Christ said, repent, he meant the entire life of believers should be one of repentance. The first of Martin Luther's theses, in which he was laying out his understanding of biblical gospel Christianity was, all of life is repentance. Now that's completely different than, say, what the world thinks. For example, Lord Byron, the Romantic poet, has a famous line in which he says, the weak alone repent. So here's Luther saying, all of life ought to be repentance, and here's Lord Byron saying, the weak alone repent. And Lord Byron, of course, represents what the world thinks about repentance. What most people think about repentance is this. Repentance is a sign of weakness. Secondly, it's an experience of disempowerment, so that we feel drained, we feel, you know, all power is taken away from us. And thirdly, it's an aberration. It's something that you hope hardly ever happens or never happens. But Martin Luther says, as he reads the Bible, he sees repentance as being the very opposite. First of all, Luther teaches, and he does some wonderful stuff on repentance. Luther teaches that it is not a sign of weakness, it's a sign of strength. Do you realize how much full, how full of joy you have to be? Do you realize how loved you have to be able to feel? Do you realize how strong, spiritually, emotionally, you need to be in order to repent at the drop of a hat? When you do something wrong, see, you admit it. Okay, yes, I was wrong. You humble yourself. You realize how strong you have to be to be like that? The inability to repent is a sign of weakness. It's not a sign of strength. So the world says repentance is a sign of weakness. Luther says, the Bible says, a sign of strength. Secondly, the world says it's an experience of disempowerment. No, says Luther. It's an experience of liberation. A repentant person, a person who's constantly repentant, is someone who is free, finally, from pretense and evasion. Free from the need to always win every argument. Free from the need to defend yourself. Free from the need to expose others, to show other people, you're not so great. A repentant person is someone who is vulnerable and happy to do it and says, yes, I was wrong. I was absolutely wrong. I should never have done that. Let's make it right. Very quick to repent. Very joyful in repentance. It's liberation. I don't have to spin everything. I don't have to control what everybody thinks. And therefore, since it's not a sign of weakness but a sign of strength, it's not an experience of disempowerment. It's an experience of liberation. Therefore, Luther says it should happen all the time. All of your life should be repentance if you understand gospel Christianity. Okay, so who's right, Luther or Lord Byron? See? Who's right, the Bible or the world? And this might surprise you for a second. I'm going to say, well, in a way, they're both right. You know why? Because there really are two kinds of repentance. Paul talks about it in 2 Corinthians 7, verse 10, where he says, Godly sorrow brings repentance that leads to salvation and leaves no regret. But worldly sorrow brings death. Isn't that interesting? Years ago, I read this and it just went right. It just really went right through me. There's a kind of repentance. There's a kind of acknowledgement of sin, an admission of wrongdoing, an acknowledgement of sin, a confession of guilt. There's a kind of repentance that leads to salvation and life and no regret, no loss of confidence, no gnawing yourself in the dark for years. And there's a kind of repentance that leads to devastation. It leads to self-doubt. It leads to the loss of power, loss of confidence, and death. Well, we better get it right then. So let's move to point two. What is this repentance, this gospel repentance, this biblical repentance that is so good, that God is so excited about, according to, you know, the parable of the lost sheep, that Luther was talking about, that it should be, if you understand it, your whole life will be permeated with it, saturated with it. Well, we can learn three things about the nature of true repentance by looking at what the young man in the parable does right. And he does three things that tell us about repentance. The first thing it says is verse 17. that an interesting phrase? He came to his senses. We live in a technological age and because of that, if we think that if there is a way to do deep life change, then it ought to be something that we can put into bullet points, a set of steps, and then once we have it, we can do it in our time, on our terms. But if repentance is coming to your senses, if the thing that really deeply changes your life and fills your life with liberation and joy is coming to your senses, think about this for a second. What do you decide you're going to come out of a trance? No. Do you decide to wake from your delirium? You see? No. The reason, pardon me, put it this way, the sins in your life, the flaws in your life, the character shortcomings in your life that are creating the most problem for you right now, and the most problem for the people around you, by definition, are the ones you can't see. See, that's why they would be the worst ones. That's why the most harmful flaws, by definition, would be the ones that you don't see, you're in denial about. The human heart runs on denial the way my car runs on gas. You know that. Well, then, repentance is a moment in which you come to your senses. How does that happen? It happens to you. Your wrongdoing sets up strains in the fabric of reality, you see, because, for example, God created the world in such a way that he says, live like this. So if you're selfish, that sets up strains against, you're moving against the fabric of the way God made you and other people. If you hold grudges, if you're full of pride, if you're full, in other words, when you do things wrong, it sets up strains in the fabric of reality, and eventually they lead to breakdown. And when the breakdowns come, when the circumstances hit you, when there's some kind of meltdown, then you suddenly say, what have I been doing? What has been wrong? How could I have thought that? What's the matter with me? And like the younger son, when he comes to his senses because of pain, because of breakdown, then with help from his father and from other people around him, he can repent. Repentance starts with coming to your senses, and that's not something that you can decide to do. It's something that comes to you, and then you have to respond to it. You can miss it. See, anybody who understands their heart, anyone who sees themselves clearly knows that the seasons in which you see yourself clearly and come to know your heart are not seasons that come at your command. They come, and then you have to respond. So the first thing is repentance, repentance, life-changing, liberating repentance always happens in response to you coming to your senses, and it's something that other people or circumstances bring to you, number one. Number two and three. When he actually responds, he does it right because he says, I will go to my father, and I will say, Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight I am not worthy to be called your son. Vertical, horizontal, in the right order. Let's look at this. First of all, he says, I have sinned against heaven. Now, wait a minute. He hurt the father. He hurt the elder brother. He hurt the family. What? Primarily, first of all, I sinned against God. If you go back to Psalm 51, the most famous and greatest confession of sin in the Bible, where David is confessing his sin for having stolen a man's wife and then having arranged to have him killed in battle. And in Psalm 51, he starts his confession like this. Against thee, he says, Lord. Against thee, O God, O Lord. Against thee only have I sinned. Wait a minute. What about the guy who's dead? What is he saying to God? Against thee only have I sinned. Why would you say God first? But that's right. Because biblical, life-changing repentance, you see, liberating repentance starts understanding that whatever sin you've done, primarily, and first of all, you have sinned against the goodness and greatness of God. Now, why is that important? Here's why. What is it that wakes you up to what's wrong with you? Pain, see? And what's wrong with you is a form of self-centeredness. But when the pain wakes you up that you've been bad, almost the great danger at that moment is that you want to do anything at all to get rid of the pain. repentance to be not a change from self-centeredness, but actually a greater, deeper experience of self-centeredness. Because repentance can be nothing but self-pity and self-absorption. When, I remember years ago when I was a young minister, I was young, I think I'd been married for like a year. I was in this little town in Virginia, and a man calls me up and said, I need marriage counseling, okay? Well, you know, there's no counselors in town. I'm 25 years old. Been married for a year. Sure, come, I'll tell you all you need to know. And so he showed up with his wife, and here's what had been happening. He was a very selfish man. He was a very arrogant man. He was a very manipulative man. And his wife said to him recently, very recently, I'm leaving. I'm packing my bags. And he said, if we go to counseling with the minister, would that help? She says, well, okay, I'll go with you. So they show up. And we went through all the things she wanted him to change. And he was so scared and so upset. And he was weeping. Men in Hopewell, Virginia almost never wept, you know? So he was weeping. And he was very upset she was going to leave me. And so she made a list. She says, stop doing this. And so that week he did. And then the next week she said, stop doing this and start doing this. And that week he did. And he did. And then the next week, and so things started going along better. And she says, I see hope here. I'm not going to leave. But after a few months, once he was sure she wasn't going to leave, he went right back to the way he was before. Now, was he sitting there in the room this first couple of times saying, I'll just act like I'm going to change, but I won't. I'll just fool her. And then way she won't leave me. No. He was really sad. He was really in pain. He was really upset for himself. You see, to really be upset for the consequences of your sin, to really be upset because of the pain your sin is bringing to you is not the same thing as being upset about the sin. It's saying, I'll do anything it takes. You actually, therefore, are not changing. You're just becoming more self-centered, more manipulative, actually. And so even though he was very upset, he was upset for himself. He wasn't upset for what he'd done to her. And he certainly wasn't upset for how he disobeyed God. And as a result, he was upset about the sin's consequences, but not the sin. And he never changed. He actually got worse. So why bring God into it? Here's why. Stephen Sharnock, the great Puritan, at one point explains the big difference between a kind of a selfish, self-pity kind of repentance and a true repentance. He says, a legalistic conviction of sin arises from a consideration of God's justice, chiefly. But an evangelical, by what that means, but a gospel conviction of sin arises from a sense of God's goodness. Did you hear that? He says, a legalistically convinced person cries out, I have exasperated a power that is as the roaring of a lion. I've revoked one that is the sovereign Lord of heaven and earth whose word can tear up the foundation of the world. But a gospel convicted person says, I have incensed a goodness like a dropping of the dew. I have offended a God that has the deportment of a friend. All the difference in the world. You see, when you say, I have sinned, I have sinned against one whose word can tear up the foundation of the world. What are you upset about? I'm going to get it. He's upset about himself. Oh, I'm going to suffer. Oh my gosh. But you see, there's another approach that says, look at this good and loving God. Look at all the things that he wants for me. Look at all the things he's done for me. How could I treat him like this? How could I break his heart? When you know, when you repent, not just about the fact that you broke the rules and it's messing up your life, but that you have broken his heart, and that is unconscionable. You'll find when you say, my sin is against the goodness of this God, it helps you to hate the sin. It helps you to hate the thing you did, not just the consequences of it, and you begin to stop doing it. You actually change. You don't become more self-centered, you become less self-centered. There's a kind of repentance that focuses completely on what's wrong with you, in which case you're going deeper into self-centeredness. You're not changing from it. And there's a kind of repentance that is focused on the goodness of God and how you've broken his heart. And it looks there first, and that changes the self-centeredness that is ruining your life. But let's go on. Because he doesn't just say, I've sinned against God. He also says, I've sinned against you in your sight. I'm not worthy to be called your son. Now there's the horizontal, and it's just right. No blame shifting. No excuses. Do you see that? He doesn't come back and say, Father, I've sinned against you. you had to sleep in a bunk bed year after year after year with this self-righteous Pharisee, you have no idea. No. Nor did he say, Father, I have sinned against you, but I'm a young man and I had to sow my wild oats and youth will have its fling. No, no excuses, no blame shifting. And here what you have is repentance. Repentance is a response to an awakening coming to your senses. It focuses on God and gets away from self-pity. It takes complete and absolute moral responsibility without blame shifting or excuse-making at all. And now we're pretty close to understanding what kind of repentance actually we are supposed to have. We really want it to be a life-changing thing, a strong thing, a liberating thing, but we're not quite done. Because the key to it all is seeing not so much in what the younger son did do, but in what he didn't. Because the last thing we see here about his little speech that he comes up with, his repentance plan, is very simple. He says, Father, I have sinned against heaven. I have sinned against you. I am no worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired servants. Ah, what's that? Well, notice, make me like one of your hired men, excuse me. Now, a domestic servant was someone who actually lived on the estate, you know, room boarded there. But a hired man was someone who lived in the town and who was a day worker and who was paid a wage. And you know what he's doing? He says, Father, I know I've sinned. Father, I know I've done wrong, but I don't want your mercy. I don't want your grace. I don't want to come back into the family. I want to pay back absolutely every single cent I stole from you. And when I put it all back, then maybe I can be back in the family. I don't want to be back in the family. I want to earn my way back in the family. I don't want it just to be given to me. I don't want just grace. See? I want to earn my way back. I want to pay you back. Now, it's very important to remember that in a way, because this is a parable, because this is not something that actually ever happened, it's an illustration that Jesus made up, we have to be careful. We have to read it at two levels. Because at one level, if you as a human being are going to another human being to try to make things right, and you have really wronged them, then this is perfectly fine. In other words, if you've stolen something, you ought to give it back. If you have wronged somebody, you ought to do everything you can to make it right or to give back as much as you possibly can. That's fine. But if the father in this story is God, then the younger sons approach to repentance toward God is the biggest mistake you can make. Here's why. Just for a second, keep in mind something that we often talk about here. Religion, gospel. Religion is a framework of thought. It's a stance of life. And it's an understanding of approach to God that says, if I have a good record, if I do everything right, then God will bless me. If I have that good record, if I really live the life I ought to live, if I minister to people, I serve people, I'm really moral, I'm a good husband or wife or mother or father or son or daughter, if I have a good record, then God will bless me. Okay? And in that framework, what is the source of your power, your confidence, and your hope? That good record. When I see that record, when I'm standing on that record, when I feel like it's a strong record, then I have power and confidence and hope. And this is the reason why, within a religious understanding of things, repentance is a disaster. Because first of all, repentance is an experience of weakness and disempowerment because why? Because repentance separates you from your source of power, which is a sense that I have a good name and I have a good record. Repentance is admitting that you don't have. And so as soon as you start to repent, you're just devastated. You start to feel that you've been, you don't have a self left. So it separates you from your hope. It separates you from your power. It separates you from your self-image and your confidence. And secondly, in the religious framework, it's not only an experience of weakness, but it's a form of atoning for your own sin. Always. Why? Because if what you, if your hope is this great moral record, then you know what you're trying to do when you repent? You try to flagellate yourself. You try to beat yourself up. You try to loathe yourself. You try to talk about how awful you are to yourself or maybe other people. And what are you trying to do? You're trying to get that good record back. What you're actually trying to say is, okay, I thought I was a good person and now I see I'm maybe not so good. I'mMOBOLAD. Thank you very much. about myself that I'm so bad, then surely only a good person would think they're so bad, right? You see, in other words, surely God and other people and I myself will come to believe because I'm beating myself up so much that I'm really okay and that I deserve to be back in his good graces. So within a religious framework, repentance is a disaster. It separates you from your source of power and confidence. It's a way of doing exactly what the younger son says, and that is I'm going to earn it back. I'm going to pay it back. I'm going to atone for my own sin. And as a result, in a religious framework, repentance goes on and on and on and on. It goes on endlessly. You know, how do you ever know you've beaten yourself up enough to really earn your way back? And you gnaw, you know, at yourself the rest of your life and you never get your confidence back and you never get your mojo back and you never get your joy back. It's a disaster. But absolutely every single thing in this parable mitigates against that approach to repentance. Why? Look, when the younger son approaches, where's the father? Pretty interesting. Well, here's what he's not doing. We don't have the father who's sitting inside his house. Occasionally, like all of us, glancing out the window. And suddenly, out the window, he happens to see the son almost on the porch. And he says, oh my gosh, there's that artist formerly known as my younger son. This better be good. After what he has done to me, let him knock, let him cry, let him call, see? And let him grovel. And if he knocks and calls and grovels enough, if he's abject enough, maybe his repentance will renew my love. Maybe it'll revive and resurrect my love. This better be good. That's not what you have. That's not what you have at all. You've got a Middle Eastern patriarch who's obviously scanning the terrain because when the young man is far off, he sees him. And he runs. We'll get to this actually next week. Middle Eastern patriarchs didn't run. You had to pull up your skirts to run, you know. So if you're a boy, you ran. If you were a woman, you ran. But Middle Eastern patriarchs did not run. But he runs. And he embraces. And he falls on his neck. That's literally what the Greek says. He falls on his neck and kisses him. And of course, in just a verse or two, you'll see that what he does is he puts a robe on his nakedness and his rags. And he puts a signet ring on his finger, which means he's back in the family. He can do contracts. And he throws a party feast. And he refuses to let the son earn his way back in. By sheer grace, he grants it. So the whole idea of repentance, earning your way back, is completely rejected. And notice carefully, the whole religious idea of repentance is if I'm really abject enough, maybe I'll resurrect God's love. But in this, what we have is it's God's love that actually enables the repentance. Don't you think this poor guy, this nervous guy, and he's walking back, I'm going to say, he's going over his speech and suddenly his father runs, pounces on him with love and laughter. Don't you think that might have made the speech a little easier? Yes, of course. It's not like our repentance gets God's love. God's love enables the repentance. God's pouncing, aggressive love enables the repentance. Now, here it is. Here it is. In the religious approach, repentance separates you from the source of your power and your hope and your confidence because that's a good record. That's your power and source. But in the gospel, repentance reconnects you or connects you more deeply to the source of your power and your confidence and your joy. Why? Because the source, if you're a Christian, you understand the gospel, the source of your self-image, the source of your power, the source of your confidence is not your record, but his record. Not what you have done, but what he has done. He, Jesus. Well, what did he do? I think it's pretty astounding that Jesus Christ told this story. What was he thinking? He tells the story of a young son, a son, who's in agony. He's in rags. He's naked. He's crying out. And the father opens the door and receives him and robes him and feasts him. And yet, at the end of Jesus' life, he cries out to his father. He's naked, stripped naked, in rags, as it were, on the cross. And he cries out, my God, my God. not robed, he's disrobed. He's not feasted, he gets vinegar to drink. Why? Some people use repentance as a way of making themselves miserable and atoning for their sin, but Christians know that Jesus Christ on the cross was miserable for us. He was stripped naked for us so we could be clothed in God's love. He got the rejection we deserve so we get the welcome of God. So God, even before we repent, God's on us, robing us, kissing us, feasting us. When you repent, you remember you're a sinner saved by grace. When you repent, you remember that the whole reason why Jesus Christ came was to do this for me. When I repent, I get back in touch with who I am. That's why the gospel, that's why gospel Christianity says all of life is repentance and you want to do it all the time. When I think about the things that I do wrong, they usually either come from pride, self-centeredness, but the gospel says you're so sinful, Jesus had to die for you, and that humbles me into the dust. The other things I do wrong come from fear and anxiety and a feeling like I'm not valuable, but the gospel says Jesus Christ was glad to die for you, and that affirms me to the sky. You mean more, in Jesus Christ, you mean more to him than the stars in the heavens. And the more I get in touch with the fact that I'm a sinner saved by grace, the more I'm humbled into the ground and raised the stars by his love, the less I need to do the self-centered things that screw up my life and everybody's around me. Repentance is getting back in touch, and to the degree I get back in touch with the wonder of what he did. How he was willing to come and in rags be stripped and have the door of the universe shut in his face. And the Father not answer him when he called. So when I call, the Father always answers. So when you call, the Father answers when you come through Jesus Christ. And don't you see the liberation of being repentant? A repentant person is somebody who's always, always free from evasion, free from having to create this idea of a good record, free from having to tell everybody, you're right and everybody else is wrong, and you're misunderstanding me. Free from needing to expose other people and argue with people all the time. Free from needing to win any arguments ever again. And you know what's interesting? A repentant person, a repentant Christian is somebody, because you're humbled, it means you repent and repent and repent. But the more you repent, the better you get. The less you do those self-centered things, and the more the self-centered things you do are smaller and smaller. But you know, you don't feel like you're getting any better. See, if you're a repentant person, if you are a godly Christian, you don't feel like you're really getting much better, but everybody around you knows you are. And you're exactly the opposite of the way everybody else in the world is. Everybody else in the world says, I'm pretty good, but everybody else around you knows you're not. Which person do you want to be? Now, finally, what if we really were a group of people that knew that all life was repentance? What kind of community would we be? Let me just suggest two things, but they're pretty strong. Number one, do you believe that repentance comes from coming to your senses? And didn't we say that you can't just decide to come out of your trance? You know, circumstances, friends like the father helped the son to go through repentance. If you understand that sometimes you need to be brought to your senses, then what kind of community do you need to be in? Odysseus, on his great voyage, you know, the Odyssey, there was a place at which he knew he was going to go by the island of the sirens, and therefore he was told that when he heard the siren call, he would go nuts, and he would drive the boat into the shoals and everybody would die. So what he did with everybody was he tied himself to the mast, he put wax in all of his sailors' ears, and he says, now when I start to go nuts and start to curse at you and start to yell, I'll be out of my head, you just ignore, you just keep rowing. And after that, I'll be fine. And that's what happened. You're saying, you're using this as an analogy for what it means to belong to a church? Yes. Because, you see, if you come here, you take your notes, you come and go as you wish, you're a consumer. You don't join, you don't become a member, you don't actually take vows that say, if anything, if anybody, if my elders, if my officers, my pastors, if my friends see me living in a way that I shouldn't be, you have the right to call me on the carpet. Have you done that? If not, you don't understand repentance yet. You see, a gospel Christian knows that sometimes you're going to need to be brought to yourself. Let's do it. say, tie me to the mast and wait till I get sane. And therefore, every Christian has to be in a community where there's accountability. You for them, them for you. And you say, boy, I've been in a church where that was abused. Authority was abused. Fine. Okay. There's a lot of quacks out there. Bad doctors. Does that mean you don't need medicine? Is that the end of antibiotics for you? I hope not. You need a community in which people help you walk and live the way you should. But if it's a repentant community that every other person who's ever correcting you, holding your feet to the fire, holding you accountable would be a repentant sinner and would be incredibly gentle and would never give up on you. They would never stop holding your feet to the fire, but they would never, ever, ever, ever, on the other hand, just write you off. They'll love you to the end. They'll be patient with you to the end because they're just sinners. They're not better than you. They don't feel better than you if they're repentant. Don't you want to be in a community like that? Don't you want to build a community like that? A community of truth and love. A community in which the people are so gracious and so gentle with each other, nobody ever abuses anybody else, and yet nobody lets anyone else just go off the way they want to go. Because we know we need to repent. All of life is repentance. Let us pray. Father, thank you for this wonderful affirmation and yet this challenging, this great challenge, which is that when the Lord Jesus Christ called us to repent, he meant the entire life of believers should be one of repentance. We pray that you would help us to understand this as liberation. Help us to understand it as liberation. Help us to create a community of repentant sinners who lovingly help one another. You said, Father, in James 5, 16, confess your sins to one another and pray for each other that you may be healed. Let it be so. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
