TITLE: Healing From Decay
SCRIPTURE: Isaiah 11:1-10
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Jesus, Our Hope (Advent)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/healing-from-decay/

============================================================

A reading from the book of Isaiah, chapter 11, verses 1 through 10. A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse. From his roots a branch will bear fruit. The spirit of the Lord will rest on him, the spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the spirit of the knowledge and fear of the Lord, and he will delight in the fear of the Lord. He will not judge by what he sees with his eyes or decide by what he hears with his ears, but with righteousness he will judge the needy. With justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth. With the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked. Righteousness will be his belt, and faithfulness the sash around his waist. The wolf will live with the lamb. The leopard will lie down with the goat. The calf and the lion and the yearling together. And a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear. Their young will lie down together. And the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the cobra's den, and the young child will put its hand into the viper's nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea. In that day, the root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples. The nations will rally to him, and his resting place will be glorious. The word of the Lord. Now, each week what we're doing is we're looking at a passage. In December, we are looking at a passage out of the book of Isaiah. Isaiah is an Old Testament prophecy, prophetic book, that often prophesied the Messiah, a great messianic king, being born into the world out of the line of Jesse or out of the line of David. So there's a whole lot of prophecies. And because Christians believe that the messianic king that Isaiah prophesied was Jesus, at Christmas we often look at these passages because, and they're often read, some of them have already been read today, because we believe they help us understand the depths and the richness of the meaning of Christmas because it helps us understand who Jesus is. The themes of Christmas, if grasped, are life-transforming. So let's look at three of those right now that we find in this passage. This is telling us about a great king that's going to be born. Three things about the king. The justice of the king, the wisdom of the king, and the identity of the king. The justice, the wisdom, the identity. Look at the passage with me. First of all, the justice. Take a look at the middle part here. It says in verse 4, With righteousness he will judge the needy. With justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. At first sight, when it says he's going to judge the needy, the way that comes out in English, usually to judge someone means to condemn them. That's not what it means. It literally means he will make things just for the needy. He will put things right. He will make the crooked straight. And when it says he will give decisions for the poor of the earth, again, it doesn't come out as well in English. The word poor there is a word that means downtrodden. People without power. And to say he will give decisions for them, what it actually means is he's going to stand in their place and exercise his power. He's the great equalizer. He's going to identify with the poor and give decisions on their behalf and use his power to make things right again for them. Now, at this point, you're getting the impression that this is going to be an enlightened civil servant. You know, some king who will come in and create more social justice, and that's great. But then the passage sort of bursts the banks. You know, the water comes up and floods everything. Because then it says, look in verse 6, very famous verses, The wolf will live with the lamb. The leopard will lie down with the goat. The calf and the lion and the yearling together. And a little child will lead them. The infant will play near the cobra's den. The young child will put its hand into the viper's nest. They will neither harm nor destroy. this king is not just going to make the world a little bit better. He's going to get rid of death. He's going to get rid of disease. He's going to get rid of violence. He's going to get rid of suffering. He's going to make everything right. Now, what's this mean? Christmas actually sheds some light on this. And that is that here we're told that this king is going to care about the poor and identify with the poor. But it's not till Christmas Day that we know the lengths to which this king will identify with the poor. Because Christmas means that the Son of God was born into a poor family. Remember, his parents, when they went to get him circumcised at the temple, gave two birds as the sacrifice. That was, you know, back in those days, the sacrifice you gave depended on your income. That was from the poorest people gave two birds. He was born into the poorest of families. He did not come as a general or as a philosopher, but as a carpenter's son. And look at his priorities. When he ministered, he didn't just preach the gospel. He also fed the hungry, healed the sick, raised the dead. So what's that mean for us? We want to be in the spirit of Christmas. What does that mean? It means, among many other things, that that has to be our priority too. That not only must we be concerned about the poor, but we can't do it from afar. Jesus didn't come from afar. He didn't commute in to help the poor. He participated. And in some non-paternalistic, non-patronizing way, we as a church, as an institution, need to figure out how to come alongside and be involved with the life of the poor. Many individual Christians need to individually and personally become deeply involved with the lives of the poor, coming alongside, non-paternalistically, non-patronizing, because that's what Jesus did. We can't go into this anymore. It's a big subject. We can't talk anymore about it. But the Christmas points us in that direction. So first, we see the justice of the king. Now, the second Christmas theme that we see in here is the wisdom of the king. That's also a very important theme. Look up a little closer to the top. It says, the spirit of the Lord will rest upon him, this messianic king, and he will have a spirit of wisdom and of understanding. He'll have a spirit of counsel and of might. Notice, along with the might goes counsel, and that word counsel does mean wisdom, just like the first two. It means not only does he have the power to do what should be done, but he knows exactly what to do. He knows the best way to get it done, as well as having the power to get it done. Then it also says, notice, he will not judge by what he sees with his eyes, or decide by what he hears with his ears. That's another metaphor for wisdom. Why? Because if you just think back on all the, think of your most stupid choices in life, the most foolish things you've ever done. And almost always was because you went on appearances. It looked good. They looked good. He looked good. She looked good. Everything seemed fine. And you didn't have the wisdom to penetrate down to the reality. And see, but see, this one has perfect wisdom. Now, the wisdom, the wisdom of Jesus, the wisdom of God, is one of the major themes at Christmas, too. Because when you take a look at the Christmas passages, one of the things that's always part of the Christmas story is those wise men. What is that up? What's up with that? The wise men, they come, and they bow down, they offer gifts. Because it's a metaphor. It happened, of course, but it was also a metaphor for this theme, that the wisdom of the world pales before the wisdom of God. And that especially in Jesus Christ's plan of salvation, the way in which God saved the world through Jesus, which began at Christmas, the wisdom of the world is seen to be foolishness. Because Christmas in particular, but actually all of Christ's career, but at Christmas we see a violation of the paradigms of the world's wisdom. An affront. Everything that Jesus does turns the wisdom of the world on its head. Let me just give you two examples. Two of the world's wisdom paradigms that Christmas is an affront to, it's a violation of. First of all, Christmas and the way in which God brings Jesus in the world, the way in which salvation works, is an affront to the world's understanding of success. it's... heard this the first time actually got the story wrong, so Kathy has helped me with this. My wife Kathy years ago heard a talk or a Christian sermon or a talk by a guy who was trying to get, the speaker was trying to get across how the wisdom of God is different than the wisdom of the world. He had actually seen at a football, he was at a football game, PAX Stadium, and at halftime, the Blue Angels, which is a Navy aeronautical acrobatic squadron. These are Navy pilots, crack Navy pilots who do all sorts of, you know, death-defying feats in jets. At one point, they sort of dove, you know, toward each other. One of the things that the Blue Angels do is they look like they're about to crash, and then they pull up at the last minute, and this was all over the football stadium. And then when they were all done, they helicoptered them, the pilots, into the 50-yard line, and they jumped out, and they were in these incredible suits with, they were silver and blue, and they had a zipper from here to here, and everybody roared and cheered, 50,000 people. And the speaker said, okay, if you're the son of God, you want to come to earth, that's how you do it. Right? That's how we would do it. That's not how God did it at all. You know, urine smell, feed trough, stable, poor parents. Or, let me put a fine point on it. How does strategic planning work? Well, in strategic planning, you get everybody together, and you put up on the board your end state, your vision. What are you trying to achieve? What is the end state you're trying to achieve? And once you've identified where you want to go, then you start to strategize, how will we get there? Now, imagine that you bring your best friends together, and you say, we want to have a strategic planning meeting. And your friends come together, and you say, okay, I really want to be successful, very successful in life, and I want you to help me to strategically plan for it. I say, okay, well, what's the end state? So let's just say you put up on the board. I want to be so successful that 2,000 years from now, everybody in the world virtually knows my name. Okay? Put that up there. Secondly, I would like a quarter of all the people in the world 2,000 years from now to center their entire lives on me. Okay? And thirdly, I would like my teaching to be seen 2,000 years from now as the single most important body of thought in the history of the world. And I would like to have two or three major civilizations based on my person and my work and my teaching. Okay, 2,000 years from now. Well, that's pretty successful, isn't it? Yeah, that's right. I say, okay, so how do we get there? So you start strategically planning. Would you put up things like this? Would you say, well, make sure you're born and you spend your entire life basically in small, out-of-the-way villages, never go, you know, don't have a career in a major city or major urban area or cultural center. Make sure you stay totally, totally outside of any networks of economic, political, social, or academic power. In fact, make sure you don't know anybody in those networks. And then lastly, just as you're beginning your career, get executed in disgrace. Would you put those things up? Nobody. Nobody would put those things up. But that was on God's strategic planning board. Because why? Because the wisdom of God makes the wisdom of the world look foolish. And in the wisdom of the world, the wisdom of God is foolish. But God's wisdom wins. God went about it in a completely different way, completely violating, it's an affront to the wisdom of the world, their paradigm of success and what creates success and what brings about world-changing influence. Jesus did it all in the wrong way. Because he, why? Because he was characterizing, he was characterized by the wisdom of God. Let me give you one other way in which Christmas violates the paradigms of the world. Christmas is a miracle. Now, I'll show you, it's in the passage here, but we're not here yet. But you know, the story of Christmas is that Jesus Christ was born into the world. That the pre-existing son of God was born to a virgin because it was a miraculous birth. Well, let me tell you another paradigm the world's got. They always come up with new ones. I mean, the world's paradigms aren't always the same, but they always make, whatever the paradigm of the world at the time, Christianity always looks stupid to the powerful and the elite of the world. So, a hundred years ago, about a hundred years ago, about a hundred years ago. the Christian institutions of North America and Europe, basically about a hundred years ago. And what many people started saying was this, the world has shown us now that everything has a scientific explanation. The world has now shown all the smart people know that everything has a scientific explanation. There's everything has a natural cause and that miracles can't happen. The supernatural doesn't happen. And because the world has told us that we're going to have to change Christianity if it's going to survive at all. See, one of the problems we have is this book is just filled with miracles all over. And if we're Christianity is going to survive, we've got it. We've got to find a way of extracting from the Bible, the ethical principles that everybody can accept, that the world can accept. We should love one another. We should work for social justice. We should understand that all people, all people are the children of God and the image of God. That's fine. But we can't believe in a preexisting deity, Jesus Christ being born of a virgin. We can't believe in a bodily resurrection. We can't believe in an infallible inspired Bible. We can't believe that everybody needs to be miraculously converted through the power of the Holy Spirit, the new birth. We can't believe in those things. And therefore, there was this great division. It was humongous. Every major Christian denomination, every major institution, college, university. And the people who won, the people who basically took most of those institutions said, we've got to conform to what the world is saying. The world is saying, we're going to laugh at you. We're not going to respect you. You know, no smart people are going to want to come to your church unless you get rid of the supernatural. You've got to get rid of the miracles. And so many, many churches went in that direction and extracted the ethical. Now, here's what's so interesting. The reason I know this, I can see this story because I was educated 40 years ago or so when people still thought that was the trajectory. But here's what we know now, 100 years later, that the churches and the Christian institutions that embraced the wisdom of the world are all in steep decline. And yet, Christianity is growing like crazy across the world in places nobody ever thought it would. And it's a supernatural religion. Some of you know that over 100, basically about 100 years, Africa went from about 5% Christian to 50% Christian. Some of you know that Korea went from 0 to 40% Christian in about 100 years, that China is in the process of doing something similar now. This is changing the history of the world. This is changing the face of human history. And what kind of Christianity is it? It's supernatural Christianity. You know why? Because when those smart people said, well, we have to do if we're going to have the world to embrace Christianity, you've got to get rid of the supernatural elements. It's just got to be ethical principles, live a good life. You know what that did? It turned Christianity, or the Christianity that was left, into a self-improvement religion. You've got to suck it up. You've got to pull together. And that only works for people in prosperous, comfortable countries. You know, it turned it into an elitist thing. But what about the wretched of the earth? What about most people in the world? The message of Christmas is that God has miraculously punched a hole in the barrier between heaven and earth. And he's broken into time and space. And now there's hope. Now there's mercy. And now there's power. See? And that, of course, actually, is something that changes lives. Do you not see, especially if you live in New York City, New York City is one of, if not the capital of the world, which means there's no place on the face of the earth where Christianity will look more ridiculous than here? Because the world has always, always, this has been the message from the beginning. They said it in Rome. You know, they said, over and over again, the world looks at Christianity and says, come on, get with the program. Nobody's smart. No smart, respectable people are going to accept you unless you get with the program, unless you change with the times, unless you get rid of this, unless you get rid of this. The world has always laughed at Christianity. Yet in the end, God gets the last laugh. The world has always said, we're wise and you're foolish. But in the end, the wisdom of the world has shown its foolishness. And yet, of course, the world gets new paradigms all the time. And they always make Christianity look bad. But Christianity will continue to grow century after century, millennium after millennium, because it's characterized by the wonderful foolishness of God, which we see in particular. in the manger and nobody saw it. Okay, now lastly, I said to you that Christmas is about a miracle, and there's a miracle even in this text. And it also shows you why Christianity's faith will always refute the wisdom of the world. Look at it. Who is this king? What's the identity of this king? In verse 1 it says, a shoot will come from the stump of Jesse. Now that's a metaphor. It's a biological, botanical metaphor. And a shoot that comes out of a stump, or a shoot or a branch that comes out of a tree, means you have descended from someone. You have come out of someone else. And so it's saying that this messianic king will come out of Jesse, who is the father of David. It's simply a metaphor for saying this will be a descendant, a physical descendant, of David and Jesse. But if you go down to verse 10, and we read this, and probably, I mean, many years I read this without noticing the implication. It doesn't just say that this Messiah is the shoot of Jesse, but he's also the root of Jesse. It says, in that day the root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples, and the nations will rally to him, and his resting place will be glorious. But wait a minute, your root is something that you've grown out of. And there what it's saying is that Jesse came from him, and David came from him. Now wait a minute, how can someone be both shoot and root of David and Jesse? How could someone both be a descendant of David and Jesse, and at the same time the source of David and Jesse? And there's only one answer, you know. As crazy as it is, especially in the eyes of the world. And that is that God, the creator God, who is the root of all of us, who's the source of all of us, that creator God was born into the world as a weak human being, and he came as a descendant of David. So he's the God-man. Jesus Christ is the God-man. Now this is the miracle right there of Christmas, but it's also an explanation of why Christmas is so category-breaking for the world. The world understands two kinds of religion perfectly well. They're nice and flat. They're nice and simple. They understand a religion of wrath. The world understands a religion of wrath is a religion in which God's law is, there it is, God's law, Ten Commandments, whatever. And if you're good, God will bless you and take you to heaven, if you're good enough. But if you're bad, wrath comes upon you. And the world understands that kind of religion. It's very simple. It's actually very black and white. There's the good people. Try to be one of the good people. There's the bad people. We hate the bad people. God's going to have wrath on the bad people. Nice, simple. Everybody understands that kind of religion. And then the other kind of religion, besides the religion of wrath, is the religion of acceptance. Complete acceptance. That view conceives God as just the sort of spirit of love in the world. I believe in a God of love, it says. And you have to decide what is right or wrong for you, and you shouldn't tell anybody else that their choices are wrong. Because basically, because we have a God of love, we just accept everyone. Everyone is included. Everything is acceptable. We accept everyone. We love everyone. And the world understands that kind of religion, too. Wrath religion. You know? Total acceptance religion. But Christmas shows that Christianity is neither of those. And I'm glad. You know why? Because both of those are basically religions of the self. Those are religions that are just about you. In both cases, you summons it up. You make the decisions. You decide what is wrong for you. You work it together. And you summon up all your... If you're in the religion of wrath, it's up to you to be good. If you're in a religion of acceptance, it's up to you to decide how to live your life and which way you want to go. In both cases, you're getting no help. Again, it's the elitist, self-improvement religion that only works for the few people in the world who are living very comfortable lives. And those of us who are living in the comfortable part of the world, usually it only works for part of our life anyway. But Christianity is infinitely richer and more multidimensional. How do we know? Because the one born in a manger is not just human. He's not just divine. He's the God-man. And what that means is, first of all, he's not just one more religious founder, one more prophet or sage come to tell you how to find God. You know? Pull yourself together and find God. No, he's God come to find you. But he's also not God just come to tell you their law. came weak. To go to the cross. And this is why Christianity is so transforming. It's not just a religion of wrath, but it's not just a religion of acceptance. It's a religion of grace. And grace is costly love. Listen, everybody. Grace is costly love. Grace is this. First of all, there is wrath. Oh, yes, there is. There's wrath on sin. We aren't living like we should. It says so in here. There's lots of evil. There's lots of injustice. There's selfishness and pride in your own heart. You've done terrible things. Every one of us has done things we deserve to be condemned for. And therefore, there is wrath. And there is wrath on our sin. But, on the other hand, God comes into the world and goes to the cross himself and takes the punishment we deserve. He satisfies his own wrath. And he does it at infinite cost to himself. Now, why don't I look at that? Costly love. Not just wrath. Not just acceptance. But God's love satisfying his own wrath. To see the law by Christ fulfilled and hear his pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. Did you hear that? To see the law by Christ, by love fulfilled. Love fulfilling the law. And when I see God doing that, that changes me. That melts my heart. If I embrace that, that begins to transform me. He would love me like that. See, on the one hand, that convicts me not just to live any old way I want. But on the other hand, it doesn't put any pressure on me to say, I've got to live up. Oh no, this is a faith for everybody. Not just the pulled together types. This is a faith for everybody. That's the reason why it's so universal. That's the reason why it's spreading the way it is. This is the wonderful foolishness of God. Hey, what are you basing your life on? What are you hoping is going to help you face death and face the inevitable sufferings of life? What are you hoping is going to give you self-esteem and a feeling of self-worth? What is it? Is it your career? Is it the hope that you're going to find that incredible someone? Is it love and romance? Is it art and the aesthetics? Is it losing yourself in narrative and story? What is it you're hoping is going to get you through it? If it's anything but God himself, you're listening to the wisdom of the world, and I can tell you whatever it is you're basing your life on will desert you in the end, disappoint you on the way, and eventually it will desert you. Everything does. But Christmas means the wisdom of God has been revealed. He's come to do something you couldn't do for yourself. He's come to miraculously break into this world, and you must embrace that. Now, if you do, and you live in New York, most of your friends are going to think you're a fool, because that's the way of it. But as St. Paul said, if anyone is to be wise, let him become a fool, that you may become wise. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that at Christmas your wisdom was revealed, and it shows the wisdom of the world to be a pale and thin and weak thing. We ask that you would teach us how to follow this great messianic king in the way of wisdom. Give us a spirit of wisdom and understanding. Give us a spirit of counsel and might. Teach us how not to go on appearances, but to know how things really are. And most of all, help us to embrace the remarkable wisdom that was revealed to us in the gospel and began on Christmas Day. Father, we pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
