TITLE: Heaven, a World of Love
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 13:1-13
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Love: The Way to Grow Up
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/heaven-a-world-of-love/

============================================================

look at the passage, and we get to a spot in which we've been learning a great deal about love, but we get to the end where Paul tells us something that is extremely important to know. He tells us what heaven is like, and there's a tremendous amount in this last passage in which he describes heaven, he tells us what it is, and then he even hints at what it's like, and what we want to do this morning is we want to see what he says heaven is and what it's like. Now, my two mentors as a teacher, C.S. Lewis and Jonathan Edwards, are always behind everything I say, even when I don't quote them, but they have a tremendous amount to say about this particular subject. What is heaven? After all, I ripped Jonathan Edwards off of a particular title of his sermon. He has a very famous sermon called Heaven, a World of Love, because I just couldn't think of a better title than that. Lewis, at the end of his book, Problem of Pain, and a number of other places, at the end of his science fiction novel, Paralandra, gives us a vision of heaven. And as I've been studying the passage and as I was looking back at what they say about heaven, it just leveled me, and I'm a fairly frustrated man this morning because I know I can't give you much more than a taste or a smell of this. But let's see, Paul says, first of all, he tells us what heaven is by using three metaphors. And then he hints about what heaven is like. And finally, let's draw out the applications and say, then what difference does it make? What heaven is, what it's like, and what difference would it make for the way we live now? Now, first, Paul gives us three metaphors. When he describes heaven, he calls it the perfect, the face, and love. See, first of all, notice he says, he says, for we know now in part and we prophesy in part. He's talking about, in verse 8 and 9, he's talking about now versus later, time versus eternity. He says, now we know in part and we prophesy in part. But when the perfection comes, now he uses a word here, sometimes it's translated the perfect, usually, the perfect or when perfection comes. This is one of those places where it's very important to know the particular Greek word because there's a number of Greek words that can be translated perfect. And I don't think the word perfect is the best word, though I don't really know what the best English word would be. The Greek word that Paul uses is, he says, when tetelion comes. The telion, the telos is the word that means design. Aim, the aim. You see, we even get the idea of a telescope. The aim, the design. And Paul is talking about totelion. He's saying, when we get to that which we're all aiming for, he's talking about ultimate fulfillment of design. He is saying, there's a place where we become all that we should be, all we were meant to be, all we were made to be, all we want to be. There's a place that we're all headed for. There's a place that we all face. There's a place we're all yearning for. There's a place where we would be all that we were built for, designed for. Now, to give you an idea about this, think of a whale on a beach. A beached whale. Is it alive? Not for long. It's dying. Is it moving? Well, yeah. It's swimming. You see, the whale's reflexes are to swim. So the whale, you know, flops its tails around. But all it does is it kicks up sand and it kicks up dirt. Why? It's not in its element. It's not in its teleon. It's not in the water that it was designed for. I mean, whether you believe in God or whether you believe in, if you're an atheist evolutionist, everybody agrees that the whale is designed either by evolutionary biology and natural selection or by God or whatever. Everybody says, everybody knows the whale was designed for water. His immense size outside of his element is a detriment. But in his element, it's a power. His reflexes outside of his element are frustrated and useless. He has reflexes that there's no correspondence for in that environment. He flaps his tail. It doesn't do a thing. But in the water, in his element, all those reflexes, you see, with all those reflexes, he flies. Now, Paul is saying, we are beached whales. Our souls are out of the water. First of all, look at yourself. We're dying. Now, who denies that? All right. drawer tudo. On the right. you're not in your teleon, when you're not where you were built to be. And not only that, we've got reflexes in us. We have reflexes in us to which there is nothing corresponding for which there is no satisfaction. We want unconditional love. We've been talking about that for several weeks. There is no such thing. We want justice. We've never even seen it. We want to last. We hate death. We want to last. Why? Don't you see? There's reflexes. There's things in us to which in this world there is no correspondent reality. There's passions in us to which in this world there is no for which there is no satisfaction. Why? Paul says because you're out of your element. But the teleon, there is a place, there is a condition where you become all you were supposed to be, where all those reflexes and where all those capacities are not detriments but they're power, where you explode to realize your utter potential, the perfect, the teleon, your element. Now, that's the first thing he tells us. And the second thing he tells us about this place, this condition is that it is seeing a face. You notice he says, you know, then he says, we know in part and we prophesy in part but when perfection comes, the imperfect disappears. Now we see but a poor reflection is in a mirror. Then we shall see face to face. And he goes on, now I know in part but then I shall know fully even as I am fully known. What is this face we're going to see? This face is what we're built for. This face is the water for our beach souls. This face is the thing we've got to have or we die. And what is it? Well, you know how you know? You have to look at the last part of verse 12. You notice it doesn't say when I get to eternity, when I get to heaven. It doesn't say I will know, I shall know, and I shall be fully known. He doesn't say that. He doesn't say I shall know and I shall be fully known. He says I shall know even as I am fully known. The am is present tense. He will know someone and he will see someone face to face who right now knows him fully. Now. And he's only, there's only one person who knows you fully. In other words, this is the beatific vision. This is the visio day. This is the face of God. And Paul says, that's what's waiting for us. And that is the water for our beach souls. That's what you have to have to live. Now, you know, the Old Testament is, it's a tremendous story about the face of God. And all through the Old Testament and the New Testament, all through the Bible, you see men and women who lust, and I'm using that word carefully, who lust after the face of God. But they're scared to death of it too. How could that be? They lust after it. They know. At the deepest level, they know. Psalm 16, they know what they need. Psalm 16, the psalmist says, in thy face is fullness of joy. In thy right hand are pleasures forevermore. They know that that's what they need. They know they're out of their element. They know they're dying. That's what they need. But whenever you get near, when Job gets near the face of God, he said, I heard about you intellectually, but now that I'm getting close to your face, I hate myself. I despise myself. When Isaiah gets near the face of God, he says, I'm coming apart. Why? Well, let's be real, let's be real concrete. What if you owe somebody a lot of money? You avoid their face because you know that if you actually meet them, there's going to be a confrontation and you're going to have to pay. We need the face of God, but sin has led us all to hijack our lives. All of us run our own lives. We don't give God the rule. He's the only one that we owe that rule to. The only one who's a rightful ruler of our lives, he created us, he sustains us. We know we owe him because we hijacked our lives and we know that if we actually meet him face to face, and this is so interesting, God even loves us so much that he doesn't want us to meet him face to face. Moses says, I want to meet you face to face. I want to see your glory. God says, if you look on my face, you'll die. What? You're a sinner. If you actually see me face to face, you will have to pay. There'll be a confrontation you will have to pay, and the wages of sin is destruction. God actually tries to avoid Moses seeing his face, and that's what it means to be human. You know what it means to be human. you now don't you know how many places that's this is a whole other sermon someday you'll get a sermon what it means to be human is to want the very things that will kill you but you see it's big and and you can see that play it out in so many areas but I'll tell you it's because of this ultimate area the thing that we need most is the thing that if we would actually get would destroy us because we owe and now you know why Jesus did what he did when Jesus died on the cross what was it that came down on Jesus Christ with such weight that even the eternal son of God would crack under it what did he mean when he said my God my God that why hast thou forsaken me I'll tell you Jesus Christ lost the face of God and for Jesus for the son to lose the face of the father was not just to throw him up on the beach it was to throw him into the fire but he lost God's face so that we could have it he lost it so we could find it he paid the penalty for our sin this is the gospel this is what you need this is what you want this is the reason you come to Jesus this is the reason that you love Jesus because he went and lost the thing you most want in life the the the teleon the face the beatific vision he lost what you most need so you could have it but actually that's not even all there's the third thing that Paul says about what heaven is going to be it's going to be the element finally and secondly it's going to be the face but notice Paul doesn't just say it's the face he says it's face to face and the last word of first Corinthians 13 is love and I don't think that's an accident the last word is agape it's not just because that's a nice way to end the chapter is because it's the last word Paul has the audacity to say that right now temporarily we have three things faith hope and love but even faith and love faith and hope are scaffolding even faith and hope are unnecessary in the end even faith and hope are not intrinsic to God even faith and hope is not really what eternity is about it's about love the visio day the experience of seeing God face to face is an experience of taking into yourself a cosmos of love that's what life's about and that's what it means now by the way this is so important for this reason eastern religions and many many mystical philosophies do believe in eternity and they believe that there will be an end to all of our suffering because their understanding is that when you die and you go off into eternity you lose individual consciousness you lose the sense of your personhood you lose the sense of being a self you lose the sense of individual consciousness and you move out into the collective universal reality and you just become one with everything else and as a result finally all the tears are wiped away and all the suffering is wiped away and you are all in all and of course therefore for them the meaning of heaven the meaning of eternity is peace serenity but that's not the vision of Paul that's not the vision of the Bible and I go so far as to say that's not what your heart wants it doesn't say faith hope and peace but the greatest of these is peace it says faith hope and love what your heart wants is not to lose your individuality you want yourself not to be lost but to be embraced heaven is a world of love we want to be taken in we don't want to be lost we don't want to be lost we don't want to be lost in eternity we want to be found and this is the reason why Lewis C.S. Lewis tells us that ultimately to see the face of God is to know the love which is the element without which we're just beached whales he puts it this way he says the faint far off results of those energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter are what we call physical pleasures but even thus filtered they are too much for our present management but what would it be like to taste at the fountainhead of that stream of which even these lower reaches prove so intoxicating yet that is what lies before us we long to be acknowledged to meet with some response to bridge some chasm that yawns here for glory means acceptance by God response acknowledgement welcome into the heart of things the door we have been knocking on all our lives will open we will be called in and we will be received heaven is not a world of peace we don't lose ourselves in eternity we find ourselves we have faces it's not just that he's got a face and we lose ourselves in the face we have a face and he goes so far Paul goes so far as to say right now we see as in a mirror you see in a confused way now by the way it's pretty interesting it's very interesting the mirrors back in those days were polished metal so mirrors were always really gave you a distorted image of yourself and you know what the little Greek word here is literally in the old King James Bible it's it's it's a it's translated now we see as in a glass darkly and here you know it talks about we have a confused reflection a poor reflection in a mirror but you know what it says is right now we see ourselves on an egg mat I you know what that means enigmatically it's the Greek word from which we get the word in make enigma we are riddles to ourselves we don't know who we are the future of the Christian eternity is not a place of peace of serenity where you empty yourself where you lose yourself it's the place where you finally find out who you are it's not just that he has a face we have a face it's face to face very ironic for me I found recently an article on how to minister to dying people and it was written by Jack Miller a friend of mine who just died and he says that when he was a chaplain in the hospital talking with people who knew they were dying they would come they would say to him you know I have trouble getting around this idea of heaven it sounds boring because when they thought of heaven they thought of peace they thought of serenity they thought they thought of gold and they thought of gold streets they thought of harps they thought of good people nice people ooh and so what happened was they just said it's boring I can't get into it and you know what he used to say is to say where's the time in your life in which you were the most happy remember the time in your life in which you were the happiest and very often they would always find a you know a place and he says inevitably it was a time in which they felt the most loved and he would start to reason with them like this why is it the teenagers when they're going out with their friends you say to them where are you going they say out well where out I'm with the people that I care to be with we'll find something to do see relationships is what life's about when you're with someone you love time flies why because of where it's from it's from eternity that's its source there's no such thing as boredom in love he starts reasoning like this pick up a child and dote on the child and tell the child you're beautiful you're wonderful pick up a child the child the child wants love the way you want air or what the the child is panting for love with its tongue hanging out and you think you've really changed when you've gotten older no you've just gotten cool about showing it to be in heaven Jack would say is to be fully known but absolutely loved and he's he would say the greatest love you've ever had on earth compared to the love you will have there is sort of like comparing an oil rag to a wedding dress we will be loved we will find ourselves as we find him we will be embraced we will be embraced this is not going off into an also the extremity of it but the familiarity of it we will dance with him he will sweep us off his feet and we will say you look beautiful today and he will say so do you the extremity and the familiarity of it it's not esoteric and yet it is it's vast it's high it's uttermost you see it's extreme but we will have faces this is what heaven is it's a world of love now let's go into let me just give you a few implications of what it's like Paul gives us a couple of incredible hints here about what that world is like and here's the two here's a couple of hints then we have to go to application because it makes all the difference in the world what you believe about heaven the people who are the most heavenly minded if you understand what heaven is will be the most earthly good but first what is heaven like there's two things first of all the fact is that everything else stops but love prophecies stop power stops but what's so interesting is faith and hope stop he says these three things are here now but the greatest is love if you've got it in front of you. Have you ever noticed something? Love trusts all things. Love hopes all things. Do you see what Paul's doing? He is saying that faith and hope ultimately are just means to the end. Faith and hope are just outworkings. Everything is unto love. And you know why? Jesus needed faith for a while. Jesus needed hope for a while. But faith and hope are not intrinsic to God. Love, therefore, must be intrinsic to God. It must be intrinsic. And here's what I mean. And here's the implication of this. If God were unipersonal, if God was just one person, then love would not be intrinsic to him because he would not have been able to love until he created another self. In fact, he wouldn't have been able to love at all because what have we been saying the definition of love is for several weeks? The definition of love, you feel loved when you're delighted in who you are, not in what you bring. When you feel people using you to get something, loving you conditionally as long as you're bringing them something, you're not loved, you're used. You're only loved when you're delighted in who you are. But if God had needed us in order to have relationships, then we wouldn't have been loved by him, we would have been used. But that's not the case because God is not unipersonal. He's tripersonal. He's triune. And this is what Jonathan Edwards says is at the center and the heart of heaven and therefore at the center and heart of the universe, he says, and I put it in there so you could always have it. He says, in the middle of the universe, the infinite essential love of God is, as it were, an infinite and eternal mutual holy energy between the Father and the Son. An infinite and eternal holy mutual energy between the Father and the Son. The Father and the Son delight in each other and they are from all eternity pouring into each other themselves, their love, that joy and that delight. Why, therefore, were we created? The Spirit comes out to create. It moves across the face of the water. The Spirit comes out from the Father and the Son. Oh, I know this is a mystery. Don't try to understand it. Try to enjoy it for a second, will you? The Father and the Son are an engine of love. It is perfect love because love is intrinsic to God. If he was only unipersonal, love and relationship would not be intrinsic to him, but it is. Because he is always, in a beginningless way, loved. He's been in a relationship, the Father and the Son, at the center of things. A holy, infinite, eternal, holy mutual energy. The Spirit comes out, and why? Why does the Spirit come out to create? And why does the Spirit come out to redeem? Jesus explains it in the most incredible verse possible. In John 17, he says this, Father, I will that they may be with me where I am, and that they may behold my glory that you gave me, for you loved me before the world began. What is the glory of God? Did you see that? He said, I want them with me so they can see my glory for you loved me. What does that mean? I want them to see my glory. I want them in the love with us. I want them to be included in the circle. I want them to be included. I want them to have the same love with us that we have with each other. I want them with us. And therefore, when Jesus says that the glory of God, the ultimate glory of God, is this incredible love between the Father and the Son, and he wants us in, that's what Lewis means when he says, finally, we will get into the heart of things. Don't you see? The love between the Father and the Son is the song of which all other songs are just hints and echoes. this is the waterfall, of which all other waterfalls are just hints and echoes. This is the song. This is the drama. This is the love story. You know, they lost each other. They found each other. This is the dance. This is the marriage. This is the friendship. This is the family. And we're brought into the center of it. Have you ever gotten joy out of a song? Have you ever gotten joy out of a marriage? Have you ever gotten joy out of a waterfall? Have you ever gotten joy out of a mountain or a sea? Have you ever gotten joy out of these things? Where does the joy in those things come from? all those things reflect what glory they have. And you're asked into the center. And when you're asked into the center, you're in the heart of things. This is your element. Where do you see what you're going to be like? There's one other hint that we're told about what it's going to be like to be in heaven. And that's where Paul says, I shall know even as I'm fully known. I need to be brief about this, but here's what's so interesting. Many people have pointed out, well, many people ask the question, what will Paul fully know? Now, if you think he's saying, I will fully know God even as God fully knows me, that can't be. There's other places where Paul talks about this. The fact of the matter is that you're finite. He's infinite. There's no way you will ever fully know God the way he fully knows you. There's just no way. So what is he talking about? Here's what I think. And this is the amazing thing. Do you know what it means to be fully known? He says, if you're a Christian, he says, I, Paul, am fully known now. Well, you say, of course he's fully known. God fully knows everybody. No, he doesn't. Not the way you're thinking. You remember the place in Matthew 7 where Jesus says on the last day there will be people coming and saying, Lord, Lord, didn't we do great things in your name? And Jesus says, I never knew you. He says, I will say to them, I never knew you. Well, you say, how could he not know them? Because the word know means relationship. And it means that on the one hand, God fully, of course, knows about you. But Paul says, I am fully loved. I am utterly and completely known and accepted. Now, do you realize what he's saying? To be fully known and to be fully, to be fully known means that you are holy and blameless in his sight. You are utterly accepted. Now, if you're a Christian, if you're justified by faith alone, if you're made right with God through what Jesus has done on the cross, if you are adopted into the family of God, you are fully known. But, get this, you don't know your knownness. You know why? If I, let me not speak for you, but of course I will. Let me speak for me. If I knew that I was fully known, I would never be bored. I would never, ever have self-pity. I would never be angry in the wrong sense. I would never be resentful. I would never sin. I'd never be anxious. I'd never be afraid. I'd never be impatient. You know what my big problem is? If a woman who's got $200 to her name lends it to somebody else, she's going to be nervous the whole time, and if that person does not pay her back, she'll freak. But, if a woman who is worth millions of dollars lends somebody $200, she will do it with a certain amount of peace, and if that person does not pay back, she can be fairly patient and forgiving and kind of work with the person. If the rich woman starts to freak, all she has to do is remember who she is and what she's got. Well, you say, now how does a rich woman forget who she is and what she's got? Well, she doesn't. But what you do, are you a Christian? Have you done something for somebody and they haven't paid you back? Have you loved without reciprocity? Have people hurt you or wronged you? Are things going wrong in your life? Are you freaking? You know why you're freaking? You don't remember who you are? You don't remember what you've got? You are fully known, and you don't know that you're fully known. But in heaven, the very first moment of heaven, we will know. And the minute we know, it will inflict a glory on us that will never go out. What will that mean? What will that glory be like? We will become spotless. Why? Because you know what? Jesus loves us. Haven't you ever noticed that the people you're in love with, you want them to be spotless, blemishless? You want them to be beautiful. We're told in Ephesians 5, he's our husband. He's going to spend all of eternity adorning us and making us more and more beautiful. We will be owned, and we will own him. You know, one of the big problems with love in this world, have you not noticed this? When you fall in love, when you are really in love, you don't want to be independent. This is a dirty little secret in New York City. You cannot give yourself over to love and keep your independence. Love by its nature says, I want to be owned, and I want to own. I want to surrender, and I want to be surrendered to. I want to utterly lose my freedom, and I want you to lose your freedom to me. That's what love always wants. The trouble is in this world, because of sin, if you do that, if you're not very, very, very, very, very, very, very, very careful, you'll be exploited, but not there. Because we're told that the essence of the covenant is, God says, you will be my people, and I will be your people. glory will be that knowing each other there and knowing God will be a seamless robe. Some of you heard me mention this last week at the gala, at the dinner on Saturday night. There's an interesting place where C.S. Lewis puts it like this. C.S. Lewis had three friends, there were two friends, three of them that got together a lot. Ronald, C.S. Lewis, a guy named Ronald, and somebody named Charles. Ronald is J.R.R. Tolkien, Charles was Charles Williams. And he said he found something odd, that when Charles died, he didn't get more of Ronald, he got less. He says, I suddenly realized that I didn't just lose Charles and get more of Ronald, but I lost the part of Ronald that only Charles brought out that I couldn't bring out. I could never get that part of Ronald that only came out when Charles told one of his jokes, for example. And he said, I began to realize that the way you get to know any person is not by having them to yourself, but by sharing them with other people who they love and who love them. I began to realize that no one human being is big enough to call the entire person into activity and draw them out. Now, here's what's so incredible. Only as we are loving God together will we find that we know who he is and see his beauty, because all of us will draw him out for all of us. And only as we are loving all of him and seeing him in his fullness will we find out who the people around us really are. And that's the reason why Lewis has this great statement about how friendship really gives you insight into heaven. He says, In this way, friendship exhibits a glorious resemblance to heaven, where the very multitude of the blessed increases the fruitfulness which each, pardon me, which increases the fruition which each has of God. For every soul, seeing him in her own way, doubtless communicates that unique vision to all the rest. That's why in Isaiah 6, verse 3, If you look, you'll see that the angels are calling out holy, holy, holy to each other. Finally, we'll have what we want. Finally, finally, without sin, we will see that the more we give each other away, the more we have each other. The more we give ourselves away, the more we have of ourselves. The more we give ourselves to God, the more we have of him. Because look, he gave himself utterly away, and now he's ours. But now look, somebody says, Wow, this is, gee, inspiring. But, you know, what difference does it make? What difference does it make? Let's run down a couple. First of all, if heaven is a world of love, if heaven is a world of love, if heaven is a world of love, let me be real practical. First of all, that means that ultimate reality is ultimately personal. Ultimate reality is about relationships. If there was no heaven, if when we die, we rot, then reality is fundamentally impersonal. If you don't believe in heaven, if you're not sure you believe in God, if you don't believe in an afterlife, I want you to know something. You believe that reality is fundamentally impersonal. A human being lasts 80 years and is gone. Civilizations last for 1,000 years. A fortune may last a long time. Art lasts a long time. Cultural institutions last a long time. And you will feel, sometimes, that it's okay to trample on somebody's rights and somebody's life, even, in order to bring about a better civilization or certainly to make money. A Christian knows that a person is always more important than a buck. A Christian knows that when there is any conflict between a business goal or an achievement goal or something like that and a human being and a relationship and a person, the person has to win. Because, you see, if heaven is a world of love, the life of a person is eternal. Who cares how long this civilization lasts? Compared to a person, anything here is as the life of a gnat, is the life of a mosquito. A Christian becomes a radically personal person. It affects your politics. It affects everything. Let me give you another one. Christian friends, if heaven is a world of love, now you know why if you have any unreconciled relationships, your relationship with God, your sense of the reality of heaven, your assurance of your salvation, your sense of the comforting influences of God's love are just taken away. Because, you see, you're breaking your relationship with the great engine, the heart of things. The heart of things is a relationship. And when you are bitter, when you're angry, when you can't face somebody, don't you see why unreconciled relationships destroy your relationship? God? Because heaven's a world of love. Let me give you a couple more. If heaven's a world of love, you should be people of passion. Both the Eastern religions and secular therapists, from what I can tell, are basically Stoics. You know what Stoicism is? Stoicism says the only way you'll be happy is if you just whittle down your desires. This is what secular therapists say. This is also what Eastern people say. And they say, your real problem is that you want too much. Stop crying after the moon. Stop asking for the stars. This is life. You're only going to get so much love. You're only going to get so much glory. You're only going to get so much... You know, whittle your desires down. Realize. Realize that there's only so much you can get. You know, grow up. And Christianity says utterly the opposite. You know what's wrong with... Listen, parks are beautiful in New York, are they not? When people try to live in them, they get trashed. Because as beautiful as parks are, they cannot bear the freight of being somebody's home. And God says, look at money, look at success, look at romance, look at family, look at marriage. They're nice things, but they can't bear the freight of home. They're not your telly on. Don't you see what Christianity says? Christianity says, fan those passions. Cry for the moon. You'll get it. Don't you dare try to make these little things be the satisfaction for those passions. Your soul is too great for those things. Become people of passion. Let me give you... Let me give you another one. If heaven is a world of love, we can face suffering. Because, as Teresa, and we mentioned this last week, as Teresa of Avila once said, from heaven, the first second in heaven will be a consolation for the worst life on earth. The worst life on earth from heaven will look like one night in a bad hotel. And you can live that way. One more. If heaven is... Well, let me see. Actually, I've got about... I wrote down 16, and I've only got time for one more. So I think I'll look for one more. Let's see. Which one should it be? Oh. All right. Two more. If heaven is a world of love, Christians will be incredible fighters here. Somebody says, why? I think this idea of heaven means that you won't treat earth as a very important thing. Only if you have a very non-Christian doctrine of heaven. If heaven is a world of love, that means that persons last forever. It means that people are more important. If you see injustice in the neighborhood, if you see dishonesty at the office, if you see cruelty in the family, you speak up. Why? Because, first of all, people are more important than real estate. People are more important than your job. People are more important than anything. You're going to fight for them. You're going to fight for their safety. You're going to fight for their well-being in every regard. But also, because you know heaven is a world of love, you can take it. You can lose something. You can make a sacrifice. What in the world could you possibly lose here that really matters in the long run? There's a courage that comes to anybody who knows that heaven is a world of love. And you become radically idealistic, but you know what? Your idealism is real. It's realistic. If heaven is a world of love, idealism is realism. If heaven is not a world of love, you have neither. Lastly, there is a hell. You know why? If heaven was just for nice people, then you might say, it's unfair for there to be people in hell. You know, why doesn't God just lower the bar? You know, just, why doesn't God just sort of, you know, grade on a curve? Why doesn't God just, you know, why doesn't God, why does God have such high standards? But heaven is not just for nice people. It's not just a place of serenity. It's a place for lovers of God and of each other. You can't love unless you lose control. To love God, as we've been saying, is to say, I give myself to you. Now, if a person comes to Christianity and says, well, okay, what do I have to do to get to heaven? Do I have to do this and this and this? Will he answer my prayers? You've missed the whole point of the gospel. You have to surrender. You have to give up the rights to yourself. And if you won't do that, then there's no place for you in heaven. It's not a matter of who's good and who's bad. You either do that or you don't do that. You either love him or you love yourself in the sense of keep control of yourself. And if you keep control of yourself, the only other place is hell. What is hell? Hell is a place where everybody's impatient. Read the list. Unkind. Never forgets a grudge. Hell is a place where people have held on to themselves and as a result, they're utterly self-absorbed. Well, You know why? Because you're not after trying to understand anybody else either. You're utterly absorbed in yourselves. That's what hell is. Hell is lovelessness. You've already, a lot of you have been in it. What happens if it goes on for all eternity? Don't you see? If heaven is a world of love, there is a hell. And don't say anything so silly as to say, well, all my friends will be there. There are no friends there. Heaven is a world of love. Hell is a place of fear and hate and utter solitude. Jesus Christ said, I go to prepare a place for you. In my Father's house there are many mansions. If it were not so, I would have told you. Therefore, don't let your heart be troubled. Don't let it be afraid. I'm the great forerunner. And you know what's waiting for you in those mansions? Now these three remain. Faith, hope, and love. But the greatest of these is love. Let's pray. Now, Father, help us to see that living in light of a world of love, an eternal world of love makes all the difference to how we live here politically, relationally, spiritually, emotionally, in every way. Help us to see the ramifications of this tremendous, breathtaking statement that there is an element, a place where we can come through the work of Jesus Christ where we can see face to face. Father, bring us there. And help us to hope in that. For if we even hope in that, we purify ourselves and get ready for that day. We thank you for these things. Help us to appropriate them and know them and realize them and rejoice in them and be controlled by them. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
