TITLE: Hell
SCRIPTURE: Luke 16:19-21
TOPICS: Heaven and Hell
SERIES: Heaven and Hell
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/hell/

============================================================

The passage is from Luke 16. This morning I spoke on heaven, tonight I spoke on hell. I thought it would be nice to have sort of bookend sermons, you know, paired polarities, as Kathy would say. And most people only come to church once on a Sunday at Redeemer. They only come to either the morning or the evening. And so if this is your service that you usually come to or you've come to this week, you say, why do I get the hell sermon? And it's like having a diet of castor oil, your meal with castor oil for the day. And I won't do that to you. I promise. Luke 16, verses 19 to 31. There was a rich man who was dressed in purple and fine linen and lived in luxury every day. At his gate was laid a beggar named Lazarus covered with sores and longing to eat what fell from that rich man's table. Even the dogs came and licked his sores. The time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to Abraham's side. The rich man also died and was buried. In hell, where he was in torment, he looked up and saw Abraham far away with Lazarus by his side. So he called to him, Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue because I am in agony in this fire. But Abraham replied, son, remember that in your lifetime you received your good things while Lazarus received bad things. But now he is comforted here and you are in agony. Besides all this between us and you, a great chasm has been fixed so that those who want to go from here to you cannot, nor can anyone cross over from there to us. He answered, then I beg you, Father, send Lazarus to my father's house. For I have five brothers. Let him warn them so that they will not also come to this place of torment. Abraham replied, they have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them. No, Father Abraham, he said. But if somebody from the dead, if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent, he said to them, if they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, they will not be convinced even if someone rises from the dead. This is God's word. Now, if in some ways there's something, there's maybe a, and I'm doing this a bit tongue-in-cheek, honest, I admit. It is a little bit of a privilege to be going to church in Manhattan, at least middle Manhattan or lower Manhattan, and have a sermon on hell. It doesn't happen much around here. I know that church is above 96th Street, church is in the boroughs. This is a topic that's treated just like any other topic in the Bible. It's mentioned quite a lot. But when it comes to these churches here in, you know, central Manhattan, you know, upper east side, upper west side, midtown, all that, I bet if somebody wanted to do a little study for the Journal of Scientific Study of Religion and do a little survey as to how often we talk about hell in the churches here in Manhattan, at least this part of Manhattan, I think it wouldn't surprise anybody to find out that it's fairly rare. And that bears comment. Why? Why is it that the doctrines, the teachings of hell and judgment are really an eclipse that not only parishioners and people who go to churches, but ministers are staying away from them? And there's a couple reasons why. I'll give you a couple from what I can tell. At least two of the three reasons are the church's fault. Two of the Christians, pardon me, most people who say, I'm not a Christian, I don't believe, I reject the church, I reject the faith. In Europe, unchurched secular people are two or three or four generations deep in many families. In America, still, the average person who says, I don't believe anything or I'm a secular person, most of us in America have actually been raised in a pretty strong connection to some church or synagogue. We've had some religious background. But one of the reasons, one of the reasons I think a lot of people have rejected the church is because of the way in which the doctrines of hell and judgment have been used. One of them, one reason is because very often the doctrine of hell and judgment is gleefully presented. Now, what I mean by gleefully, there's a smugness, there's a gloat, a gloating that sometimes goes on. You see, the doctrine of hell goes something like this, if sometimes it's presented this way, say, we're right, you're wrong, and you're going to burn for it. exactly happy, and yet you can sort of tell that it kind of feels good to the minister to be able to say that. If you're growing up as a kid and you saw the doctrine of hell used that way, you know, it didn't seem quite fair if you, your kid, if you said to somebody, you can go to hell, you got your mouth washed out with soap. But if your minister said, you will go to hell, everybody said, what a great preacher. It doesn't seem fair. And very often there was a kind of smugness and a kind of, there's no tears. There's just no tears. I mean, and to preach this without any kind of tears or any, at least anything like that, at least in the heart, really is an abuse. And then the other thing I kind of say is that I think the church is also to blame because the doctrines of hell and of judgment are not just gleefully presented, but they're often incompetently presented. Now, I really wish I didn't say that, but I thought about it because it sounds like I'm going to say, ah, but tonight I will competently present. Look, I can guarantee you, I can guarantee you, I won't do it gleefully. I can guarantee you that my raw responses to the doctrines of hell and judgment and wrath are pretty much like yours. My raw responses are pretty much like yours. On the other hand, of course it's not possible for me to do this perfectly competently, but here's the direction I want to go into. If it's true, if Jesus was right when he got the disciples together in his 40 days between his resurrection and his ascension, and we see in the book of Luke, we see in the book of John, we see in the book of Acts, that when he got them together, he really had one thing to tell them, and that is everything in the Bible is about me. Every nook and cranny is about me. Every image, everything is about me. Whether it's the prophetic history or whether it's the history of the covenant, whether it's the law, whether it's the prophets, whether it's the songs, whether it's the wisdom literature, no matter what it is, it's about me. And if that's true, the only competent way to look at hell is to ask, what does this tell me about Jesus? That's really the only way to do it. What does hell tell me about Jesus? How does hell show me Jesus? Huh? Because Jesus, he sits down with the disciples and he said, he showed them how everything in the Bible is about him. So we have to ask ourselves, what does hell tell us about Jesus? And until we ask that question and begin to answer it, we're really misusing the doctrine of hell and certainly misusing it in the lives of people. On the other hand, having said that, there's one last reason that I think people have rejected and really just move away. And, you know, ministers in churches that largely work with, well, better educated, professional type people, they sense a tremendous antipathy to the whole idea of judgment and wrath and hell. Tremendous antipathy. And one of the reasons is not just the church's fault, but it, I don't know how you say it, I guess it's in the society, there's a real, there's a real, a real reaction to this. These seem, it makes God into, makes God, of course, into someone who's very judgmental. It means confrontation. It grates on the teeth. But here's the danger. There are plenty of people, I mean plenty of people, walking around here in New York City, at least our part of New York City here, who say, I'm a Christian, but I do not believe in a God who torments people in hell. Now, if you put it that way, I suppose there's a certain sense which I don't believe that either, as I'll show you. But let's just say, I don't believe in a God who sends people to hell where they're tormented forever. I just cannot believe in a God like that. But I'm a Christian, and I really believe in God. I really strongly believe, and I pray to him, and I believe in a God of love. Now, I don't have enough time to show you this completely, but I'll show you the general outlines of it. That is ecologically disastrous. Here's what I mean. Experience in the area of the environment has shown us that when you go into any ecosystem, any ecological system, you find that it's almost like a mobile. Have you ever seen mobiles where you've got things balance out, and then you've got balances balancing, balances balancing, and if you take one off, the whole thing falls apart? You know, one little birdie is suspended and is balancing this beam, and there's two beams that are balanced, and it's balancing a second beam, and those beams are balanced on a third beam, and so forth. Very often, if you go into an ecosystem and say, ah, look at these bugs. Bugs. How we hate bugs. Let's get rid of these bugs. They eat my crops. They eat my daisies. They eat this or that. Let's get rid of them, and so in comes an insecticide. We get rid of those nasty predators. Who likes bugs? We like bunny rabbits. We like goldfish. You know, we like even praying mantises. You know, they seem so spiritual, but we hate certain kinds of bugs. They're predators. We hate them. So we wipe them out. Next thing you know, we find we've destroyed the whole ecosystem, because those… down the numbers of the nice ones. And so the ecosystem in some ways, in various ways, was all being held together because you needed the nice and the nasty aspects of the ecosystem. You needed the nice and the nasty animals. And my thesis here is, if you get rid of, how do we put it, the predatory, if we get rid of the nasty, if we get rid of the heart, if we get rid of the idea of judgment and of hell, you will find that you have gutted the ecosystem of the doctrine of the Bible. You will find that you have gutted many of the things the Bible says about what Jesus has done for you. You will find that you will have actually gutted your comfort. You will have gutted some amazing things the Bible says about your value to God. And it's just very much like wiping out those nasty bugs and finding out you've just totally blown the whole system, the whole natural system. You cannot get rid. I mean, common sense says, here's Jesus, and he talks about love and grace, but he also talks about hell. And you say, oh, I can't believe, I can't believe in this. I can't believe in a God who sends someone to hell, in hell where he was in torment. Father Abraham, have pity on me and send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue because I'm in agony in this fire. But who's telling us this? It's Jesus. No. How in the world do you just say, I mean, let's forget the ecosystem thing for a minute. How in the world do you just say, I like this stuff that Jesus says, but not this stuff? Well, you don't have a Jesus left. Not a real Jesus. You've got a cardboard cutout that you're cutting out. You know, you've got an idol. But beyond that, let's give Jesus some credit, all right? Let's give Jesus some credit. You can't get rid of the nasty predatory doctrines without gutting the comforting ones and completely getting rid of so much that the Bible tells you about your value to him and about his love for you. Now, let me show you. I have to say one or two things very briefly about the parable. The parable is not just about hell. And one of the things we see when we look at this parable is that it fits in so beautifully to the rest of Luke. And if you study the book of Luke, you will find that Luke does this again and again and again. He so often gives us two people, not one. He gives us the Pharisee and the publican. Or he gives us Simon, remember the Pharisee and the woman who anoints Jesus' feet. Or he gives us Zacchaeus and the crowd. Over and over and over again, Luke gives us people who are morally wealthy and financially wealthy. Over against people who are morally unwealthy. That means that they're sinners or they're outcasts. They're maybe social outcasts. They don't have moral and social capital. And very often they're poor. And again and again and again and again, Luke shows that the outcast is in and the insider is outcast. Over and over and over again. That's a whole other sermon. That's a very interesting thing to see how Luke does this. And this just fits right in. And here's the reason, here's what's going on. Now, the rich man, why is he in hell? Because he wasn't generous to Lazarus? You know, there's places where it almost looks like that in the Gospels. The Gospels brings this up so often. You have even Matthew, though it doesn't come up as much in Matthew as Luke. In Matthew you have Matthew 25, where it says that on the last day Jesus will show up and he will divide the sheep from the goats. That means he's going to look at the people who claim to be Christians and he's going to actually separate the genuine article from the counterfeit. And how is he going to do it? He says, you are my sheep. Why? Because you fed the hungry, you clothed the naked, you visited the sick. And when you treated them that way, you showed that you were treating me that way. And you are not my sheep. You are counterfeit. You are goats. Why? Because you didn't feed the hungry, and you didn't clothe the naked, and you didn't visit the sick. And when you rejected them, you rejected me. You remember that story? It's just like this story. And we have to be very careful because what these stories are all saying is not that the rich man's lack of generosity to the poor was the reason he went to hell. Rather, it was the revelation of why he was going to hell. Put it another way, his lack of generosity wasn't the reason he was lost. It was the revelation he was lost. It revealed that he did not understand the gospel. It revealed that he thought he was saved and right with God because of his good works. And as a result, because he didn't see himself as weak and spiritually impoverished and spiritually bankrupt, he didn't care about the weak and he didn't care about the poor. And he says, let them be pulled up by their own bootstraps. Because again and again and again in the Bible, we're told that people who are financially wealthy, it is so easy, it doesn't happen to everybody. Oh no, thank goodness it doesn't. morally wealthy. It's so easy, it's just such a near skip. If I seem to be making pretty good money, if I have a lot of money, surely I'm a little more savvy, I'm a little more, you know, articulate, a little more talented, I really, you know, I have made it, and it's very, very easy to see the spiritual pride come. And therefore Lazarus' lack of concern for, pardon me, the rich man's lack of concern for Lazarus is very indicative of his spiritual state. It's not the reason he went to hell, but it shows, it's a revelation, it's the indicator of his rejection, of the truth, of his lack of belief. So Luke brings this up and shows this, and it's very intriguing, and it will be another whole sermon, however, we have to look at three things that this text tells us about hell, and that's why I went to it. And here's the three things we learn, and they're pretty spine-tingling, yes, they are. The first one is this, the first is, hell is a place of separation. Between you and us, you know, the NIV says, a great chasm has been fixed, but I, you know, the old King James, the authorized version has a phrase there that has stuck with me over the years, where Abraham says, my son, between you and I, between you and us, there is a great gulf fixed, a great gulf fixed. There's a separation of you from the presence of God, from heaven, and that's what hell is. See, a lot of people, when they think of hell, they immediately think of God kind of concocting a dungeon with a rack, you know, with red-hot irons or something like that, but hell is simply the result of separation from God, and we put it to you this way. If sin is, by definition, saying to God, leave me alone, I mean, that's really what sin is. Sin is saying, leave me alone. I could go into that, but I won't. I mean, the Pharisees, in their good deeds, are actually trying to say to God, I don't want to depend on you, I don't want to have to rely on you every second, I don't want to have to completely cling to you in mercy all the time, look at me, look at how good I am. The Pharisees are condemned because their good deeds are sinful, in that they're basically saying, leave me alone. I don't want to have to feel that I have to completely depend on you, and I don't want you to say that you can just do anything in my life, I don't want to have to be unconditionally obedient to you and unconditionally dependent on you, see? And the non-religious people are saying, leave me alone. Everybody, that's what sin is. Sin is saying, leave me alone. If sin is saying, leave me alone, hell is saying, okay. That's all God's doing. Okay. Separation, you see, this chasm is something we've been trying to jump over all of our lives. We've been trying to get away from God. Now, if you're a parent, you know something about this. You know that if you really, really want to punish your kid effectively, just let them do what they want. Now, for a long, long time, we don't do that except in the tiniest, you know, sometimes you'll see a kid, you know, you say to the little kid, no, don't touch that because it's hot. And it's maybe not real, real, real hot, but it's hot. And you see the kid looking at you and then going like this. No, no, don't touch that. Okay. And then you walk away and, you know, you see him lifting his little hand out of the corner of your eye. So what do you do? You say, okay. Okay. See? Daddy, leave me alone. I want to explore this. And you say, okay. And, of course, next thing you know, he's running to you. Ah! You know? And, you know, it was a smart move on your part because it's good parenting to sometimes let the child have the consequences and sort of teaches them. But, you know, by and large, you don't do that. You know why? Because if you really let the child have what they wanted, they'd kill themselves. They would be killed. They'd be dead. They'd ruin themselves spiritually or socially or psychologically or something. So you put constraints on them until they're about 20. And then you're a lousy parent unless you're able to look at your child and say, I have to let you do whatever you want. I cannot stop you anymore. I will not stop you. I will not try to control you. You have to do whatever you want. And it's fair. In fact, it's only loving to do that. There's a time at which you have to finally say, thy will be done. Now, for reasons that are not that easy to understand, but they're partially revealed, and I just gave you one of them. There's an analogy, you see. For reasons that are, we don't know completely what it is. I'll tell you what hell is. Hell is nothing but God saying to the deepest recess of your heart, thy will be done. You want me out of your life? You want me to leave you alone? Okay, that's the reason why C.S. Lewis has that. pain in his chapter on hell. He says, what do you want God to do? He says, hell is the greatest monument in the history of the world to human freedom. He says, what do you want God to do? Forgive them, but they won't be forgiven. What do you want them to do? Leave them alone? Alas, says Lewis, that's exactly what he's going to do. And so the first thing you have is separation. And the reason that that's hell is because it's the face of God in spite of what our heart says. Our heart says, you don't want to go near God. You don't want to be absolutely dependent on him. You don't want to be absolutely obedient to him because then you'll lose your independence. And your heart's right. But what's wrong is your heart believes independence equals freedom, and that's not true. Yes, you lose your independence when you go to God, but you find your freedom. Because freedom is doing what you most deeply want. And every human heart's got two levels. At the bottom, the deepest, deepest, deepest level, the creation level, the original level, we know that in his face is fullness of joy, and in his right hands are pleasures forevermore. That's Psalm 1611. But at the next level, the sin level, there's a slab over that that says, that says, but if you go there, you will not be able to do as you want. You will lose control, and that will be utter death. And as a result, every human being has got these two layers. We're always at war. But sin will have the upper hand unless God comes in and intervenes. And sin, you know, God comes and he makes an offer, and at a certain point we're still trying to run away from him, but you see, it's in his face that's fullness of joy. It says in James chapter 1, verse 17, every good and perfect gift comes down from God. Now, what that means is, here's a person who says, I don't believe in God. I don't believe in God of any sort. I'm a completely secular person. If that person is loving, if that person is unselfish, if that person is wise, if that person is decent, whether they acknowledge it or not, they are not completely separated from God. See, nobody in this life and in this world is totally separated from God. Nobody actually gets over that chasm. Because if you actually got away from God, spiritually speaking, you would not be able to love. You would not be able to have any joy. You would not have any wisdom. You'd lose all your humility, and therefore you'd lose all your sanity. You would lose all your humility, and therefore you'd lose all your perspective. You would be absolutely absorbed in self-centeredness, and then therefore you'd lose your ability to give love or receive it. But nobody in this life actually gets all the way away. You know, the illustration I like best is, you know, what if you were born and raised in a cave? And the cave was always about 45 to 50 degrees. And somebody came in and told you about the sun. And you didn't believe it. I don't believe in the sun. I've never seen the sun. I've never felt the sun. But you see, the problem is that even though you don't believe in the sun, if the sun really went out, that cave would be about 300 million degrees below zero, and you'd be dead. But the sun, which you don't acknowledge, which you don't see, is keeping the cave warm, even though it's not direct. And a person says, I don't believe in God. The reason that there's any love, the reason there's any wisdom, the reason there's any decency is because they can't be totally cut off from God yet. And nobody here is. Because every good and perfect gift comes down from above. In thy face is fullness of joy. Anyway, the presence of God is the source of all this stuff. But all of our life, we're trying to get away. All of our life, we're trying to get away. All of our life, we're trying to jump over that chasm because our heart says, then, then you'll be free. No, you'll be independent, but you won't be free. Hell is letting him go. Hell is saying, leave me alone? Okay. That's the first thing. The second thing we see here is hell, therefore, is a place of disintegration. So you might say, well, what happens if you get over that chasm? What happens if you actually get away from God? Don't you see already what's going on here? Can you see already? The Bible never talks. I'll show you how this works. The Bible never really talks about God so much saying, where can I throw these people? But rather, the people running and running and running into a place that they think is going to be great. You see, remember how Milton says in Paradise Lost Sea has Satan saying, better to rule in hell than serve in heaven? That's what every heart, every disordered, every delusional, sinful heart believes. Better to rule in heaven. Pardon me. Better to rule on earth, in hell, than to serve in heaven. And that's where they're trying to go. God doesn't say, where can I throw these people? You see, God finally says, okay. Now, the second thing is, there's disintegration. You know why? It's the word fire. Now, some years ago, somebody asked me, they said, well, now, you seem like a pretty conservative kind of preacher. And I, see, I just, I love that word so much, you know, and I, I've never, I've never feel like that's really the best. He said, well, do you believe in a hell with real literal fire? I said, oh, gee, no, of course not. And the person sort of, you know, oh, gosh, I'm so glad you didn't believe in literal hell fire. I said, no, of course, hell would just be a metaphor for something, the fire would be a metaphor for something much, much, much, much, much worse than fire. Well, doesn't that serve, listen, when you look at heaven, all they ever, the Bible all says is heaven is like a crown, it's like pure gold, it's like music, it's like this, it's like a feast, it's like a wedding, which means it's infinitely better. And therefore, when it's, you see, whenever it starts talking about hell, it's talking about something much worse. But the reason that fire is there, the reason that fire is brought out is this, what fire does, when you put a substance in the fire, the fire disintegrates it. It destroys, as it were, and I see, here's where my liberal arts education, as opposed to a science education, will probably be revealed. The object breaks into gases and solids and liquids and all sorts of things, the little chemical filaments, as it were, that hold the thing together, they blow up. Explode sometimes. Now, when you get away from God, that's what happens to you. Can't you see that? When your heart is filled with love, what do you feel but integration? And when your heart, give in to a bitter thought. Go ahead. Some of you have been doing that recently. Give in to worry. Just let it rage. Let it burn. Give it fuel. And you will see what's going on. First of all, as you know, bitterness and worry and anxiety and fear, go talk to a doctor, and the doctor will say that your very body will break down under those things. Your body breaks down. It starts to go to pieces. It disintegrates. There's ulcers. There's hypertension. There's all kinds of stuff that happens. But that's just an image of what it does to your soul. You break into pieces. You break apart. You know, Lewis is so good at that, and he talks, for example, you know, one of his villains in one of his space, his science fiction novels, he's one of his villains named Weston. And when Weston finally goes under, he says this about him. He says, the forces which had begun years ago to eat his humanity away had now completed their work. The intoxicated will, which had been slowly poisoning the intelligence and the affections, had now at last poisoned itself. And the whole soul organism had fallen to pieces. Only a ghost was left, an everlasting unrest, a crumbling, a ruin, an odor of decay. Here's another place. In The Great Divorce, he talks about hell like this. Hell begins with a grumbling mood. And you yourself, still distinct from it, perhaps even criticizing it, saying, I shouldn't grumble, see. You can repent in the beginning and come out of it, but you see you're falling apart. But there may come a day when you can do that no longer, and then there will be no you left to criticize the mood or even enjoy it, but just the grumble itself going on forever and ever and ever. The rich man, the rich man, why doesn't he have a name? Why does Lazarus have a name and the rich man doesn't have a name? Well, you know why? Because the rich man gave himself to riches. He gave himself to some, and therefore, he was a rich man or he was nothing. And when he loses his riches, he's lost himself. He falls apart. Psychological disintegration. Don't you see that already happening? I mean, actually, all of us, even those of us who are the strongest Christians in this room, you can see that. Because we still, even no matter how hard we try, we still have got our idols. We still got those things we give ourselves to, those things that we want them to name us, you see. We want them to name us. We want them to make a name for us, and that's why we give ourselves to our career. We give ourselves to this or that. But as a result, we're addicted to those things. And we've got no self except that if we've given ourselves to it utterly. And that's what hell is. You fall apart. It's very much like an addiction syndrome. You're just a rich man or nothing. You're just a beautiful woman or nothing. You're just a savvy consultant or nothing. You're just a mother or father or nothing. You have nothing else. You have no other name. That's it. And when you lose that, and everybody will, there's nothing left of you. You fall into pieces. Give into pride more and more and more. And you'll just see yourself go to pieces. And in hell, it just goes on for good. That's all. These things begin now. You know about them. See? So first of all, hell is separation. Secondly, hell is disintegration. And thirdly, hell is a place of complete self-deception. That should go without saying. But you notice three things about the rich man. First of all, he's still ordering Lazarus around. here and wipe my brow. Now, to quote somebody, if you saw an oozing cadaver corpse suddenly get up, still falling apart, you know, still sort of liquefying, a corpse of a woman, and that corpse of a woman would grab some lipstick and smear it on and start to flirt. That's roughly the analogy. Here is somebody who is in utter disintegration, but, and this goes along with the addiction, this goes along with the whole syndrome, he is in utter denial about where he is exactly and about why he's there and about who he is. And do you see he does not ask for forgiveness not at all? As a matter of fact, he says to Abraham, I really didn't get a fair shake. I've got five brothers out there and they need to get enough information. If they got enough information, if I got enough information, don't you see what he's doing? He's blaming God. He doesn't even talk to God. He talks to Abraham. He doesn't ask for forgiveness. He asks for comfort. He's still ordering Lazarus around. He has no idea where he is exactly. He has no idea who he is or why he's there. And the lack of self-knowledge that comes to you in this life through selfishness is absolutely total in hell. Don't you see you don't have here a God standing on the top of hell, on the lid. And inside hell, there's these people saying, no, no, let me out. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. You don't have anything like that. There's nothing like that. Absolutely not. He doesn't even ask to be let out. He just says, you know, it's not fair that I'm here. This guy could certainly be, if you ever read The Great Divorce by C.S. Lewis, this guy is just another passenger on the bus in their delusion, grumpy about where they live, but unwilling to go to heaven if you offered it. Better to rule down there than to serve up there. All that humbug up there. Don't you see, haven't you seen it in the lives of people around you now? The more you let pride, the more you let sin go, there's the paranoia. I'm right. Everybody's wrong. Nobody understands me. Nobody understands me. They're miserable. It's the beginning of hell. In hell, everybody's like that. Hell is the place of disintegration. I mean, separation. Hell is the place of disintegration. Hell is the place of absolute self-deception. And, therefore, lastly, Jesus slips something in at the end. Have you noticed it? And what does he slip in? He says, hell, there's an antidote, but many people will not take it. What is that antidote? It's so interesting how he tweaks what the rich man says. The rich man says, send Lazarus back to my brothers if someone from the dead will go back. He doesn't exactly ask for anything other than sort of a message or maybe a ghost, you know, showing up. But then Jesus sort of, he kind of tweaks it and he has Abraham say, no, they won't listen even if someone rises from the dead. Now, that's Jesus referring to himself. And what, see, what Jesus is saying here is there's an antidote to this. And you'll never understand my work of dying and rising unless you understand hell. Over and over and over again, I've had people say, I don't believe in someone, a God who sends people to hell. In other words, I don't believe in a just God. I don't believe in a God who does that sort of thing. Then the question has to come back. Okay, what then did your God do? What then did your God suffer? What then, what cost did your God pay in order to love you? Well, nothing. He just loves everybody. Now, here's what I want to ask. Everybody in this room, if you have ever loved anybody really, not just sentimentality, not just affection, not just a feeling, but if you've ever actually loved anybody, you have suffered. It costs you something to love anybody, really love them, I mean, really stick with them, really commit. And the only God in all the religions who has suffered in order to love us is the classic God of Christianity who did pour out his wrath on Jesus Christ. You see, I don't want a God who's behind me in love, who can learn from me in love and learn from you. I want a God who's infinitely ahead of me. And that's exactly what we have. Because until you understand hell, you will never know how much you mean to Jesus. It's hell that Jesus took on the cross. Because on the cross, he said, my God, my God, why hast thou separated me, forsaken me? He was separated. He was thrown away. He was taken out. And we're told these amazing words in Isaiah. In Isaiah, we're told, the results of his suffering he shall see, and he shall be satisfied. Now, that means that whatever Jesus Christ experienced on the cross, when he looks at you, what I get, and what does he get? He gets us. He gets us. What I paid compared to what I get is worth it. Now you know how much you cost. Now you know how much he values you. If you don't believe in hell, you'll never know what Jesus did for you. If you don't believe in hell, you've got a sentimental God at best. What could be greater than this? What could be more endearing than this? What could be more transforming than this to see Jesus Christ doing this for me? This. Yeah, without this. You have no, it is only a God who allows hell as a great monument to his justice and the human freedom, but who sent his son and who died for us and was willing to take hell into himself. That's how much he loved us. It's only that way that you know your dignity, your worth, your value, and how absolutely infallible his love for you is. Doesn't it melt you? Without hell, it can't. It won't. There's nothing close to this. Nothing at all. So in the end, hell should drive us to God, not make us hate him. I mean, I hate to end on such a lighthearted note. You know, this story went this way, that years ago when Calvin Coolidge was the vice president of the United States and he was presiding in the Senate, and there was a pretty angry exchange going on, and one senator said to another senator, go to hell. You can, you go to hell. And the senator, this is in the 1920s, I guess, not right? Early 1920s. Calvin Coolidge, you know, was looking there and this senator who was told to go to hell gets up and says to the vice president, Mr. Vice President, do you consider that an appropriate remark? Calvin Coolidge looked at him, this story says, and says, oh, of course not. I've read the rule book, and you don't have to go to hell if you don't want to. That's the reason why the doctrine of hell is of the greatest comfort to anybody who hears it, whether you know you're a Christian or not. It's of the most incredible comfort because, first of all, God says, you don't have to go. Why? Because my son endured it. Unless you believe in hell, you'll have no idea how much you mean to me. Respond to that. Respond to that. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that the doctrine of hell shows us your glory and your love in ways inaccessible. There's no other way we can see this. It's inaccessible any other way to see this kind of love except through this terrible teaching. This teaching which really does raise the hair on our head and really deeply distresses us, and yet it deeply comforts us. And that's just like you. Your wisdom isn't great. Your wisdom is incredible. We pray that you would so move us with what your son has done and so gladden us with the knowledge of who we are now through you and how much you love us, that we would really become more and more like your son. He was filled with joy, filled with joy because of your salvation. Let us be as well. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
