TITLE: His Name
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 1:18-25
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling Identity Salvation
SERIES: Advent: God with Us
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/his-name/

============================================================

I'd like to turn your attention to Matthew chapter 1, verse 18 to 25. Last week, we looked at the Annunciation where the angel comes and announces the birth of Jesus to Mary. You know, whenever Jesus comes into somebody's life, he creates problems. That's just inevitable. We already heard the Annunciation read again here today, and it always strikes me as almost humorous when the angel comes and speaks to Mary, and it says Mary was troubled, and she wondered what sort of greeting this might be. And you want to sit there and say, well, it's not the normal kind of greeting, that's for sure. The angel shows up to Joseph, also, we're told, only in Matthew. And this is the account of that announcement of the birth of Christ. This is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about. His mother Mary was pledged to be married to Joseph, but before they came together, she was found to be with child through the Holy Spirit. Because Joseph, her husband, was a righteous man and did not want to expose her to public disgrace, but after he had considered this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said, Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary home as your wife, because what is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will give birth to a son, and you are to give him the name Jesus, because he will save his people from their sins. All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet. The virgin will be with child, and will give birth to a son, and they will call him Emmanuel, which means God with us. When Joseph woke up, he did what the angel of the Lord had commanded him, and took Mary home as his wife. But he had no union with her until she gave birth to a son, and he gave him the name Jesus. Jesus, this is God's word. You see, whenever Jesus shows up, there's problems. It's so silly to say, well, back in those days, people believed in miracles. They believed in the supernatural, but today, we're modern people. Here's Joseph. He doesn't believe in miracles either. He's a normal person. He says, I've got to divorce her. She's either crazy, or she's a traitor to me. The angel shows up, and they have an argument, in a sense. Now, it's not as obvious with Joseph as we could see in the Annunciation account with Mary. But the issue, the issue here, is the name. The drama is about the name. Jesus shows up and says to the Father, pardon me, the Lord shows up in the form of the angel, and says to the Father, Joseph, he says, I will not let you name this child. This is the name you're going to give him. Now, you realize that this is a drama because it was the parents' right, and in particular, in those days, the father's right to name the son. The Lord shows up and says, you're not going to name this son. This is the name he's going to have. And the climax of the story, you notice, in verse 25 is that Joseph gives the name that the Lord had given him. In other words, Joseph submits. Now, the whole purpose of the passage is to talk about the name. No one is allowed to name Jesus. Only God gives Jesus this name. Takes the right from his parents, his earthly parents. Now, if you're going to understand the purpose of this, the meaning of this, the teaching of this text, we have to spend a little bit of time seeing what the Bible says is the significance of a naming event. So, first of all, I'd like to just take a look at that teaching. What does this naming event of Jesus tell us? And then, secondly, how does that apply to you and I? How does that apply to us? How does that apply to how we're supposed to discover who we are? Here is God showing us how Jesus knew who he was. How does that apply to us finding out who we are? Look at it this way. First, let me give it to you in a nutshell. In the Bible, a person's name was never just a label. Kids never got names because their parents just liked the sound of it. Saw, you know, it... name was the name of the favorite soap opera character of the mother or the father's uncle, for example, or anything like that. Instead, in the Bible, your name is your identity. The deepest secret of who you are is locked up in your name. And the naming event always has two aspects in the Bible. Number one, the source of the name. Who gives it to you is extremely important because the one who names you is your superior. Naming is always the work and the act of a superior. Then number two, the second aspect, is what is the content of the name? Because the content of the name always shows you your purpose. It tells you what you're to live for, what you're here to do. There's the source of the name, which is your authority. And there is the content of the name, which is your purpose. And if you know these two things, the Bible says, you know who you are. And that makes sense. Who is your final authority? Who is the one who or the thing or the standard to which ultimately you defer in making life's decisions? And secondly, what's the bottom line in your life? What are you here for? What is your highest priority? What is the thing when push comes to shove that you're out to accomplish before anything else? If you know those two things, you know who you are. Now let's apply it to Jesus, and you see it both in this passage. First of all, you've got the source of the name, which is an authority issue. The reason God will not let Joseph or Mary name this child is because they are not allowed to think they have authority over him. In the Bible, to name someone was the work of a superior. For example, you can see this, say, in the Old Testament in 2 Kings 23 as an example. When one king would defeat another king, the victorious king would always rename the defeated king. Or when God would bring animals. Remember when God brought the animals to Adam and said, I want you to name these animals? Why did he do that? Was God just, you know, kind of out of ideas? He says, you know, I've created all these creatures over here, and gosh, creation's a hard work. And I've just, you know, I've named all the various, you know, botanical species, and there's just thousands of them. But I need someone to name these things. I've run out of ideas. Would you give these people labels? No, these things labels? He wasn't saying that. When he asked Adam to name the animals, he meant I want you to take charge of them. I want you to take care of them. You're not here to exploit. But to care for. You're responsible for these. And therefore, you see, it was normal for parents to name their children because, at least in the early days of the children's life, a parent was responsible, had authority over the child. But what we have here is God showing up and teaching us one more time in the Bible. I don't know how clear the Bible can be. It gives you so many, it gives you this message in so many different ways. Jesus Christ is not only a human being. No one has the right to name Christ. Why? Because the minute he was born, he was already older than his parents. He's the only one like that. He was not a mere human being. And his parents were supposed to, from the beginning, recognize that. Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see. Hail the incarnate deity. Pleased as man with men to dwell. Jesus, our Emmanuel. He is the King of kings. He's the Lord of lords. No one has authority over him. No one can name him. So you see the authority issue. Secondly, the second aspect of the name is the content issue. Your name tells you what you're here to do. Jesus' name, we're even told in the passage, you should call his name Jesus. Why? Because of his life's work. He will save his people from their sins. See, Jesus, or Yahshua. Yahshua, his word, his name. By the way, his name, Jesus, is a Greek, Hellenized, sort of a Greekized form of the Hebrew word. His name was Joshua. And Yahshua means Yah, the Lord. Shua means saves. There's a lot of names for Jesus in a sense. A lot of titles. He's the wonderful counselor. He's the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. But the one name, you might say the one title that God is very jealous to put right into his name is Jesus, which means he's the Savior. He comes to rescue us. And Jesus had a very clear understanding that that was his purpose in life. And you can see it again and again. There's a place. to Jesus, who's praying, he's in reflection, he's in his study in a sense, and they say, a lot of people are here to see you, and he says, no, I've got to go from village to village and preach because that is why I came. There's another place where we're told that all of his friends said, don't go to Jerusalem, and it said, yet he knew he was to die there, so he set his face like a flint for Jerusalem. Jesus always knew what he was about. Summary, Jesus had what today we call a strong sense of identity. Nothing rattled him. Nothing. Whenever you read about him, you have a sense, and this is the one thing, frankly, that so irks Christians when they see Jesus depicted in literature as someone who's wrestling with his identity. There's a lot of things Jesus wrestled with. He was a man of sorrows. He was a man who felt pain. He was a man who felt grief. He was a man who didn't trust people. Remember we got to that months ago in John 2? He didn't trust people. He experienced all these sorts of things, but the one thing you don't see in the Bible at all is that he ever wrestles with his identity. He's got the clearest sense of self that you could possibly ask for. It unnerved people. It intimidated people everywhere. He knew who he was. Why? Because he knew these two things. He knew where his name came from, his father, and he knew what he was about. In he knew whose he was. And he knew what he was here to do, and that is to serve the one he belonged to. And don't you see, therefore, the real thing that comes out of this passage? Stop asking, who am I? And start asking, whose am I? And that answers the question, who am I? Let me apply this now to us for a moment. Let me apply this to us. We all want identity. We want to know who we are. We want to have that same sense of self. All right, let's take a look at those two things. Look at yourself. Ask yourself, first of all, who names you? And secondly, what is your highest priority in life? And when you ask those two questions, you'll have an idea about your identity. And until you can answer those questions, those questions are right, you'll never know who you are. First, whose are you? Who names you? Who gives you your identity? Now, you know, 100 years ago and beyond, your family and your society tended to name you. In other words, if you were born in this kind of family, you went to the right schools, and you dressed in a certain way. And if you were born in this part of society, you were supposed to know your place, and you got your identity. Basically, you got your name from what society told you you were, or what your family told you you were. Now, that was oppressive in many ways, and it also is not the way the Bible says you find your name and find out who you are. And today, that's been largely abandoned. Now, what does society tell you? What society tells you is you've got to find out who you are. You've got to name yourself. Don't let anybody else name you. Don't let anybody else tell you who you are. You have to name yourself. Well, how do you do that? I want you to know that most of us in this room have been going about doing that, because we are modern people. We are creatures of our society and culture. Well, how do you go about doing that? Number one, one way to do it is through work. You know, Henry Ford said, work doesn't just give you a living, work gives you a life. And recently, here's the problem with that. If you decide, I'm going to name myself through my work, through my career, through my achievement, through the money I make, problems show up. Because if you're successful, you'll find out you'll lose your family and your health, by and large. And if you're not successful, I noticed last week in the Wall Street Journal, there was this, I considered an irritating article, on why men tend to get more depressed when they lose their jobs than women. And what the expert said was very clear. It says men have a tendency to get their identity more from their work than women do. So they get bitter and depressed, and their lives fall apart. And then the articles, there's this expert, it said probably, obviously, how can men overcome this depression and bitterness? They should not try, they should stop making work so important to their identity. And I looked at it, and I wanted to say, okay, Mr. Expert, then how do I get a name? You know, what do you mean, just stop identifying with your work? I mean, that's unfair. It's like throwing me out of the boat, but not telling me there's any other boat. I know my boat's sinking. do? Now, there's another approach, and the other approach says, you know, there's one approach that says name yourself through your work. There's the other approach that says find your inner poetic self. You know, drop out of the rat race, find out what your own personal needs are, your sexual needs, your aesthetic needs, your deepest aspirations. Forget about the rat race. Forget about work. Find out what you really want and go do that. Now, that's a conundrum in a sense. I remember Gail Sheehy in her book Passages, you remember that book in the late 70s, said the real problem is when you drop out to find your poetic self, you find out you need money in order to do that. But I want you to know there is a deeper problem than that in this whole effort to name yourself. I think one of the cutest things about this new Steven Spielberg movie about Peter Pan is he tries, he's dealing with this whole issue. Supposedly, in this storyline, which I think is clever and cute, really, is that Peter Pan has been taken away. By the way, he's got amnesia. He's been taken out of Never Neverland and he's been living for the last number of years and he's in America and he now is a merger and acquisitions lawyer. Or as Wendy says, Peter, you've become a pirate. But he's unhappy and he never spends time with his children and there's an emptiness. And somehow he finds out that he really is Peter Pan and he goes back to Neverland and in the process, he discovers what he says is his real thing he wants to do, and that is he wants to be a father. He wants to have a family. And so what's interesting is supposedly, and there's a lot of good things about the whole movie in the sense that it's affirming, let's not be a greedy business person who's always working. Instead, find your meaning now in your family. Here's the problem. If you decide you're going to name yourself through your work, what actually happens is your work names you and therefore it rules you because whoever names you is your authority. And then if instead you say, no, I'm going to name myself through my relationships. If you name yourself through your relationships, what really happens is your relationships name you and therefore they rule you too. The Bible says both of them are dead ends. Because in both cases, what happens is you think you're naming yourself, but actually you're not. Whatever you use to name you becomes your authority. It's the thing that drives you. It's the thing that says you must have this or you won't be happy. Here's, you know, in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, the rich man is never given a name in Luke 16. Why? Because that's all he is in the end, a rich man. If you live for riches, in the end there's nothing else to you. You lose those riches and you've lost yourself. Here's a man who gets all of his sense of self out of his acquisition. What happens if he loses his job? He becomes impotent. Why? That was his masculinity. That was his identity. He thought he was naming himself through his riches, but the riches were naming him, and in the end he's got no name at all. Paul, trying to become independent, he ends up becoming more dependent. Trying to get out from under oppression, he's oppressed. Or here's a person instead who tries to find all his or her name in the family. I'm going to be a great father. I'm going to be a great mother. What happens when something goes wrong with the children? What if they rebel? What if they turn on you? You don't even have a name anymore. Because your whole identity is wrapped up in that. All of your meaning goes out the door. You become a shriveled husky. You're not a human being. You're a rich man. You're not a human being. You're a father or you're a mother. Jesus has taught us, the Bible teaches us, whoever names you is your authority. You do not belong to yourself. Whoever names you is the one to whom you belong. If you want to know who you are, you first have to ask yourself, whose am I? And be honest about that. Whose are you? You don't belong to yourself. You either belong to God, who is the one that names you, or else you belong to whatever you have turned to, to name yourself. See this naming yourself through attainment or through riches or anything. You see, if only I had success in this field, if only I was married, if only my parents loved me, if only, then I would know who I am. Oh, really? The irony is that this is not a new way of getting identity. It's a very old way. You see, back in Genesis 11, we're told about the Tower of Babel and how. came together and said, come, let us build ourselves a city with a tower that reaches to the heavens, so that we will make a name for ourselves and not be scattered over the face of the whole earth. Huh? This is pretty typical. Let's build the biggest skyscraper in the world, then we'll know who we are. And we'll never be scattered. We won't just be faces in a crowd. We will have a name. And the story says that they are scattered because they sought to make a name for themselves. Or as Esauk Denison says, Elizabeth Elliot showed me this quote years ago, and it's a quote that I just go back to again. She says, Pride is faith in the idea that God had when he made us. Most people are not aware of any idea God had in the making of them, or else it has been lost and who shall find it. So they have got to accept as success what others decide success is, and to take their happiness, even their own selves, at the quotation of the day. Aspire to realize the idea God had for you. Don't aspire to comfort or success or beauty, but to the will of God. You see, in the end, whoever you turn to to name you is your authority. What then are you living for? Jesus knew what he was living for. Your priorities and your commitments are what gives you that identity. You know, the English word identity is actually a word that literally means to be the same. If you live for your own happiness, if you live for your own comfort, you'll never know who you are, because with one crowd you'll be one way, with another crowd another way, with the church crowd you're one way, with the business crowd you're another way. Huh? The only way you're going to know what, who you are is, is there anything that you serve, is there anything you're committed to that is so strong that you're committed to it in every situation, so there is an inner core of sameness, in any situation you're in, if you are committed simply to your own happiness, you will find that you won't know who you are, because you're different with everybody. But if God is the one who names you, and if God is the one to whom you belong, and if God is the one for whom you live, you will know who you are. Here's the irony, the sense, the self needs something higher than the self to live for in order to become a self. Now, the conclusion here, how then do you enable yourself to do just what God has done here? God says, I have to name you. You cannot name me, I have to name you. So here's what my suggestion, consider this, in the Bible, the Bible says that only God can name you. You say, what does that mean? What does that really mean? It doesn't mean that you get a couple of words that float down out of heaven. But what it means is this, as a Christian, you can have a last name and a first name. Your last name is God's family name. It says in John 1, 12, it says, as many as received him who believed on his name, he gave power to become the children of God. The first thing you do is you have to see that you've been trying to name yourself. What it means to become a Christian is to say, Jesus is my Savior. He and he alone has satisfied all the requirements so that I'm acceptable before God. That's what it means to receive him as Savior. And then when you receive him as Savior, you're adopted into the family of God and you get God's family name. That is the ground, the base, the foundation for your new identity. You've got to realize, everybody here has to realize, that it's possible to name yourself even through your morality. Some of you have been coming to church for years. Some of you have been trying to be moral and good. And underneath it all, you still feel guilty and unworthy. You know why? Because you've been trying to name yourself. I'm a good person. I'm decent. But you've never actually received Christ as Savior. You've never seen that he has done everything for you. He lived in your place. He died in your place to accomplish everything that you need to accomplish in order to be acceptable before God. Until you acknowledge that, you're still naming yourself even through religion. Some of you are trying to name yourself through your work. Some of you are trying to name yourself through your relationships. Until you say, Jesus is my Savior. He is the one who gives me validation. He is the one that makes me acceptable. He has done it all for me. In him, the Father loves me and accepts me completely. Until you can say that, you'll go on being unhappy. Until you make him your Savior. you. And by the way, there's a lot of you out there, Christian friends, you understand this. You've received Him as Savior, and yet you're still living lives in the doldrums, in the dark, in the damp, in the low places. You know why? Because you keep forgetting this. But then secondly, Christians also have a first name, not just a last name. And the first name comes from finding your gifts and finding the kinds of people that God wants you to help, finding the kind of ministry that He wants you to do. The first name comes as time goes on. God changed Sarah's name to Sarah, Abram's name to Abram, Saul's name to Paul, Simon's name to Peter, by saying, this is the kind of ministry I'm going to give you, these are the kinds of gifts I'm giving you, this is the kind of service I want you to have. How do you find your first name? How do you find your niche in the kingdom economy? Only by getting down to obedience, getting down to serving. It takes all of your life. Slowly, incrementally, your first name is revealed to you. It's only by obeying, it's only by reaching out, it's only by submitting to Him completely, and saying the most important thing is to serve you and know you. Do you find your first name in increments? But unless you let Him name you, you'll never find out who you are. He says, lose yourself to find yourself. That means unless you make me your highest, highest goal, you'll never find out who you are. You'll never have that sense of self that Jesus Christ had when He was on earth. Final warning, if there's anybody here who says, you know, this idea that I have to submit to Him totally, I don't have your view of Jesus. I prefer to think of Jesus like this. Look out. Don't you dare do what the angel wouldn't let his parents do. Don't you dare name Him. That means don't you dare decide what He is. You have to listen to what He says He is in His Word. God says, I am God. I have come from heaven to earth. I speak in the Bible. Don't edit me. Don't you name me and decide what kind of person you want me to be. Instead, let me name you. Let me bring you. Let me bring you into my family. Let me reveal to you who you really are. Come to Him. Find out whose you are, and then you will find out who you are. Let's pray. Father, as we consider this Christmas season, that your Son was named by you and given His purpose, and He had this tremendous sense of self because He knew where He was from and what He was here to do. Help us to be just as single-minded, just as clear in our service to you, so that we can have that same tremendous sense of knowing who we are. We know who we are because we know whose we are and what we're here to do. I pray, Father, for that one more gift that you can give us at Christmas. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
