TITLE: House of God (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:19-22
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) The Holy Spirit
SERIES: Salvation from the Outside In
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/house-of-god-part-1/

============================================================

I'll read verses 19 to 22, four verses, very, very critical verses if we're going to understand how the church is supposed to function. I'll show you why in just one second it's so important for everybody in this room, no matter where you are, no matter where you stand, no matter what you believe, how important it is for you to understand what the church is, what it can be, what it should be. Verse 19, consequently, you are no longer strangers and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household, built on the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord. And in him, you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his spirit. Now, we're talking about the church. We go back to it. Why? Two things, I think, in my experience, are necessary for people to cross the line from unbelief to belief, to cross the line from being outside of the Christian faith into the Christian faith. Two things. You have to demonstrate to people, and some of you are in the midst of seeking this out and this happening to you right now. You need, first of all, to have the credibility of the Christian faith demonstrated to you. And then secondly, you need to have the plausibility or the personal relevance of the Christian faith demonstrated to you. The credibility and the plausibility. The credibility means, is it intellectually coherent? Does it stand up to the evidence? The credibility. The plausibility has more to do with, does it have the ring of reality? Does it work? Is it practical? Does it make a difference in people's lives? Now, in order for both those things, the credibility and the plausibility of the Christian faith to be demonstrated, the Bible shows us again and again that you really need two things. The Christian message only really spreads, and it only does good in a city, when two things are happening. Both communication of the Word and the community of the Lord are highly developed. Communication and community. See, the communication, which is what I'm doing right now, in case you didn't realize it, the communication of the Word really has a lot to do with the credibility. Tremendously important to show people that Christianity really isn't just a pipe dream. It's not really wishful thinking. It's not a leap in the dark. No more than anything else is. That Christianity, of course, is coherent. It's true. As one writer put it, the reason you urge people to become Christians is not because Christianity is exciting, though it is. Not because Christianity will really help you, though it will. Not because Christianity is up to date, though it of course is. Not because Christianity will meet your needs, though of course it will. But because Christianity is true, which is very surprising to modern people. I mean, the best they hope for is that it's useful. The idea of truth doesn't even come in. Well, it's the purpose and the goal of communication of the Word of God to demonstrate that Christianity is true, to demonstrate its credibility. But that's not enough. That's not enough. You also have to demonstrate the plausibility of the Christian message, and that only happens in community. In other words, when the Church is healthy, when the Church is showing people relationships that are inexplicable because of their beauty, when you have a body, when you have a corporate supernatural, corporate life, that is characterized by both truth and love. Not love without truth, where everybody's goopy, but nobody holds anyone accountable. But not truth without love, where everybody is making people toe the mark, but in a kind of harsh and destructive way. Truth and love, affirmation and accountability, praising and weeping. When you have relationships of that kind of beauty, then people say there's something to this that shows the plausibility, the relevance of the Christian message. So great communication isn't enough. And this means, let's be real practical, this means that it's possible temporarily for a Church to get off the ground with fine communication. The music is good, and the worship is good, and you're inspired, and you feel like I get something to take home with me, and I'm lifted up, and so forth. That's great communication. But without community, ultimately that Church ends up just being a spectacle. That Church just ends up being a circus. And in the long run, it cannot really spread the Christian faith through the city. Now actually, the Vice is Versa, as well. for churches to be very warm and very loving and to have a tremendous amount of, you know, really good in the area, personal relationships, but the communication is poor. The worship is actually poor. As soon as you walk in the door, you feel like unless you're one of the friends, unless you're somebody who's in these relationships, you get nothing out of the worship service at all. Haven't you been to churches like that? Community without communication? Well, Redeemer, of course, has, though you can find this supernatural community out there in spots, the jury is out on us. Absolutely the jury is out on us. Because ultimately, communication without community is like a tire without air. In fact, for quite a while, you know, actually your tire can be losing air, but if you keep on going hard enough and long enough, it sort of artificially stays inflated until you come to a stop sign. All of a sudden, communication and community relate like the air relates to the tire. All the greatest, slickest presentation and all the fine music and all the sense of worshipfulness and the communication is nothing without community. The Christian message really spreads and really gets into the guts and into the entrails of a city when the church's corporate life gets remarkable to the point of inexplicability. People can't account for it. They're amazed by it. We've said that before, and that's the reason why we're looking at this passage. Now, having said that, and don't forget, as we look at these things, I hope that no matter who you are, whether you think you're a Christian, you think you're not a Christian, you don't know what you are, to get an understanding of what the church ought to be is important for all of us, you see. When we look at what the Bible says the church can be, it ought to burn a hole in our hearts. I don't feel that people are nearly passionate enough, and part of the reason is because we're individualistic Americans. The best we hope for is that I will come to a church that makes me whole and that gets my life together. And you don't even know, really. I think, by and large, we don't even have pictures of what the church ought to be and what the church can be. The pictures that God gives us here, that Paul gives us, ought to burn a hole in our hearts. It should make us really passionate for it. It should make us salivate for it until we're willing to put up the time, the emotion, the money, and the vulnerability it takes to achieve this kind of unity and fellowship and corporate body life. I said to put up the time, the emotion, the money, and the vulnerability because, make no mistake, it will take all of those four things. It takes money, believe it or not. It takes time, absolutely. It takes emotion and vulnerability, which I guess kind of go together. You've got to put yourself on the line if you're going to have this kind of unity and supernatural community. But it's worth it. It's not only worth it, it's an absolute necessity. You know, it's hard to achieve this, but it's much harder not to. Now, let's take a look. The three things that Paul tells us about the church, he gives us three pictures, and I actually want to look at the last one because it's the one that he spends the most time on and that I think would be appropriate at least to get into it tonight. As you will see, it will be appropriate for coming before the Lord's presence by coming to his table. He tells us three things. Consequently, you are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household. Build on the foundation of the apostles and prophets with Christ Jesus as the chief cornerstone. In him, the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple in the Lord, and you are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit. Number one, we are citizens in a kingdom. See? No longer foreigners, no longer aliens, no longer immigrants. Citizens, fellow citizens. You're citizens in a nation. Secondly, you're God's people and members of his household, which means, actually, you're members of his family. So first, citizens in a nation. Secondly, members of God's family. But thirdly, you're building blocks, stones, and a house. We are built upon the foundations of the prophets and apostles in Christ, and our building is fitly framed, growing into a holy temple. You are a habitation of God through the Holy Spirit. Now, what is he telling us? Just, there's only time for two things to talk about tonight. He says we're a temple, and you are building blocks in a temple. All right? First, this image, if you look carefully, you will see every image from the citizens of a nation to the members of a family to the stones and the constituent building blocks in a temple of God, that actually everyone moves higher. Everyone actually goes farther in its claims. First of all, Paul is trying to tell you by saying you are stones in a building that's becoming a temple. He went straight to the center unless it'sports. What's next? Well, it's so important. in its claims. First of all, Paul is trying to tell you, by saying you are stones in a building that's becoming a temple, a dwelling of the Holy Spirit, he's trying to tell you how absolutely you need each other, how absolutely you need each other. It's talking about a unity that Christians must have, and actually all human beings have got to have, and it's only available in Christ. And that if you violate this unity, you're violating your own nature. See what I mean by saying there's an ascendance? Citizens, if you're all citizens of the same country, there's a unity we have. Of course, citizens have a unity. We share, we're under the same laws, we're paying the same taxes. You know, there's something about April 15th that just creates a bond between us. So there's a unity between citizens. Ah, but when it comes to members of the household, there's even greater unity, is there not? Because brothers and sisters, fathers and mothers and children, there's even greater unity between family members. But I would point out that what Paul's trying to tell you is when he says that we're building blocks in the same wall, building blocks in the temple of the Holy Spirit, the temple of the dwelling of God, he's actually giving us an image of unity that's even more intimate. And even, he's even talking about a closer kind of unity. Because you see, a brother and a sister can have a falling out. They can be estranged, and they're still part of the family. You're still in the same family, even though you're mad at each other, even though you only see each other, say, at Christmas, and then you kind of stay on the other side of the room from each other. You can be estranged, you can have a falling out, and you still are members of the family. But two building blocks can't have a falling out, and there'll still be a wall. The fact is that you can be estranged from each other, and still be brothers and sisters. You can have a fight, you can be having conflict. But let me tell you something. Building blocks, and I think we referred to this a couple of weeks ago, building blocks, unless they're together, have no function at all. What is the function of a building? To shelter you from the cold. To keep out the rain. Why are you in a building? Why do we need buildings? Well, nature is our enemy, basically. Because nature changes more than our body can take. And so you need shelter. That's what a building is for, to shelter you from the cold, to comfort you, and shelter you from the rain, and the storms, and the snow. Building blocks, unless they're together, can't do that. A building block all by itself. One building block cannot keep the rain off of you. Just try it. You know, walk through the streets that way. One building block cannot keep the blizzard away. I'm sorry. You can curl up around a building block, and you'll still die of exposure out there. Building blocks estranged from each other have no function at all. You might talk about them as, in a sense, you're totaled. You know, when they talk about a car being totaled, they say the car was totaled. Does that mean the car ceased to exist? No. Well, what does it mean when it says the car was totaled? It's there. Look at it. It's all there. Why is it totaled? It means it is totally incapable of fulfilling its design. It's totally incapable of doing what it was designed to do. It's just a piece of junk. I mean, in a sense, it's all there. There's the windows. There's the doors. But it's totaled. When you are a lone ranger Christian, that's what Paul's trying to say. When you are trying, in a sense, to be a Christian all by yourself, you can't even begin to function the way God intended you to function. For you to be all by yourself, not in accountability relationships with other Christians, not bearing one another's burdens and having other people bear your burdens. By being a privatized individualistic Christian, you are violating your nature as surely as I am violating or you're violating your physical nature if you work 100 hours a week or if you're addicted to drugs or alcohol. It's the same thing. If you're addicted to drugs or alcohol, you're working 100 hours a week, you're violating your nature. There's going to be breakdowns. And if you're a privatized Christian, there's going to be breakdowns too. Why? Because you're building blocks in the temple of the Holy Spirit. You're meant for each other to be intimately put together. For one, build on the other. You'll be completely supported by others. You're meaningless. Your existence is meaningless, apart from the unity of the body. Well, I know you don't want to hear that. I know what you do. I know what I do. It was a tendency for me. If I wasn't a pastor, I know what I'd be doing anyway. I mean, in some ways, ministers just be, you know, we're unable to do what most people or other people do. And yet, in other senses, there's ways for us to be just as private. If you have a fight with somebody, you just leave. Why? Well, there's lots of churches. It's a big city. There's 1,800 other churches. If the minister changes you don't like, we'll go to another one. If you don't like the change in the style of music, we'll go somewhere else. I'm going to sit here and I'm going to get my needs met. And as long as I don't get my needs met... A lot of people, you look around and you say... You look at the other people around and you say, are these people too... these people too trendy or too tacky for me? And of course, you size it up, and as long as it's within your comfort level, you'll stay as long as your needs are being met. That's not what Paul is saying to churches at all. You're not an audience. You're a holy temple of the Lord. You're building blocks, being built up. What he is trying to get across here is the absolute critical nature of the unity of the body. You're built for it. You're designed for it. Let me just ask you, just for one second, as kindly as I possibly can, how do you obey the verse Hebrews 13, 17? How do you obey that verse? Now, I'm talking to Christians here. I am not talking to people who aren't sure whether Christianity is true. I'm not talking to people who aren't sure where they stand with Christ, all right? I'm talking to the person next to you who knows Christianity is true. What do you do about Hebrews chapter 13, verse 17? It says, Obey your leaders and submit to them for they're keeping watch over your soul. Don't make it hard for them to do their job, but enable them to do it gladly. Did you hear that? Obey your leaders and submit to them for they're keeping watch over your soul. Can I ask you, who are those people? Does it mean anybody that walks up to you and says, I'm a leader you've got to listen to? If you're outside and you're walking out the door and somebody says, oh, by the way, are you a Christian? And you say, yes, I am. Well, I'm a Christian leader. Here, could you go get me a tuna fish sandwich? The point is, that would be silly. You only obey people that you are in a covenant with. You find somebody who you say, here's a person who's more mature in Christ than me. Here is a person, in other words, put it this way, here is a building block further down toward the foundation. Down closer to the apostles and prophets. Down closer to the Lord Jesus Christ. Somebody who I can rely on. Somebody who can support me. But then somebody who I can be accountable to. Somebody who I can say, I want to submit to you. The Bible says we're supposed to submit to each other. We're supposed to confess our sins to each other. We're supposed to bear each other's burdens. We're supposed to admonish one another. We're supposed to exhort one another, lest we be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. And we're supposed to obey our leaders. That only works when you find a set of leaders who you want to be accountable to. And the only way to be accountable to them is to make an agreement with them. You enter into a covenant with them. You join. You're in a member. You've got to be a member of a church. You do. Oh, not that you say, well, where does the Bible say anything about membership? I'm not. Everywhere. You know, everywhere. Because membership just means you make a covenant, a public promise. You make yourself accountable. You know, Ulysses. Remember Ulysses? He wanted to hear the sirens. He heard that they were really, really a great singing group. But he also heard that when you heard the sirens, you would go insane and crazy. So he says, all right, I've got a great idea. I will tie myself to the mast and I'll keep my ears open. And I'll take all of my crew members of my ship and I will plug their ears with wax so they will be free. They won't be tied. They will be at the oars. So in other words, I'll be tied. They'll be free. But I'll be, my ears will be open and their ears will be closed. Therefore, he says to everybody, now, when we get near the sirens, when we get near the coast, I'm going to start hearing the singing. Now, I want you to know what's going to happen is I'm going to go crazy. I'm going to go berserk. I'm going to say, stop the boat and go over there. But we can't because anyone who under the spell of the sirens seeks to get near their island, their boats are dashed on the rocks and they are lost at sea. So he says, when I go crazy, I'm going to yell and I'm going to scream at you. And I'm, and don't, don't listen to me. And then I'm going to make all sorts of motions. I'm going to say, when I get out of here, I'm going to strangle you. I promise I will. I'm the captain. I'm the general. I'm the king. I'm a king Odysseus. You're just a bunch of galley slaves. You're just a bunch of sailors. I'm going to strangle you. I'm going to make it impossible for you to even get home alive. So I'm going to, I'm going to disembowel you. I'm going to run you up the flagpole and see if anybody salutes. Don't listen to me. I'll be wrong. I'll be berserk. What's he doing? What's he doing? He's actually saying, I'm going to put myself in a position where I'm going to submit to you because I know I'm going to go insane. There'll be, there'll be a time in which I'm insane and I'm going to set up things. I'm going to put myself, tie myself to the mask. I'm going to set up things. I'm going to plug ears. I'm going to set up things so I can submit to you. So I can, when I go crazy, can be brought by you away. It's the same thing when you say, obey your leaders and submit to them. be times in which I'll go crazy. There'll be times in which I will be bewitched. There'll be times in which I won't think that Jesus is so great. There'll be times in which I won't think that holiness is a great thing to have. There'll be times in which I won't want to obey. Everybody, if you know your own heart, if you know your own heart, you know there's going to be times in which you'll hear the sirens and not the police sirens. And unless you've got some people around that you have worked with, that you've said, now when I go crazy and when I say I don't want to do this and this and this and this, don't listen to me. Take me away from them. You know, unless you've got accountability relationships, unless you're built into the wall, unless you've got people under you and over you, people that you're supporting and people who are supporting you, people who are accountable to you and people to whom you're accountable, unless you're built in, unless you have that kind of unity, you're violating your own nature. There's going to be breakdowns. How do we say this? You see, in a sense, Paul is saying there is nothing higher than this. There's unity in a citizenship. There's unity in a family. But most of all, there's this unity in the wall, the unity in the temple. And Christians are characterized by this. You need it. You must have it. You were built for it. You've been recreated, so you've got a design. Have you got that kind of unity? Do you have those kinds of relationships? Is there that kind of accountability? I'm not trying to get everybody to join Redeemer. I'm trying to get everybody to listen to what the Word of God says. Okay, now, secondly and lastly, I said there's two things that he lays out for us in this image. The first thing, this wonderful image of the temple, this idea that we're stones in a holy temple, first of all, proves that there is a unity that we've got to have. And there's an interrelatedness that we've got to have. That there's a unity and an intimacy that Christians should have. And secondly, the fact that we're a holy temple means that we actually have access to the presence of God. Again, look, citizens have access to their king or their president, of course, to some degree. Children have access to the father. You know, that's the first image of citizenship in a nation. The second image is children, members of a household. Children, of course, have even more access to the father. But children are still outside the father. You know what I mean? Children are still independent individuals. But in this last metaphor, in this last image, Paul is trying to show us that we have an access of, there's no higher access than this. God actually dwells in us. The father can't actually indwell the child, you see. The king can't actually indwell the citizen. But Paul has got to pile metaphor upon metaphor to get across to the privileges that we've got. The Holy Spirit of God, God's own nature, actually interpenetrates and indwells us. We're the temple. We're the place that he lives. Now, we're going to spend next week really developing this in some detail, but here's all I want to tell you right now. We desperately want to live with God. When you live with somebody, they really see who you are, don't they? You know, if you're married, that's one thing. But even if you're raised with brothers and sisters, even if there's three or four roommates in a dorm room in college or something like that, they really know who you are. To some degree or another, they see your nakedness. They see what you're really like. They certainly see what you look like without makeup, ours. You know, they get to know you. They get to know you. There's a familiarity. God and humanity once lived together. It was in the Garden of Eden. The Garden of Eden was the dwelling place of God, and we lived together, and we walked in the cool of the day together. And it was life itself. We opened our hearts to each other. We knew each other. We were naked there and not ashamed. But as soon as human beings decided to be their own master, we're told, and we looked at this last month, God put, he sent us away. As soon as we decided to be our own masters, God's presence became traumatic to us. Why? Rudolf Otto, an old German sociologist of religion wrote a book, early part of the 20th century, called The Idea of the Holy. And he said in all religions, people have an experience when they get near God that he called numinous awe. What is the characteristics of numinous awe, he said. Numinous awe is a violent contradiction of fear and fascination. That's what he said. He was just a sociologist of religion. He wasn't a Bible scholar. He wasn't, I don't know if he was a Christian or not, but he wasn't, he wasn't writing as a Christian. He just went out there as a sociologist, as a phenomenon. near, in any religion at all. And he found out that every one of them had this incredible approach avoidance feeling when they got near. It was traumatic. He called it numinous awe. It was a violent contradiction, a tension within him, a fear and fascination. Well, you know where that comes from, biblically. We were built for the presence of God, but now we're scared of the presence of God, because when you get near God, you see who you really are. The closer we get to God, the more, the closer we get to his hugeness, the more we see our smallness. The closer we get to his holiness, the more we feel our unholiness. Whenever you get near God, I mean, if you listen to a sermon that makes you feel terribly guilty, guilty, it may be that the minister just happens to be a legalistic person who just enjoys inflicting, he just might be a sadist, enjoys inflicting that. But it also could be, and that's always a possibility, but it also could be that you're getting near God and you hate it. Because the way you know you're getting near God is you feel like Isaiah did. When Isaiah got near God, and Isaiah was a godly man in a source, he was a preacher, what did he do? He says, woe is me, I am a man of unclean lips. You have to remember that Isaiah made his living through lips. He was a preacher. That was his pride and his joy. But don't you see, the minute he gets near God, the thing he's most proud of in the whole world, his lips, his senses are full of uncleanness and corruption. We're built for the presence of God, we want the presence of God, but the closer we get, the more scared we are and traumatized by the presence of God. Now this is one of the major themes of the Bible. This maybe in a sense is the theme of the Bible. How can a human being live with God when that's what we're built for and that's what we need and that's where all of our problems come from? When Moses, on the mountain, Mount Sinai, turned to God and said, show me your glory, show me your face. You know what happened to Moses at that point? He got it. This is what he was saying is, oh my Lord, oh my God, I suddenly realized that my sexual passions, I suddenly realized that my professional ambitions, I suddenly realized all the lusts and passions that drive me are basically just derived from this ultimate lust, this ultimate passion, this ultimate longing, this ultimate yearning. I want your glory. I want your face. I want to live with you. I want to dwell with you. I want you to see me and know me and love me. He suddenly realized that that's what he was built for. He suddenly realized that underneath all the itching, underneath all the passions, underneath all the addictions, underneath all the drivenness, underneath the sex and the ambition, all these other things, he suddenly realized this has grown, all these things have just grown out of this. Those things are just shoots. This is the root. This is what I want. This is why I'm restless. This is why there's something wrong with me. This is why I'm incomplete. And none of these other things is going to complete me. This will complete me. I want to dwell with God. Show me your glory. And what does God say? I can't. It'll kill you. God says, what he's saying to Moses is, God, Moses, I know you need to dwell with me. That's the problem. It'll kill you. You're sinful. I'm holy. The trauma will kill you. And yet, Paul says, he who said, let there be light has shined in our heart to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. John the Apostle said, and the word became flesh and tabernacled among us and we beheld its glory. Glory is of the only begotten of the Father. What the New Testament says, and here we do, I'll just say it now so we can conclude and get back to it next week, is that the Garden of God, the original place where God dwelt with us, God recreated his house when he built the tabernacle and the temple. He dwelt in there and he let people live near the tabernacle and near the temple, but nobody lived in it. The priests weren't allowed in there. No one was allowed to live in it. His Shekinah glory dwelt in there. And you know why nobody could get in it? Because of the sword. When God sent the people out, Adam and Eve out of the garden, he put the sword there and the chair of it. And he said, you can't get in because somebody has got to pay for your sin. You'll never get back in unless somebody goes under the sword. And for years, in the tabernacle and the temple, that's where God dwelt, but nobody could live in there. And when anybody even came in to visit, nobody could live with God, but if you just came in to visit, you had to bring in an animal and put it under the sword. There had to be payment for sin, or you couldn't even visit God. But in the New Testament, the Bible says, All right. I see 여러분 here are you 觉得 tonight. Yeah. bring in an animal and put it under the sword. There had to be payment for sin, or you couldn't even visit God. But in the New Testament, the Bible says, Jesus is the temple, and you're a temple. In the New Testament, it says, Jesus has gone under the sword. So that when you believe in Him, when you're built into Him, the very presence of God that Moses wasn't allowed to have, the presence of God that the people couldn't dwell with in the temple and tabernacle, the presence of God that Adam had in the Garden of Eden belongs to you. You can dwell with God. His presence can come into your life. You can know His love. You can know His touch. You can know His kiss. You can know His power. That is what God is talking about here. That's what Paul is talking about here when he says, you are a temple of the Holy Spirit. There's nothing higher than that. We're going to have to explore that theme. But what does it mean? It means that when you come to the Lord's table, you're coming as part of the dwelling place of God. God will give you a sense of His presence that Moses did not have, that Abraham did not have. It's not as complete as Adam had because we're told that the final temple will be the new Jerusalem when it comes down out of heaven. In Revelation 21, it tells us that the new Jerusalem, the new heavens and the new earth will be a cube. It will be a giant holy of holies. It will be the place where God dwells. It says the Lamb and the Lord will be there, and there won't be a tabernacle because the presence of God and the knowledge of God will cover the earth the way that waters cover the bottom of the sea. And we will dwell therein. And then we will walk with God in the cool of the day. We don't have complete access to God. It's not total, but we've got real access to God. We are His temple. Now what that means is, you need to cleanse your hearts. Because the more holy you are, the more godly you are, the more disciplined you are, the more holy His you are. The more you set aside sin and make Him the focus of your attention. The more you consecrate yourself and ditch competing concerns and make Him first, the more you will experience this incredible presence, the more you will experience this power. You can have it right now. You can see it right now. Why? Because you are a dwelling place of God the Spirit. You see, this image, in a way, shows us something, and there's nothing higher. There's an intimacy and a unity we have with each other, and there's an intimacy and a unity we have with the Lord, because Jesus Christ advanced against the sword at the mouth of the Garden of Eden, and the sword slew Him. But as it slew Him, as it broke His body, it broke itself. And death no more has any claim over us. Oh, death, where is thy sting? Oh, grave, where is thy victory? It's gone. We're going to physically die, yes, but the physical death will do nothing but make us spiritually completely alive. There's no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. God says, come into me. Come into me. I want your fellowship. You can experience my presence. Are you ready to do that? Let me just tell you how we're going to do the Lord's Supper. Remember, if you have received Christ as Savior, if you've been baptized, in other words, if you've professed your faith before other people, joined a church or been baptized, if you're ready to ditch competing concerns and to forsake any sins that you know of and commit yourself to be holy, because that's what a temple is, you can receive the sacrament. That means you can actually receive His cleansing power, His grace, and His presence here tonight. If you haven't received Christ as Savior, don't take the bread and the cup. Take Christ. Bow your head and say tonight, if I've never really received you as my Savior before, I do so now because I want to be built into that temple. We're going to confess our sins together, and then we're going to pass out the Lord's Supper, and you're going to hold it until, when we pass out the bread, we sing, and then we'll eat together. And we're going to pass out the cup while we sing, and then we're going to drink together. We're going to come into His presence because we are the temple. Because He's the temple, we're the temple. Because He's the priest, we are priests. You see? Because He was the bread of life, we can eat it. Because we've seen God's presence in His face, we can look on God's glory in His face. Let's pray. Our Father, as we come to You, we ask simply that You would really meet us. You've shown us here tonight that it's possible to meet You. That's what we want. Father, I pray that some people here tonight will not take the bread and the cup, but will actually take hold of You for the very first time. I pray that somehow, somewhere, in all these words, Your gospel has been made clear to them, and they have crossed the line into faith. And I pray that that will happen to some people here tonight. But Father, I also know that... know your presence, that feel very cut off from you. I pray that you would enable them to repent tonight, to know the freedom of that, to ditch competing concerns, and to commit themselves to be holy, commit themselves to be part of the temple. And I pray that some people here tonight will get a sense of your presence and feel your love shed abroad in their heart in a way that they never have before. Prove to them that you indwell us. Prove to us that you're in our midst. Show us your glory. We ask that in Jesus' name. Amen.
