TITLE: How to Change (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:17-24
TOPICS: Sanctification
SERIES: Lord of All
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-to-change-part-2/

============================================================

If you get your hand out and you turn to Ephesians chapter 4, we can begin. We're looking at Ephesians chapter 4, the same verses as last week. We're going to read verses 17 to 24. Ephesians 4, verses 17 to 24. So I tell you this, and insist on it in the Lord, that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their thinking. They are darkened in their understanding and separated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them due to the hardening of their hearts. Having lost all sensitivity, they have given themselves over to sensuality, so as to indulge in every kind of impurity with a continual lust for more. You, however, did not come to know Christ that way. Surely you heard of him and were taught in him in accordance with the truth that is in Jesus. You were taught with regard to your former way of life to put off your old self. Which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires to be made new in the attitude of your minds and to put on the new self, created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness. Let's end right there. These verses, especially verses 22, 23, and 24, are very important verses. Put off the old self, be renewed in the attitude or the spirit of your mind and put on the new self, which in Christ is made to be in true righteousness and holiness. When I was converted around 1970, in 1970 I was 20 years old, and there was two or three years there in which these verses were almost, were very pivotal to me. Because I think that one of the three most sensational things about Christianity, and I use the word sensational, I mean three things that are the most appealing and the most incredible, because they're too good to be true, they're most appealing to the world. This is one of them. You can change. Theologically, the three things go like this. The ideal is not a philosophical principle, and it's not an abstract force, but it's a force, it's a person. God himself, Jesus Christ, and the ideal has broken through the wall of the world and has come in. The ideal has become real. And because the ideal has become real, we can know Jesus Christ, we can know God personally, he can come into our lives, he can change us, and through us, he can change the world. So put in the most stark and simple way, the three most, I think, three most sensational things about Christianity is it's able to claim with a real straight face, you can know God personally, you can change, and you can change the world. Three things. You know, when I was a kid, there was a lot of people who just believed that in general. Not so much about God, but there were a lot of people who sang Peter, Paul, and Mary songs, if I had a hammer, and I'd hammer out danger and warning, and everybody said, that's it, that's it, we can change the world. We wanted to go straight to number three. And as a result of that, a lot of people have, a lot of people, you might say, of my particular generation, are really pretty disillusioned folks. They decided they were going to do an end run around number one and number two and get to number three. We can change the world. At this point, not only are we cynical about that, but we're extremely cynical about whether we can change ourselves. About 20 years ago, I wrestled a lot with these verses. I read, if you want to know, if those of you who would be interested in obscure little, I don't know, you might just satisfy your curiosity. I read a man named Jay Adams 20 years ago on these verses, put off and put on. And the issue was, can you change? How can you change? How can you change in such a way that it sticks? And at the same time, I read a man named John Owen, who went a little deeper, and he wrote about three or four hundred years ago. And he wrote a particular book called On the Mortification of Sin. That book changed my life, and it saved my life. And it was on the same subject. Only Jay Adams, as good as Jay was on put off and put on, he kind of ignored, or not ignored, but he didn't really develop the little bridge between the put off and put on, which is... your mind. And John Owen did not ignore that, and he explained that. And those were extremely important people to read, and I was constantly brought back to these verses, these two verses especially, 23, pardon me, 22, 23, and 24, those verses right there. Put off the old self, be made new, and put on the new self. And so if you don't mind, I'm indulging and spending a couple of weeks on these verses because they're so critical. Do you believe you can change? I mean, that is the most sensational thing about Christianity. And yet a lot of you have been either Christians or at least hanging around Christianity for a long time. And have you really changed? Have you really? There's so many things you want to change. I just, I asked my wife last night, give me a list of all the things you want to change. And I said, not just you in particular, but just you in general. And we made a little list. I mean, of course, the things we, there's a lot of things that today in modern New York we're talking about. Oh, we've got to change our addictive behavior. We're addicted to food. We're addicted to sex. We're addicted to substances. But then you've got uncontrolled emotions. We can't control our anger. We can't control our bitterness. We can't control our fear, you see. We can't control our tongue. We've got problems with our tongue. We say too much or too little. We have problems with harshness. We have problems with cowardice. We can't keep secrets. We can't keep our promises. We've got all kinds of fears. We're afraid of certain situations. We're afraid of certain kinds of people. We have hardness of heart. We say, why can't I be more tender-hearted toward that person or toward that situation? We know we're hypocrites. There are certain areas where what we say does not at all measure up to what we actually do. There's various sorts of anxiety. Some of us are too shy. Some of us are self-conscious. Some of us say, I wish somehow I could be quieter and less open and public and forward in public. Some of us have a lot of problems with money. Some of us are too stingy with it and can't spend it and are always worried about it. And some of us aren't stingy enough and find ourselves being very undisciplined with it. But some of us cannot, we cannot discipline our time. We cannot get in charge of our time. Some of us eat too much. Some of us have a lot of trouble with various sorts of thoughts, controlling our thoughts. Some of us overlove certain people or certain kinds of people. Some of us overwork. We have various integrity problems. We have various problems with honesty in certain areas. And there's actually quite a few other things you need to change, but I can't read my own handwriting. And so neither you nor I will ever know what they are. It's very, very sad. But, very sad. Boy, who knows? Your life could have been changed tonight, but I don't know what that was there. Anyway, are there any things that we want to change? Of course. The most sensational thing about Christianity is it can say with a straight face, and it says out of literally thousands of years now of experience, with millions of satisfied customers, you can change. Now, the principles that are lying inside these verses are many, and they're profound, and it takes years for them to sink in. And just rereading them and rethinking about them recently has just created in me a real hunger to grow in holiness again. And therefore, they're never things that you get down. They're things that continually you have to go back to. You know, being a Christian is a lot like being a pail of water outside on a very, very cold morning. You've got to constantly be breaking the ice. Constantly. Because it always tends to ice up. Now, the first principle, and we touched on it last week. We have to get right to verse 22. We monkeyed around with verses 19, 20, 21 last week. 22. The first principle we see is the putting off and the putting on. We touched on it, but we've got to hit it. The putting off and the putting on. Putting off means stop doing something, and putting on means start doing something. Everybody knows that change is two-factored, right? Everybody knows that in order to turn, metanoia, repentance means to turn, you can't turn toward unless you turn away. You can't turn away without turning toward something else. It's two-factored. That seems so obvious. Spiritually, it is. Intellectually, it is. Practically, it's not at all easy to keep these two things together. And a lot of people in this room, in fact, probably to some degree, unless you had just the perfect family background and the most wonderful and balanced church background, and all of your friends are just tremendous peer counselors, unless all those things have happened, you probably have fallen into one side or the other. We tend to separate these things. We tend to separate putting off or putting on. Churches tend to do it. Counselors tend to do it. Cultures tend to do it. And it is. I know I touched on these last week, but I want to really show you the implication of this principle. First of all, you've got a kind of approach that puts all the emphasis on putting off. Now, I can call it the willpower pathology. It's the emphasis that stresses the negative. It's the emphasis that stresses threats and appeals and don't, and remember we said last week, it's the emphasis that says just say no. Just stop it. Cut it out. It's bad for you. Now, an awful lot of pastors, an awful lot of counselors, an awful lot of friends are so tired and familiar with this pattern. The person that says, I sinned. I'm really sorry. I'll never, ever, ever do it again. I've really learned my lesson. And then next thing you know, they relapse, and then they come back, and they repent again. I really am sorry. Oh, I'll never do this again. And back you go again. And you say, why? What's going on? It's probably a person who puts off without any put on. We won't get to it now, but later on in this chapter, Paul is a very good teacher, gives us a bunch of case studies. Like, for example, down in verse 28, he gives us an example of putting off and putting on. Down in verse 28, he gives you several. And we'll look at them, but it says, He who has been stealing must steal no longer, but must work doing something useful with his own hands that he may have, something to share with those in need. So, J. Adams, the one Bible teacher named J. Adams used to put it this way. He said, when is a thief not a thief? And a lot of people would say, well, when he stops stealing. That's not what the passage is saying. That's not what the case study is saying. That's not what the verses 22 to 25 is saying, 24 is saying. When is a thief not a thief? If you say, well, when he stops stealing, no. A thief who stops stealing is just a thief between jobs. All right? It's not good enough. You see, if you just say, stop, that's not good enough. A person who is stealing is solving a problem through stealing. Now, there's variations of this, but let's just give you one example. Here is a young man, and he grows up in a community or in a neighborhood or in a place where the families are so weak, and everybody needs groups from which to get identity. Everybody needs groups from which to get identity and get a sense of belonging. Because the family isn't possible for that, then he hangs out with a gang. The gang is his family. The gang gives him a sense of belonging. The gang gives him a sense of power. It gives him a sense of safety. And the gang, they steal. All right? And the important thing is, not necessarily that he's got to steal because he's got to steal because, well, he's poor and he wants to get rich, necessarily, but rather he's part of a group. Now, get a hold of one of those kids. You've caught him stealing, and the judge gives him a second chance. So what do you do? You sit down and you say, don't you see what you're doing with your life? You've just got to stop in the name of humanity, for the sake of your grandmother, for the sake of the nation and society, for your own sake. You've got to stop. Put off. Put off. And what will happen? Well, you know, if you're particularly eloquent and he's particularly scared, he might put it off for a while, but he's still just a thief between jobs. What does Paul say? Paul says, not let a thief, let him who steals just stop stealing. He says, but here's the put on. You've got to have a put on to take place of the put off, or you don't change. And in his case, he says, you no longer get your meaning in the old way and get your sense of power in the old way. You get your sense of meaning out of being a generous person. To put off stealing, you've got to put on generosity. You've got to put on the satisfaction that comes from job satisfaction, knowing that I, the satisfaction of work well done, but beyond that, to know that I am taking the resources now, and I'm using those resources to really make a difference in people's lives. I'm changing people. I'm helping people. I'm ministering. I'm serving. I'm being generous. See, what Paul is trying to say is you cannot deal just by saying put off with something like stealing. You've got to put on a whole new lifestyle. You've got to go meet the needs in the new way. You've got to go underneath and not stop with just the putting off, but look and say, you have got to find a whole new way of living, and you have to put that on, or the put off won't last. It's like trying to clear away the ground, you know, with full of weeds. So you rake it up, and you get it nice, clean dirt, and then you leave it there. And instead of putting grass in, you just leave it there. grow back. It's inevitable. There's no other way for those, for the ground to stay fallow like that. It's not going to stay. If you don't plant wheat there, if you don't plant tomatoes there, if you don't plant corn there, if you don't plant grass there, you're going to get dandelions. They're just going to come up. You can't put off without putting on. Now, in fact, I can go further than that. There's a sense in which put off without put on is not just not effective. It's worse than not effective. It actually can create problems. Another way to say is it may not just... To put off without putting on doesn't just not improve things, but it makes things worse. Luke chapter 11, Jesus tells a strange parable about the man out of whom a demon is cast, but nothing is put in its place. Have you heard that? There's a place where Jesus talks about... He says a demon is cast out and it goes wandering around, comes back and finds out that the house is now cleaned and swept and more ready for occupation than before. Nothing has moved in in its place. So the demon gets six of its brothers and they all go back on in, Jesus says, and now the latter end of the man was worse than the former. What does that mean? It can mean a number of things. In this case, I'll apply it this way. There are ways... There's a sense in which by telling somebody to put off without giving them something in its place, by having a totally negative approach, can make you even worse than before. Or, for example, in some kinds of churches, especially in conservative churches, all the negative reaction, saying, the way I'm going to make you holy and unworldly, the way I'm going to keep you unspotted from the world, and the world is a bad place, sure it is. The world is not a geographic location in the Bible. The world is a state of mind. The world is a way of being... It's a state of mind, a framework of self-indulgence, of self-confidence, of licentiousness, of violence. That's what the world means in the Bible. And we want to keep people unspotted from the world. And so what we're going to do is we're going to keep them completely sheltered. The attitude of put off, just put off, and just stay away. Put yourself in a fortress. We'll keep you unspotted from the world because we won't let you watch any TV, we won't let you read any books, we won't let you see any movies, we won't let you see any of those people. There's an attitude of put off that actually does not put anything in its place. And these kinds of folks that are raised in these kinds of churches or raised in these kinds of Christian communities in which they're given the put off but nothing in its place, therefore there is no positive, supernatural, Christ-like character growing in them to resist outside infection. They're like the boy in the bubble. Hmm? You know, those kids that are born without any immunities at all, without any immunities. And so the child is not sick, but the child has to immediately be put in a bubble because the child has no way of resisting any outside infections. In the same way, there's an approach to holiness that says, we're just going to keep you away from any unholy influence at all. We're going to keep you away. That's like, in other words, we're not going to put something in its place, but we're just simply going to, in a negative way, keep you away. You know, one of the more interesting experiences I had coming to New York was meeting people who started coming to the church. And I kept thinking, well, who are you? What are you doing here? This is Manhattan. What are you doing? Well, first of all, I found out there are plenty of Christians who have been floating around and, you know, by nosing around, they found the church and it's great. And then there was also a whole lot of folks who had very little, if any, church background. And one of the great joys of these first 16 months or so here, 17, 6, 15, anyway, not too long, was the fact that people with very little background at all, not used to churches and certainly not used to this kind of church, would come and be intrigued and come back and find there's something here and continue to come back, in some cases, cross over the line into faith and, in other cases, just find themselves growing in the right direction and that's great. But then there was a third kind of person. You had the Christians and you had the people who were sort of, who knows, I'm not sure where I am and I don't know much about Christianity and I'm on my way. And then there's the third kind of person and I began to realize who they were after a while. I call them recovering Christians and I don't know, here, here's who you are and a lot of you know who you are. You were raised in a situation with only put-offs and no put-on. You were a boy or a girl in a bubble. You were told, don't do these things but there was nothing put in its place to resist any outside information. I don't know why anybody let you do it, you moved to New York. And you descended into darkness because you had absolutely no resistance to the infections. Not one. There was nothing positive in there. There was no put-ons inside. And you just descended into darkness for a long time, and you surfaced, and you came over here for whatever reason, and you started to say, am I a Christian or not? I was raised in a pretty, you know, Christian church, and I did all these things. The last eight years, I haven't not only set, really hardly set foot in the door of a church, but you should see what I've been doing, and I don't know why I've been doing it, and I don't know if there is a guide. Am I Christian or not? And the answer is, I don't know. And you certainly don't know. If you think you know, you're crazy, too. There's only one thing to do. It doesn't, I don't know what it is, but you know what you have to do, whether you're a Christian or not. You've got to come. You've got to come to him. You've got to do all these things. You know who you are, don't you? All those put-offs and no put-ons at all, that's worse in some ways, almost, than no appeals to holiness at all. Don't you think? In some ways, you're a lot worse off than the people who never really had any kind of Christian background at all. And listen, this put-off approach without put-on is not just something that Christians do. It's even something that non-Christians do, or just the world does. And in the 19th century, in the Victorian era, there was, and there still is, to a great degree, this approach. Put-off but no put-on. And so you come to a little, you know, a young boy, and you come to him and you say, stop crying. Don't cry. What are you, a baby? Be a man. Men don't cry. Stop that. And the kid, well, the demon of self-control has been cast out of him forever. Absolutely humiliated. But the seven demons are coming in. He's worse off than before, because here's a kid who either grows up, A, thinking, since I'm a man, I can't express emotions or weakness. That's better, huh? That's how he gets his self-control, huh? Or else, he thinks, because I experience emotion and weakness, I guess I'm not a man. You know, in the name of getting rid of the one demon of self-control, you put another seven in there. Putting off without putting on is lethal. But, the other side, putting on without putting off is extremely lethal, too. And one of the problems we've got today in your average modern city is all the emphasis on putting on without putting off. And I'll tell you why. It's because of the Victorian and the fundamentalist excesses. It's because of churches, and it's because of homes, and it's because of institutions, not just Christians, as I said, who put all that emphasis on put off. And as a result of that, we're afraid to tell anybody to repent. We're afraid to tell anybody to deny themselves. Look at, for example, let me just give you an example. For an example, all the emphasis is on positive. All the emphasis is on see yourself as a worthwhile person. Fill your needs. No talk about repentance. No talk about self-denial. No talk about discipline yourself for godliness. See, in the 19th century, you had the Victorian approach to divorce. And that is, never, ever do it. And if you do, you slime. You know, we might not even let you come to our church anymore, but if you do, don't expect to be elected to anything. You see, put off. If you have a divorce, what a sub-person you are. And now, all the books are saying, gosh, what happened? We've swung the other direction, haven't we? I read two books recently, The Divorce Revolution and a book called The Equality Trap, both written by what they call themselves second-stage feminists. And what they're saying is, we went to the other extreme. We said, the most important thing is not to deny yourself ever. Not to ever deny yourself. Not, when you have a need, you gratify it. See, put it on. We never tell anybody to put off. We never tell anybody, deny yourself, sublimate your desires, subordinate your needs to the higher good. We never tell anybody that. Remember, I think I used a couple weeks ago, a little clipping I found in a British newspaper once about a man who was paralyzed in an accident and he was confined to a wheelchair and his wife left him and he committed suicide. And afterwards, somebody interviewed her and she says, well, she says, don't make me feel guilty. I had a right to happiness. I've married a man that I'm happy with. You know, you only go around once in life, you've got to grab for all the gusto that you can. That would make a great commercial, wouldn't it? And you see, we've gone to the other side. Never deny yourself. Never ask people to change. Never ask people to sublimate or change anything. Instead, put on, do, do, all that you can be, see. Don't say, no, never say to people, deny yourself because Uncle Sam needs you. Never say, deny yourself. There's a higher good here and you've got to sublimate your needs and your interests for the higher good of your country. That kind of ad won't wash. Now you have to say, be all you can be. Put on, never put off. And of course, that's a response to the excesses of the put-offers, those awful put-offers. And a lot of us have been raised by put-offers and a lot of us have dealt with put-offers. But I say, to put on without put off is just as bad. And on the Christian side, and I have to say this quickly because I don't want people to think that I'm focusing on any one particular person or church, but there has been a movement in the 20th century that puts all the emphasis on put on and very little on put off. It's an emphasis I mentioned last week. It's the let go and let God emphasis. It's the emphasis that goes like this. The teaching goes like this. If you are struggling with a problem, don't do anything about it. Let God do it for you. Let go of it. Don't strive. Don't struggle. Just give it to him and let him deal with it. Now I want you to know, for a long time I listened to that and I kept saying, that sounds so spiritual, but I don't know how to do it. I mean, what does that mean? And the teachers would say, well, you just stop struggling. Stop struggling. All right, I'm going to stop struggling with the temptation to masturbate. Okay, I'm going to give that to God. I'm not going to struggle against it. I'm not going to do anything about it. Okay, 20 months later. Gee, this is kind of interesting. I'm not struggling against it. Does that mean I just do it? Well, I guess it means I just do it when I feel like it. I don't know. God's not taking it away. You know, it gets you pretty confused. Basically, this sort of teaching assumes that just as you can receive your salvation and you're pardoned by faith in a single action. You know, you say, Lord, by faith I take you as my Savior. And now I know my sins are forgiven regardless of how I feel. It's a once and done action. I take it by faith. There's a kind of teaching that says that's how you get your victory over sin, too. You just simply take it by faith. You say, Lord, now I'm giving you myself and now I know you've given me victory over all these bad habits that I need to change. I just accept it. Haven't you ever heard that teaching? Some of you surely have. Well, that can't happen. Because, you see, salvation is a once and done thing. You're pardoned once and for all. But the process of Christian growth is exactly that. It's a process. It is a process. You can't simply receive victory over things. Now, occasionally that comes, but boy, if you think that that's something that God owes you and that's the way everything always happens. There's no doubt in my life. One out of 50 bad habits sometimes just goes. I'm on a retreat and God really comes through in a particularly great way. And I say, Lord, you've just helped me with that thing. And it's gone. How great. Is that the way the Bible says that we should expect everything to go? What about Philippians 2, where it says, work out your salvation with fear and trembling? Work out. It's almost like, here are the chocolate chips. You throw them into the batter and you work them out into the batter. That takes diligent effort. It takes continual pressure. It takes movement. See, work out your salvation. God's given you the salvation. Now, you've got to work it out or, better yet, work it in to every part of your life. What about where it says in 2 Peter, chapter 1, verse 5, it says, give all diligence to add to your faith virtue and add to your virtue knowledge and add to your knowledge and so on. Give all diligence. Make every effort. There's no sense here of stand back and let God do it for you. Put on and put off. It doesn't say, let God put on and let God put off. It doesn't say that. It's something you've got to do. It's something you've got to put your back behind. You know, look, every day, give all diligence. Every single day, there's a battle going on for the center of your life. The phone rings, the newspaper comes in. There's messages, the answering machine. These things are thrust upon you. And what are you going to do? Are you going to let your life be run by all these outside pressures? Or are you going to run your life for God by saying, there's some things that I insist on. If it's more important for me to read the Bible than the newspaper, then I will read the Bible more regularly than I read the newspaper. You know, when you face all the basic duties, the hard process process of Christian growth, reading the Bible, praying it in, talking to other Christians about it, trying to do better. When you don't, when you fall down, picking up, repenting, and doing better the next day and doing a little. day. When you look at that, you say, I want to believe I can receive this all by faith at once. It makes you susceptible to that kind of teaching. That's not what the teaching is here. There's no put on without put off. There's a continuousness about it. Especially, be made new in the spirit of your mind. It's a continuous thing. It's a present progressive. It has to go on and on and on. When you look at the lives of the great men and women of history, look at Augustine, for example. I mean, there's a whole bunch of them. You could look at Luther and Wesley and Edwards, but there's dozens and dozens of them. You look at them, and you'll see that their lives were lives of order. They insisted on certain things. They insisted on the self-examination. They insisted on the prayer. They insisted on the time with God. They insisted on self-examination. They insisted on those things. When you read their lives, you say, oh, if only I could have their courage. If I could have their power. If I could have their joy. Well, heck, you've never insisted on these things. They're no different. They are the same high priest that you do. It's Jesus. I mean, of course you say, oh, but I've got so far to go. Oh, well, you know, an all-star third baseman doesn't show up at Shea Stadium one day and say, I played a game yesterday and I'm ready. I mean, I want to be an all-star third baseman. He knows it takes years. First Timothy, verse 2, pardon me, 1 Timothy 4, 7, discipline yourself for godliness. Discipline, the word gymnasdo again. The word that means get in the gymnasium, train yourself up, take the time, the effort. No put on without put off. Don't you see the balance, the incredible, gorgeous balance of the gospel? The put on, which is so critical. I'm a new creature in Christ. Yeah, I am a new creature in Christ. That great story that I love to tell, how about Augustine, who had lived this terribly debauched life, remember? And after he became a Christian, one of his old prostitute buddies came up and said, Hi, Augustine. How are you doing? You want to come home with me? And he just said, no, sorry, and walked away. You remember how that story goes? And she looked at him and she said, but Augustine, do you remember who I am? It's me. It's me. And he looked around and he said, yes, but it's not me. You've heard that story. Now, half of you didn't because you laughed. The other half did because you didn't laugh. What is Augustine saying at that point? He's putting on. I know who I am, lady. I'm not the same person. I am not my own. I'm bought with a price. I continually think about that. I melt myself with spiritual understandings of the glorious person that lives within me now. I melt myself with understandings of the honor of being a Christian. And I'm not going to besmirch that honor. I'm not going to take the blood of Jesus Christ. He died so I wouldn't do this dastardly deed. I'm not going to throw it back in his face. Like Joseph, when Potiphar's wife grabbed him and says, lie with me. And he says, how can I do this great sin and sin against God? He immediately thinks of who he is. He's putting on. But if you think that just thinking and just putting on and claiming who you are in Christ without the putting off, without the discipline, without the repentance, without the prayer, without that grinding out, putting on without putting on is dangerous. Putting on without putting off is dangerous too. Now, I want to look at the putting off in a way we couldn't look at it before. And I want to use a friend of mine as an example. Putting off. As wonderful as putting on is, putting off is really pretty neat as well. Putting off is an aorist tense. A-O-R-I-S-T. It's a Greek tense. It's referring to a single past action. Not a continuous process. Now, you said, wait a minute. What? It's not a continuous process. It's a single past action. Where it says, be made new in the spirit of your minds. That's a single past. That's a progressive tense. But what he says, put off and put on. He's talking about a single activity. Now, somebody says, well, you mean that's only done once? And the answer is no. In Romans 6, it says the old man is crucified. The old self is killed with Jesus. And yet, later on in Colossians 3, we're told to put him off. Even though he's dead, put him off. What Paul is telling you is this putting off is something you do have to do more than once. It is something you do continually. But every time you do it, it's a complete thing. To put off your old self is to renounce the old personality. The word, you know, originally in your old King James, it says put off the old man. And in your modern translations, it's put off the old self. It's a very strong term. It's trying to say you have got to get a whole new personality. You have to do things. simply that you look your life over and you say, well, here are things that are okay, because God says I can do them, and so I'll do them. And here's things that are not okay, and I have to stop them. So I'm not completely putting everything off. I'm just going to put some things off. No. Putting off the old self means everything goes. Everything. Now, what does that mean? Some of you are saying, gosh, my favorite color is green. Now what? Well, I think you look just fine in brown. And as a Christian, you ought to choose a new color. Is that what it means? No. No. Here's what it does mean. There's two parts of you. When you become a Christian, there's some things that you're going to have to change. They're unacceptable. And there's some things that your behavior is formally acceptable. The form of it's acceptable. But the content, the insides, even the motivation why you do it has to change. See, there are good things that need to stay in your life, but they have to be purified. It's the Abraham and Isaac principle. The Abraham and Isaac principle means that Isaac was a good thing. Abraham loved Isaac, but Isaac was more important to him than God. And God had to call him to sacrifice Isaac. And it wasn't until he was willing to say, okay, Lord, you first, Isaac second, that God says, okay, don't kill him. Now he's safe for you to have. The Isaac, something you love very much. Now Abraham was loving him in a whole new way. He was loving him for God. He was loving him after God. Before, you see, Isaac gave Abraham his meaning in life. It only makes sense, doesn't it? You know, Isaac came along when Abraham was how old? Wasn't he 90? Huh? You can just imagine an old man in the twilight years of his life. His whole life revolved around Isaac. Of course he loved him. And everything in the Bible says, love Isaac. Love your son. And of course he doted on him. But there were all kinds of other things that were being neglected because of Isaac. And Isaac was the light of his eyes. And Isaac created mood swings. If Isaac was happy with him, he was happy. If Isaac was sad with him, he was sad. He was more important than anything else. Isaac had to go on the altar. Isaac had to be transformed. And then there were other things, of course, in our lives that just have to be removed. And that means that every part of you does have to be made taken off. Every part has to be taken off. Every part has to be examined. That takes time. Now, I wrote down in here a little case study of a personal friend of mine. And I've met, when I was a pastor for 10 years in Virginia, I met some wonderful, wonderful people. And they're just completely different than you. Just totally and utterly. And I'm just so glad I had 10 years there. And one of the, and I'm really glad I'm going to have, I hope, 20 years here. You know, but, but you're really different. You're really different. Now, one of the things I thought found most interesting was to take blue collar, white, middle, middle age, middle class, working class, excuse me, southern males. And when they became Christians, to see what God did to them. Do you hear that? We're talking about white, working class, middle aged, southern males. Now, there's a culture. Everybody's got a culture. And there's a culture of the kind of person that I met in this small town in the south. This particular man had, somebody reminded me now, he had about an eighth grade education. But, let's just say he finished eighth grade. He probably had more like a fourth or third grade education. And he'd been a lifetime alcoholic. And he'd been a lifetime army sergeant. He was a lifetime, a career man in the army. But he was retired on disability when I met him. And he became a Christian in a very glorious way. And that's fun to talk about. But here's what's interesting. There were at least four aspects to his culture. Everybody like him. All the other guys who were 50 years old and had been born and raised in that town and were from that area. And they were blue collar, white, southern males. They had these, at least, they had a lot of characteristics. But I could think of four. One is frugality. These guys did not want to, you did it yourself. You never got somebody else to do anything for you. You were absolutely frugal. I'll never forget when the church manse, the house that we lived in, it belonged to the house, was leaking water furiously. And we had some people come by and say, well, that's because the foundation is cracked and you need to put new drain tile down there and new crushed rock and all that kind of stuff. And it'll cost you $7,000 because we have to get, because the foundation was something like 11 feet below actual ground level because the house was built up into a hill and all that kind of thing. about that, they said, 7,000, we'll do it ourselves. I said, sure, you're going to do it yourselves. And sure they did. A whole bunch of them from the church came over one Saturday, believe it or not, dug down all the way, 11, 12, sometimes 13 feet, all around the back of the house, put the new drain tile in, put the new crushed rock in, sealed the whole thing up, put it all back, replanted the lawn about two days. Cost them $400, $500 maximum to say, see? And that was the way they did it. And I'm not exaggerating at all. They built their own houses. There was a 50-year-old lady who used to take her Volkswagen car apart and put it back together again in her front yard just for fun. Very frugal. Nobody. You don't pay anybody else to do anything. They also hate specialists. They don't believe in specialists like you do, all right? Frugality. Secondly, hospitality. Hospitality, absolutely. One of the things I found out, that if you were going to just drop in on people, you just dropped in on people, you didn't call up. You know, if I would call up and say, hello, Mrs. Jones, this is Pastor Keller, I was thinking of coming by and seeing you. Well, sure. Well, come on. And of course, I found out that people consider that unbelievably snobby to call before you'd come. What are you, a privacy junkie or something? What's the matter? First of all, it was a way of showing. First of all, it put them off because they said, oh, gosh, I guess I can't drop in on him. I mean, he obviously expects me to call. I mean, well, la-dee-da. All right? Also, that proved that you were not just folks. You know what it means to be just folks? See, some of you are nodding your head. You've got to be just folks. Another thing I found out was if I called, then they felt like, oh, I guess you expect me to bake you a cake. And I found out you just had to come. You just came. You did not call up. That was considered unbelievably... And they were very hospitable. People in at the drop of a hat, have 20 people in for a meal any time. Oh, yeah, you're out there. Come on in. All right? Frugality, hospitality, didn't believe in privacy, didn't like privacy, didn't really approve of people who were into privacy. All right? They also had a tremendous scorn for education, didn't like education, thought people that read too much were pointy-headed. They themselves stayed away from books and made fun of people who did a lot of learning and education. And it was their defense about the fact they had a poor education. And fourthly, they were racist. They were baldly racist. They were blatantly racist. They were unapologetically racist. Now, Easley, as his name, came to Christ. And what I really admired was that he took a look at his life and he changed. First of all, did the frugality go? I'm afraid there's an awful lot in the Bible about that. Those people gave like you never saw. I think, you know, the statistics will show you that the less money you make, the higher percentage of money you give away. That's absolutely true. People who, across the country, people that make under $15,000 a year give away 3% of their income. And people that make over $100,000 a year give away 0.5% of their income. And that's just a general trend all over. Not only were these people incredibly frugal, but then they were extremely generous. They were tremendously hospitable, but it was completely reoriented. Totally reoriented. They weren't frugal in a mindless way and in a penny-pinching way because they became very, very generous. They reoriented their hospitality for evangelism, for taking in people who were needy. The kind of people they never would have taken in before. But now, you see, what happened was the motivation, even for the things that they kept, changed. I'm here to please God, not myself. On the other hand, the racism went. And not only that, but the scorn of learning. And I remember how he would work so hard, he taught himself to read because, hey, I'm a Christian now. And he would love to listen. And it was not unusual for him to put in 30 hours preparing for the Sunday school lesson that he would teach. Because what he had to do is he would get the Sunday school book and he would get the teacher's manual and he would underline every word he didn't know and then he would look up every single word in the dictionary. That took him a day or two, his wife told me. Another thing that would happen is then he would take and write everything out and he would read into a tape recorder everything he was going to say. And then he'd listen to it and then he'd do it again. So that on Sunday he was ready to teach. And he loved learning. I saw a lot of people who said they became Christians but they brought their culture right on in. Completely in to their Christian faith. They didn't get rid of their racism. Easily instantly realized, I can't be like this anymore. They didn't get rid of their scorn of learning. You see, what they basically did was they adapted Christ to their culture instead of adapting their culture and themselves to Christ. That's what I put down here. You see, in a new perspective, still doing was to please God. He had a whole different self-image. Now he did these things because he already knew he was acceptable in Christ. He didn't get his sense of self-worth out of conforming to the culture. He didn't give a rip about what his old drinking buddies thought about this and about that and about saying, look at that kind of person that you have in your home. He didn't care anymore because his self-image was no longer based on what his culture said, but it was based on what his Savior said. So even the things he was doing, he was doing for a different motive. And the things that he was leaving, he was leaving because in the past, the way in which he decided what was right and wrong was folk wisdom and the traditions of his culture and the traditions of his family and his own gut. And now it was the word of the king. If the word of the king said, stop it, he stopped it. I want to know whether you've put off the old self. You come with your culture and you've got all kinds of different cultures. You've got your biases. You've got certain attitudes toward money. You've got certain attitudes toward privacy. You've got certain attitudes toward sexuality, certain attitudes toward education. You've got a lot of attitudes. Are you willing to completely remake your personality? Are you willing to put off the old self? And that means taking a look at everything. And I mean everything ruthlessly. And the things that you continue to do, things that you know, hey, these are good things. The Bible says they're good things, but I have to do them. I have to put them on the altar. I have to reorient myself. So I'm doing them for a different purpose. They no longer can be my idols. They no longer can be my meaning in life. I have to do them with a new spirit. I have to do them for a new perspective. I have to do them with a new motivation. On the other hand, there's a lot of things that I have got to look at. Oh, I know that amongst my friends this is all right. But is this what the Word of God says? You've got your biases. You've got certain attitudes toward money. You've got certain attitudes toward privacy. You've got certain attitudes toward sexuality, certain attitudes toward education. You've got a lot of attitudes. Are you willing to completely remake your personality? Are you willing to put off the old self? And that means taking a look at everything. And I mean everything ruthlessly. And the things that you continue to do, things that you know, hey, these are good things. The Bible says they're good things, but I have to do them. I have to put them on the altar. I have to reorient myself. So I'm doing them for a different purpose. They no longer can be my idols. They no longer can be my meaning in life. I have to do them with a new spirit. I have to do them from a new perspective. I have to do them with a new motivation. On the other hand, there's a lot of things that I have got to look at. Oh, I know that amongst my friends, this is all right. But is this what the Word of God says?
