TITLE: How Do We Share Our Faith Now? Practices
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Missional Living
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-do-we-share-our-faith-now-practices-2/

============================================================

Now, for a person to go from no faith to faith, I think it takes at least four things. They're going to need four things, and I'm going to briefly talk to you about three, because the fourth one, Rebecca's going to give you a really great presentation on. But those four things are, you have to get their attention. As I try to say, they have to give sustained attention to thinking about Christianity. Secondly, there has to be some attraction, because people have to get to the place where they say about Christianity, it would be great if it was true. Why would they, there has to be at a certain point, you have to get a person to the place where they say, gee, that would be interesting, that would be great if that was true. And that's attraction. So they need attention, attraction, then demonstration, which is how do you know if it's true? And that's what I'm not going to talk about right now, because Rebecca's going to talk about that. It's what, if a person goes from paying attention to finding Christianity attractive, then it's natural for them to say, but how do I know if it is true? And therefore, you do have to answer some questions there. And then lastly, there's explanation. Well, what is the gospel itself? Let me just give you a couple ideas on those three, three of those four. When we talk about attention, how do you get people's attention? I've already hinted at this, I already said something about this in the Q&A. Ultimately, people are going to need relationship now. It means, and Abe also has talked about it, so I really can be pretty brief on this. You've got a number of, you've got a number of web, you might say, no, a number of relationship networks. There's the people you actually live with. And even there, in New York, there's the people in your building, and there's some people in your neighborhood. It's not necessarily, you know, the same, but there's the geographical network, people that live near you. There's the work network, people that you work with, or people in your field, even if it's not people in your actual company or business, but people in your field. A third area, of course, is interests. That could be hobbies, but it just means something that you get involved in doing. Maybe hobby, avocation. A third network, for some people, are kinship networks, so I have to admit that probably the average person in New York City is not living near their extended family. That's not always true, of course, and some of you are. But a fourth network of relationships are kinship networks, people who are your extended family and relationship. A was right in saying that one of the most important things to do is to choose one of those and ask God to begin to help you be more intentional in developing relationships there. And it's not real instrumental. That is to say, the way to get those relationships going is really just to be more regular and inhabit them. If you, for example, do the same thing in your neighborhood routinely, if you, for example, in my building, I have found out that if you wash your, you know, if you do your laundry at certain times on certain days, I've noticed there are other people who are there always the same time on that day. That's their day or one of their days to do it. It's not that hard to get to know them if you do that. But if you go to the store at certain times, if you take even walks at certain times, if you're regular, you end up seeing the same kind of people. What you really want to do in the very beginning is you want to be finding ways to just strengthen the relationships in one of those fields. You need to say, this is where I'm going to pray that God would open some doors just to become friends. And don't forget the motivation. The motivation in these relationships is really, on the one hand, to say, Lord, you have to open doors. If there's going to be an openness to talk about the faith, that's something you've got to do. But it's also, your motivation is actually to love people. Talking about your faith, this may sound strange, talking about your faith is really a means to an end. And what's the end? Loving them. In other words, you don't love them in order to share your faith. You share your faith in order to love them. Those are two very different motivational structures to the heart. If you're loving them in order to share your faith, in some ways, you have objectified them. They're objects, not subjects. They are people that you want to feel good about yourself because, hey, I'm sharing my faith. You don't love people to share your faith with them. You share your faith with them if you get the opportunity because you love them. And so what you want to do is you want to deepen relationships in one area. And the only way people are going to pay attention... a believer. And then number two, the moments come. Now what do I mean by the moments? A lot of you are saying, how do you get into conversations? I'm a little more passive maybe than I should be, but I wait for moments. And there's three kinds of moments once you have the relationship. The one moment I'll tell you, here's the easiest one, is when you see an article or something that you've read online or in the paper or something like that, and you say it raises questions that aren't necessarily directly about Christianity or about even religion, but they raise some pretty interesting questions. They kind of get you talking beyond just the, hey, what do you think of how the Yankees have done and that sort of thing. You're trying to get people to start talking about life issues and how do you what is the meaning of life and how do you make moral judgments and how do you what are the important things for us to be doing. One of the things to do is just to see something like that. Especially when you know it's going to be a kind of interesting just to give you an interesting article there was a an article a while ago in the New York Times called Has Trump Stolen Philosophy's Critical Tools? And it's written by a a guy who at the time was a PhD student in English, maybe still is an English PhD student in, because it was two years ago and we all know how the doctorates go at Duke and what he says here in the article he says this, he says for decades critical social scientists and humanists have chipped away at the idea of truth we've deconstructed facts insisted that knowledge is situated and denied the existence of objectivity the bedrock claim of critical philosophy going back to Kant is simple we can never have certain knowledge about the world in its entirety and now these ideas animate the work of influential thinkers like Nietzsche, Foucault, Derrida and they've become axiomatic for scholars in literary studies anthropology, sociology and from these premises philosophers and theorists have derived a number of related insights including this all facts are socially constructed people who produce facts scientists, reporters, witnesses so they do it from a particular social position and that influences how they perceive and interpret the world and therefore all facts are socially constructed we create them because they suit us and he says call it what you want relativism, constructivism, deconstruction post-modernism, critique the idea is the same truth is not found but it's created and making truth always means exercising power then he points out that this is what Donald Trump is doing and he doesn't like Donald Trump Donald Trump says well you have your facts but I have my alternative facts and he says wait a minute that's what we were told to do in the PhD program at Duke that when somebody came along and made truth claims you say ah all truth claims are relative okay he says entire PhD programs are still running to make sure that good American kids are learning the hard way that facts were made up that there is no such thing as natural unmediated unbiased access to truth that we're all prisoners of language that we always speak from a particular standpoint he says what do you say when Trump is actually doing that and here's what he says it's at the very end listen to this he says well here's the only thing he can say he says we need to recognize though that while all facts might be created and constructed not all facts are created equal some facts are better than others now okay and he says now here's the question how would you know if some facts were better than others unless there was an uncreated standard by which you're judging which facts are better than others so what he's actually trying to say is my own world view doesn't work for me now if you ask somebody else to read that and you just talk with them about it you don't have to be talking about Christianity by any means but you can actually say isn't that interesting he's trying to say he says well you know I think all facts are just created I don't believe there is such a thing as absolute truth out there but now I don't know what to do about this guy who I don't like and therefore I have decided that there must be some uncreated standards of truth which is what I just said didn't exist so talk about that I don't know what your friend would say about that it's interesting there's tons of these kinds of articles they happen all the time do you have your antenna up ask them to read this is not getting right into Christianity at all it doesn't even get close I don't think you have a great article. Number two is when people see a story that would be great if it was true, but it's only fiction. J.R.R. Tolkien wrote a wonderful, wonderful essay, a lecture years ago called On Fairy Stories. And he said, why is it that people love fairy tales? And he said, because deep in the human heart, we have a massively deep desire for several things. We're fascinated by all stories in which somebody escapes time. Or when they escape death. Or when they commune with non-human beings. Or when they experience, they cheat death and they experience love without parting. Or when good really triumphs over evil. So say in fairy tales, this is not how things actually happen in the real world. And yet in fairy tales, all these things are happening, and that's why we're so passionate for them. There are certain stories that just move us, even though they're not really true. Except what J.R.R. Tolkien points out, J.R.R. Tolkien points out, is if the resurrection of Jesus Christ actually happened, every one of those things will literally be true. You will escape time. You will escape death. You will know love without parting. You will commune with non-human beings. They call themselves angels, but we can call them elves if you want. You will see good triumph over evil. And there are places when someone's really moved by a story, which, in Christian terms, will literally come true. But in non-Christian, secular terms, it's just something you can pine for and then say it's just all, you know, basically it's rubbish. It makes us, we would love it, but it's just not true. Is there a place to talk about that when people are reading, watching those stories? Yes, there is. There's a place to talk about that. The last thing is this, and that is everybody's worldview, if it's not a Christian worldview, is like, and by the way, some of us at my age certainly understand what I'm talking about here. If you're wearing a set of clothes that's too small for you, because you have gotten too big, then when you move and it's too small for you, it either pinches or it rips. Everybody who's not a Christian has a worldview that actually doesn't fit reality. They have meanings in life. You know, my meaning in life is to get into a good school and be a doctor and really help people. But then what happens if you get injured and you can't become a doctor or whatever, or you can't practice medicine or whatever? In other words, everybody has a meaning in life that can't handle suffering. Or has a real strong moral sense, but doesn't really have to back, what that poor guy has Trump's stolen philosophy's tools, has a strong moral sense, but doesn't have a worldview to back it up. Doesn't have the moral sources for his moral ideals. And what it means to share your faith with people is to be near them and to like them and to love them and to have them like you and trust you and be around for when there's times for articles like that, stories like that, or when suffering comes into their life and they find their worldview actually pinches or rips. So be patient and love them. Here's the last thing I was going to say about the gospel itself. You say, well, how do I share the gospel? Well, I've actually talked to several of you already tonight about this. There are so many different ways to do gospel presentation. And yet, and I talked to you, you're not going to have a gospel presentation that works for Hindus and Muslims and, you know, secular white people. No. And yet, in the end, everybody is trying to save themselves. They don't call it that. Some people are going to church and hoping by living a good life that God will take them to heaven. Okay, that's, they are saving themselves. Other people are just throwing themselves into their career or romantic love or whatever. Everybody's trying to save themselves. And at some point, everybody will see they can't save themselves. And every other religion, every other philosophy says the way, once you fail to save yourself, they say, here's, we'll try another way to do it. Another way to save yourself. Get your life together. You know, go into therapy. Learn meditation. Do all these things. comes along and says, no, you never will be able to. You might do okay for a while, but you'll crash again. But Jesus Christ is the one founder of all the world religions who doesn't say I'm a prophet, come to show you how you can climb up to God. No. Jesus is the only founder of any major religion that says I am God having come down to save you. And the idea of salvation by grace that's it. That's the heart of it. That's what you have to get across. I mean it's old English and all that sort of thing, but Nathan Coles when he was converted by listening to a George Whitefield sermon in a field in Connecticut in the 1730s. He's got this very famous place where he wrote a, it's an interesting historical record but in his autobiography he talks about it and he says this, he says, my hearing him sinned gave me a heart wound and by God's grace my old foundation was broken up and I saw that my righteousness could not save me. Now see he's using traditional biblical language because he was listening to George Whitefield preach but basically every person who grasps the gospel has to say I've been living and making this into my salvation and it won't save me. I can't save myself this way. In fact I'm failing and I'm just feeling cursed in myself. But there is a way I believe in Jesus Christ who took the curse for me so that I can be received by grace. That's the essence. That's the essence of everything you're going to do. This is what you're trying to get across. Yeah, they're going to ask you a question about the Trinity. Yeah, they're going to ask you questions about hell. Go to your church and figure out ways of being able to talk about those things. But the essence of the essence of the essence is salvation is of the Lord. Jonah chapter 2 verse 9. Salvation is not from you. It's not partly you and partly God. Salvation is from the Lord. It's all from him. One of the great witnesses in history was the woman at the well that Jesus met in John chapter 4. And at the very end of John chapter 4 after he says to her woman, would you give me some water to drink? And she says he gets the drink of water and he says, I have water that if you drank it you would never thirst again. And she says give me that water and then he immediately says go bring your husband. Interesting juxtaposition. He's obviously talking about spiritual eternal life. The water he has is the water of eternal life. Ultimate satisfaction. Ultimate thirst assuaging. Ultimate joy. That's what I have. She doesn't understand that. She says, well give me this water that if I drink it I'll never thirst again. He says, well go get your husband. He says, I don't have a husband. No. He says you've had five husbands and the man you're living with right now is not your husband. Why does he say that? It's kind of harsh. No. He's trying to say you've been looking for the water of life. You've been looking for joy and satisfaction. You've been looking for a love that would heal you and finally make you feel like finally I'm okay. Finally life is alright. You've been looking for it and you've been finding it in men and I've seen all that you've done. And then he explains who he is and then she understands the water of life and so she runs into town and then leaving her water jar the woman went back into town and said to the people come see a man who told me everything I've ever done. Could this be the Messiah? Many of the Samaritans from that town believed in him because of the woman's testimony. He told me everything I ever did she kept saying. So when the Samaritans came to him they urged him to stay with them. Because of the words many more became believers. They said to the woman we no longer believe just because of what you said now we have heard for ourselves and we know that this man really is the savior of the world. Now maybe you don't feel that you are equipped to talk to your friends about Christianity. How equipped was she? Did she do any training programs? No. And look at what she said. Come see a man who told me everything I've ever done. What's that? You know what she's saying? She's saying he saw me to the bottom and he still loved me. He saw everything about me and he still offered me the water of life. He didn't say well my dear woman that's a pretty bad record. And if you want the water of life I'll tell you what if you could just straighten up and fly right and keep your nose clean for a few minutes can have another meeting and maybe then you'll be ready for the water of life and that's not what she heard come see a man that's sharing the faith look at this man and you know why he was able to give her the water of life freely without asking her to jump through a million hoops because on the cross he said I thirst see he got the thirst that we deserve he got the separation from the father that we deserve so that he could offer us the water of life freely and she didn't understand that but she understood grace she understood here's a man that looked saw me to the bottom and loved me to the skies come look at this man and look if she could do it you can too okay let's uh I tell you what I'm gonna I'm just I'm introducing Rebecca now I told you there is we have to explain the gospel I just talked about that attention attraction demonstration how do you know it's true explanation Rebecca's gonna come up Rebecca McLaughlin now and she's gonna talk to you about how can Christians be confident to talk about the truth of their faith Rebecca please Rebecca please Rebecca please Thank you.
