TITLE: How a Gospel Identity Grows
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-a-gospel-identity-grows-2/

============================================================

Right, let me finish the last time we were talking about two. We went through two of the four unique ways in which gospel identity is so great. And the question was, what's so great about gospel identity? And I was giving you four. And remember, the first one had to do with the unique coexistence of humility and boldness at the same time. The second one was the unique attitude toward feeling and emotion, that whereas traditional identities tend to say, ignore or even stifle, repress the emotions, the modern identity tends to almost idolize and let the emotions rule us, the feelings rule us. The gospel says that it's when you experience the love of God and when you give your love to God supremely. The other desires know their place, they're reordered, and actually there is great satisfaction and desire. Now the third, moving right along, the third I already mentioned, and even though it was kind of a mouthful, I want to get right to it. It's the gospel gives us a unique cultural flexibility because of gospel identity complexity. Now, here's what I mean. Actually, all identities to some degree have layers to them. There's a number of things. So for example, your ethnicity, your race, your vocation, your religion, they're all part of your identity, and that's true of virtually everybody. So, but they can be shuffled into different, they can be stacked in different ways. So for example, imagine a man who comes to an immigrant from Ireland in 1910, and he raises his family here. What is his identity? Well, let's just say in this case, you know, he comes, he's Irish, he comes to a pluralistic society, and so his Irishness in some ways becomes more visible here than it was in Ireland where everybody was Irish, and so what ends up happening is he finds, he gets a lot of pride out of being Irish. That's who he, he's Irish, and that's probably the thing he's most proud of. Yes, he's Catholic, but it's more as a function of part of being Irish. And yeah, he's a plumber, and he makes money for his family, but he's, you know, being a plumber is not a big part of his identity. Rather, being a plumber is the way he provides for his family, and Irish men provide for their family. See how that works? So really, the, you might say, the top identity factor is his ethnicity. But along comes his son. His son is born here, and his son grows up here. And his son goes to college, and then his son becomes a lawyer. And now his son, okay, the most important thing in his life, in his identity, is the fact that he's an educated man, and he's a lawyer, he's a professional. And that's what really makes him feel good about himself. That's where his self-worth is. That's where his identity is. He likes his Irishness. You know, he enjoys it, but it's nowhere near as important an identity factor as it was for his father. And maybe he doesn't go to church at all. So you see, it's been reshuffled. And yet they're all there, in a sense. They've been reshuffled. Now, by the way, the danger of a traditional identity is racism. But the danger of a modern identity, you know, the father had a traditional identity, but the son has a modern identity. The danger of the modern identity is not racism. It's workaholism or materialism. But what if Jesus Christ comes into somebody's life? What happens is Jesus Christ goes to the top. To the degree, as we're going to be talking here, right here, about to the degree that you work Jesus to the top of your heart and your life, he does become the supreme validator of your life. His love does become the supreme, you know, his love is the supremely important thing in your life. What it does is, it moves the, it demotes the other factors, but it does not efface them. Can I say that again? Again, it demotes them without in any way destroying them. Now, as they move down, what happens is they still inform your identity, but they no longer control you in the very same way. And that's, there are cults and there are, or I should say, there are religions and there are cultures that basically say it's all or nothing. That is to say, if you belong to our religion, then you have to eat in a certain way, you have to dress in a certain way, you have to come live with us rather than with your own family. In other words, in a sense, they flatten all the other aspects. So there really are totalitarian identities. is either two or more in the world, but we see it only in other cities. But we did not IND پili bin, and there's only one sub- targets but they Predator Because it's even if grenadily, they mean that's a pretty simple You had to know the Bible back, and over the surface, but there's incredibly important. In other words, in a sense, they flatten all the other aspects. So there really are totalitarian identities, and I'll give you an example of how, to some degree, the modern identity is totalitarian too. But see, gospel identity is based on grace, which means you don't have tons of rules. You don't have to eat this and dress in this way in order to please God. No, because you're already pleasing God in Christ. And so what that does is it creates a complex identity with Christ at the top, but the other parts are still there. You're still an Asian Christian or an African Christian. You're still a professional Christian or a blue-collar Christian. Those things still inform who you are. You're open to the insights of those identity factors without the idolatries of those identity factors. And so what does that mean? Well, so, for example, let me press this. Richard Baucom, in his great book, Bible and Mission, points out that 80% of Buddhists live in the Far East Asia. 90% of Hindus live in India. 80% of Muslims actually live in a band, you know, from, you know, across the top of Africa and Middle East over to Indonesia. But Christians are distributed all through. I mean, Christians are almost equally distributed across Africa and Latin America and Asia and North America. And he says, why? He says, because Christianity is the most culturally flexible of all religions. Because it's an identity based on grace, you do not have, it doesn't, say, flatten all the other or suppress all the other ethnicities. And, by the way, if you don't mind me bringing up a sensitive topic, there is certainly a sense in which if a black Christian has a white Christian come to them at Redeemer, say, and say, you know, I don't even think of you as black anymore, which is supposed to be a compliment. It's a way of saying, actually, the fact that you are black really shouldn't. It's basically saying the fact you're black shouldn't actually inform your identity. And the fact that it's not there, in my mind, is a plus. Well, it isn't a plus. I mean, the fact is that your race and your class and your nationality, all those things, for a Christian, they are part of who you are. You're a particular kind of Christian. There are different kinds of Christians. That's the reason why for this cultural flexibility. The Christian gospel identity is not totalitarian. It doesn't efface the other aspects of your identity, and yet it demotes them because you're a Christian first and you're everything else second or third or fourth. An example of how the modern identity can be more totalitarian, Laman Sane used to teach at Yale, African, Gambian, Christian, tells a story, some of you have heard me say it before, I've just never gotten over it. He says, you know, he says, at the essence of being African is you believe in spirits. You believe in the supernatural. You believe this world is both natural and supernatural. So you believe in spirits, good spirits, bad spirits. That's intrinsic to being African. He says, but now if you go and you get a scholarship to Harvard, you go to Harvard, you know what they're going to say? They're going to say, great, we're all into cultural diversity. You know, wear your African dress and eat your African food. But by the way, there are no spirits. Everything has a scientific explanation. There's no good spirits. There's no bad spirits. In other words, Laman Sane says, we want your cultural diversity superficially, but we're going to destroy the heart of your Africanness and make you basically a European. But he says, the heart of Africanness is we believe in spirits, but as a result, that can lead to fear and superstition. And Christianity comes along and says, let's take a look at the Bible. It opens the Bible and says, look at what all the Bible is talking about. Spirits. There's spirits. There's good spirits. There's bad spirits. There's angels. There are demons. Yeah, they're out there. But Jesus Christ has triumphed over them. And if you're in him, you know, he defeated them on the cross, Colossians 2. And if you're in him, you don't have to be afraid of them. And Laman Sane says, you know what that does? He says, the modern identity will turn Africans into Europeans, but Christianity will turn you into a renewed African. But you'll still be an African Christian. You won't be an Asian Christian or an Anglo Christian. Don't you see the flexibility that comes from the complexity of gospel identity because it's based on grace? And lastly, there's a, I talked about the unique openness to difference that gospel identity creates. Now, this ought to be not just a whole talk, and it's got to be about five minutes right here. It ought to be a whole conference. But let me, I've alluded to it, and fortunately, my wonderful panelists, and I've got three more wonderful panelists coming along, have actually pulled out a lot of stuff already here with great questions. But I've, so I've alluded to it. on performance always means that if your identity factor is your race, if your identity factor is your profession, or even your morality, then the way you feel good about yourself is you say, I'm moral, or I'm a member of this great race, or these are my politics, something like that. What that means is automatically when you see somebody without your identity factor, since you've made that identity factor important to your goodness, in fact, crucial to your goodness, when you see somebody without the identity factor, they have to be bad. If you're a Christian, though, and you have a received identity, not an achieved identity, then you are absolutely secure in God's love. And it's not because you're a better person, a more moral person, a more hardworking person. It has nothing to do with your race, your pedigree, or anything. So if you meet a person who's not a Christian, in fact, they oppose Christianity, there is no reason for you to conclude that they may not be a better people than you. They may be more moral. They may be better parents. They may be more self-controlled. Why? Because you're not saved because you're moral or self-controlled or a better parent. Not at all. So there's absolutely no ground for you to feel superior to them, or no need to. You also don't need to bolster your sense of self-worth by saying, I'm not like them. And therefore, and I've mentioned this a couple times, if you're a Christian, if you're a Christian and you're a Democrat, or if you're a Christian and you're a Republican, and you absolutely pretty much hate the other side, then your politics actually have pushed Jesus out of the top. Jesus is not at the top. You know, there's a lot of, you know, I said there's layers to everybody's identity. And Jesus is not up there. Because if he was up there, you would see the other side as being mistaken. You might even be irritated. But you see, they're not identity factors. You're not taking your identity from your politics. Same thing with race. If you actually find certain races, certain groups, you say, oh, those people. I don't like those people. I don't want to be around those people. I'm not saying you're not saved. I know this is hard to do. Because you're not saved by, you know, being open-minded. You're saved by grace in Jesus Christ. But you are not, that's not a gospel identity at all. In other words, your race is too high up. Jesus is not at the top. He's not the main identity factor. See that? Ah, but what happens? Oh, gee. What happens is, if Jesus is at the top, then again, I'll be brief here, because you actually got this from me last night and today. Hey, if I, as a white man, have a modern identity or a traditional identity, how am I going to really look up to a poor, single mom who's African-American, you know, in some poor part of the city? How am I going to look up to her? I can't. Why? If I, whatever my, if it's traditional or modern identity, my identity factors, she doesn't have any of them. She's got none of them. How can I respect her? I might pity her, but I'm not going to respect her. But if we are both Christians, she's a sister in Christ, and my highest identity factor is the love of Christ and faith in Christ, and I see she's actually got a better prayer life than me, which is really not that hard. Then I'm going to say I need to listen to her. And then she's not going to just tell me things because we're, you know, brother and sister in Christ. I'm going to be able to respect her. She's going to tell me what it's like to be a single African-American mother, poor. In a neighborhood in New York, and I'm going to get it. In a way, I would never have if we didn't have that common bond in Christ, which means she's turning me into something that this society needs. You know who it is? I'll tell you in one second. John chapter 13, Jesus says to Peter, you know, Peter, I'm about to die, and when they come and take me away, you're all going to fall away. What does Peter say? He says, they may fall away, Lord, but I will never. Okay? So, and then, by the way, when the soldiers, you know, come up to arrest Jesus, he gets out his sword and cuts off one of their ears. Why? Because Peter thought he had a Christian identity, maybe, or a gospel identity. He had a traditional identity. How so? His identity was not based on Christ's love for him. His identity was based on his love for Christ. What he was saying is, Lord, you know these other disciples? They don't love you like I do. But I love you more than anybody else, and I will be brave for you. Now, if your identity is based on your commitment to Jesus, you see how subtle this is, Christians? Christians? You see how subtle this is, away too. You're going to deny me three times. Never. So he looked into his heart, and he couldn't see the cowardice that was there. He obviously was a coward. He couldn't see it. Why? Because when your identity is based on being brave, you cannot look into your heart and see the cowardice that's there. You screen it out. You've got to be so secure in God's love in Christ if you're ever going to be able to know who you are. You're never going to know who you are. It's too traumatic. If your identity is based on being a good Irish father or a great lawyer or a hardworking person or a moral person or someone who's sold out for Jesus Christ, you're blind. You will be blind because your identity is not in Christ. It's in something else. And so, first of all, it blinds you. And secondly, it makes you hostile to anybody who doesn't have your commitments. You want to cut off their ears. You know? Peter failed because he didn't have a gospel identity. But you don't have to fail because in Christ, if you have a gospel identity, you become one of the few people in this world who doesn't want to cut everybody else's ears off. See, that's what I need to be. That's what you need to be. That's what the world needs. It needs people whose identity can handle difference. And if you get, if you live into the gospel identity, you will have that now. Now, how do you get there? And that's what we do now. How do we get there? Hmm. Well, let me just tell you, first of all, I know that somebody's going to say, you're taking too much pressure off of us. But John Newton, in one of his letters, he was a great, you know, he was the hymn writer. He wrote Amazing Grace. He was an 18th century Anglican pastor. He was a great pastor. And he wrote many letters. In one of his letters, he says, all Christians are like people who go out and do their business in the rain. Even if you put on your rain hat, even if you put on your umbrella, you know, you always get wet. Right? No matter how well, you always get wet. Now, if you actually just run out in the rain, you'll be soaked in the skin and you'll catch pneumonia. But he says, no matter what, you're going to get wet. And he was trying to say, there's no way for a Christian to live in this modern world and have a pure gospel identity. I mean, if you really, really, completely, remember what an identity is? If you totally trusted in Christ and you let no one but God himself through his word be your decisive validator, if you always sense the reality of his love, why would you ever lie? Why would you ever have a problem with criticism? Why would you ever have inordinate desires for things? I mean, you'd be perfect. And nobody's got that gospel identity because we're all out in the water, in a way. We're all getting wet. So everybody's got, to some degree, in this world, the old identity and the new. That's why Paul says in Ephesians 4, 22 to 24, put off the old self, put on the new, which means formation is basically the process of catching yourself living out of the world's identities and deliberately working yourself, working Christ to the top of that, of the layers of your identity factors so he's supreme. How do you do that? One would be to immerse yourself in the various themes. This is going to be really, truly 60 seconds. There are many themes in the Bible that we preachers and pastors and teachers need to be opening to our people and showing them how they are answers to the modern identity narrative. So, for example, there's the image of God. Martin Luther King, Jr., Dr. King, one of the main ways in which he argued for equal rights for all people was on the basis of the image of God, that we are all made in God's image so we're equal in infinite value and equal value. The doctrine of adoption, that for those who received him, who believed in his name, he gave rights to become children of God who were born not of a man's will, you know, but of God. And the Bible actually talks about adoption as naming. That's all about identity. Every time you baptize somebody, you baptize them into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. What does that mean? That's identity. That's an identity change. When you baptize somebody, you're calling them into an identity change. I mean, what's the name? That's your identity. And so what it's trying to say is your real name is your believer. You belong to him. So adoption is a very important theme. The image of God is a very important theme. Calling is a very important theme. Ephesians 2, chapter 2, verse 10, says God has prepared good works for you to walk in. Every one of us has a set of gifts and talents, things that we can do. And when he says that, when Paul says that, God has prepared good deeds for us to walk in. I believe he's saying... show you your uniqueness. There are certain deeds that only you can do. There are certain hands that only you can hold. There are certain hearts that only you can open. Because of your uniqueness, your skills, your background, your ethnicity, your gender, your experience. There are some people that only you can help. And it takes all of your life for you to see all of the ways in which God has equipped you and what he's called you to do in this life. So calling and adoption and the image of God and even discipleship. You have to lose yourself to find yourself. What is that? That doesn't sound modern, does it? It's not. And yet you do find yourself through losing yourself. What does that mean? That's discipleship and that has to be explored. So there's many ways in which we have to immerse ourselves in biblical themes. But we do it through practices. And those five practices, I'll name them because you've just been getting training in them. But I would like to give you a little higher level understanding of how practices work to show you how the world is giving you a modern identity through practices. The thing that actually captures your heart, that shapes the things you love most, and therefore shapes your identity, are the things that capture your imagination, the things that capture your attention, and the things that are reinforced by your community. Imagination, attention, community. These are the three ways you get formed. Identity is formed in you. What do I mean? Well, in imagination, we've been talking about this. You actually don't, I mean, you know, I can put bullet points up here and you can say, oh, that's very clarifying. But the fact of the matter is music, narratives, images, these are the things that capture you at the heart level. Those are the things that grab you. Have you not noticed, I could tell you to, a lot of the hymns we sang here are very old hymns, even though some of them are put to quite a modern tune in some cases or certainly a modern beat. But they're very old hymns. And those of you who are older like me, you've been singing these things for years. And here's the one, I can just tell you this, if I'd only ever read those things as poems, I wouldn't be able to recite them to you. You know, when I'm in trouble, when I'm in pain, when I'm dying, I'm going to remember hymns, aren't you? Yeah, you are. Why? Because they capture your imagination. They've shaped your heart. They've shaped your loves. Why? Because music captures the imagination. The words, by and large, tend to, you know, just capture the reason. But the music captures the imagination. Also, images, poetry, of course, you know, language that's filled with imagery also captures the emotion. And, of course, story captures the emotion. Okay? So, imagination. Secondly, attention. Whatever is repeated and repeated and repeated and repeated, that is what's going to shape your heart. It's repetition. And then thirdly, we talked about this, again, my great panels were always drawing me out, sociology of knowledge. And that is, you tend to really become like the people you hang out with. That you're much, much, much more of a relational being than modern culture wants you to believe. The modern culture wants to say, you are the product of your personal decisions and choices. The reality is, you are just hugely affected by the people you hang out with, especially the ones you admire. And so, if you're immersed in a particular community, if your attention, no, listen, if X is coming to your heart through music and through narrative, if X is something that you are looking at and thinking about repetitively every day, if X is something that all of your best friends and the people you love the most are trying to work into their lives and talking about, then X is your identity. There it is. Now, how does the modern world shape your identity into a modern identity through practices? Well, let me give you two or three. I'll just give you two. Okay? One is, how does social media work? First of all, it takes up all your attention. You know the Benedictine monks have, in a monastery, they actually, it's brief, but they get through the Psalms every, all 150 Psalms every week. Did you know that? Because seven times a day, they chant or read the Psalms. So, they get through 150 every week. You say, wow, that's amazing. Well, yeah, it's seven times a day, but they're not long. You know, they can be 15 minutes, 20 minutes, a half an hour. They're not long. But guess what? You can get through 150 Psalms a day. You know, it used to be 30 or 40 years ago, people said, I don't have time to pray. do that sort of stuff. It's a busy world, and I felt a little sympathy. No more. It's over. I see you on the phones. I see me on the phones. I see me on the phones. Do you know what that is? That's Benedictine. That's, you know, it's seven times a day. I mean, but what are we getting? We're getting pictures of consumer goods all the time, or beautiful bodies so that you feel terrible about yours. So, you know, social media is catching all your attention. It's capturing your imagination with the stories we've been talking about of how the only really great thing to do is to move from a traditional identity to a modern identity. identity, it's showing you consumer goods. You see how it's shaping you? Of course it's shaping you. But here's the other thing. Pornography. May I just say? And I know this isn't just a male problem, but nevertheless, you know, being a male, knowing men, I guess I'm thinking more of you guys for a moment. But here's the point. Do you know what pornography does? Now, I haven't even talked about this until this second, which is kind of, isn't it amazing? We've gone this far in any Christian conference without talking about sex, really. But let me just tell you, in modern identity, sex is a way of self-fulfillment. In the Christian, the gospel identity, sex is a way of self-giving. And it's a way of creating a covenant that lasts forever. And it's a way of giving not just your body, but your entire life to somebody else, which is complicated. What pornography does is it literally glorifies sex's fulfillment. There is no friction. Basically, it's just like, I don't have to worry about this person, you know, dealing with this person in a relationship with this person. These people are just, they're beautiful, and they're just coming at each other. And what does that do? That's imagination. It's repetition. And what it does is it forms a modern identity automatically. It makes you very impatient with real relationships. It makes you very impatient with covenants. I mean, it's enormously formative. So what we have to do is we have to take our practices, devotion, Bible and prayer. I was very glad that the last panel brought out the fact that unless you really understand the Word of God, you trust it, which takes some thinking, and you have to use it, the Word of God is powerful. It does have a life to it. It's living. And it can really truly, God really can speak to you through it. And, you know, your heart might say this, and the world might say this, and if you know how to immerse yourself in the Scripture, then you really will hear God saying, you are my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased. You know, that's what God said to Jesus to empower him. And that's essentially what God says to us. And have you heard that? That comes through what? It comes through devotion. It comes through preaching in the worship service. It comes through accountability, where people are bringing, you're coming together. You see, the Christian practices are things that you have got to make at least as pervasive in your life as social media. Otherwise, you won't have a gospel identity. But as much repetition, as much imagination, let me just end like this. Brian Rosner is an Australian theologian. Has written a great new book. It just came out this year. And so my guess is most of you would not have heard of it. And it's called, it's called Known by God, Yeah, Known by God, A Biblical Theology of Personal Identity. Known by God, A Biblical Theology of Personal Identity. By Brian Rosner. And it's the best single book I've seen, and it's very accessible, on all the themes about personal identity in Christ. And at the end, he makes a list, which is not quite our list, but when I go through it, you'll see that it's the same list. He says, how do you live into your identity? How does it become more and more true? And up there at the top of your, you know, it really is the top factor in your identity. And he says, do these eight things. He says, number one, get baptized. Now, I know that probably shouldn't be one of our practices here, but the fact of the matter is, you do know that getting baptized, what is getting baptized? It's a formative practice, in which you're identifying with a community, you're taking vows to them, they're taking vows to you, and you are being baptized in the name. It's very formative. If you do it, if a church does it right, if a church understands what baptism is, he says, get baptized. It's very much an important practice and way to develop a gospel identity. Number two, he says, attend worship. He calls them family gatherings. If you want to feel like part of the family, you need to go to family gatherings. Number three, sing the faith. We've been talking about. words. I actually wish we could just sing more words because there's so many things in the Bible or there's so many truths about gospel identity that I would love to see sung. And by the way, you need to sing them, not just watch the people singing them, all right? Got it? You need to sing them. In other words, if you can't remember them, they're not forming you, just to let you know. Number four, say the creed or the creeds. These are ancient summaries of biblical truth and they are, you know, probably many of you know the Apostles' Creed by heart, but you probably should know the Nicene Creed by heart, which you probably almost certainly don't. And in other words, say the creeds. Number five, take communion. Now, I don't have time to go into that, but there is nothing more formative than communion. Because it's not just like the sermon, which is all word. It's also tactile. It's also, it's also like it's incarnate. In fact, our theology says that in a sense, the Lord's Supper is essentially a, you know, it's still the word. It's still the word coming to you, but it's coming to you in a concrete form, the bread and the wine. Take communion. Number six, read and hear the Bible all the time and put yourself in the story. Read and hear the Bible all the time. Immerse yourself in the Bible. Do not read the Bible once a day. Learn to love it. Learn to let it speak to you. Find out how to study it. Number seven, pray to your heavenly father and remind yourself that he's your father. And number eight, he says, live the gospel. And, you know, I got to that and I said, oh, what's that mean? He says, oh, it's very simple. He says, every day, think out if I believe that I was a sinner saved by grace, the costly grace of Jesus Christ, and I was a loved child, how would my emotions and my actions be different than the way they are now? C.S. Lewis said, to be loved by God, delighted in as an artist delights in his work, or a father and a son. It seems impossible, a weight or burden of glory, which our thoughts can hardly sustain, but so it is. Glory means good report with God, acceptance by God, response, acknowledgement, and welcome into the heart of things. That's the gospel. The door on which we've been knocking all our lives will open at last. Okay, let me pray for just a second, and then we're going to move on to the next section. Our Father, we do ask that you would remind us we are your children, so we need your help, and we will never, ever enjoy the riches and the unique glories of this identity you've given us without your help, and yet we have much to do. And we pray that as a family of churches, the Redeemer churches would really be very, very good, not just at winning people to Christ, but forming them into people with a gospel identity.
