TITLE: How to Handle Trouble
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 1:6-9
TOPICS: Doctrine Sanctification Suffering
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-to-handle-trouble/

============================================================

I think the most important reason to take a moment upon occasion to think about what God did to bring Redeemer about is so that we don't show him contempt. I mentioned this in the morning service, and I've put it in a little insert that's in your bulletin that I hope you might take a look at and actually use in a spiritual way and use in your own devotional life maybe this week. If you're a guest or you're a visitor, Redeemer, you're not going to do that, but if you've been part of Redeemer, I'm hoping that you will discipline yourself to think about how God put Redeemer together and then to use that to thank him for it and to renew our commitment to what we originally were called together to do and to also, by reminding ourselves of the miraculous nature of our existence, it gives us the dynamic we need in order to face the future. If we forget, if we stop being grateful for the church, not only will we start to complain, I do this myself. Instead of remembering what a miracle the church is, it's easy for me to get up every morning and say, there's this wrong with the church and there's that wrong with the church and what are we going to do about it? And if I stand back and look at the right end of the microscope, you know, stand back and say, look at the amazing thing that God has done here, then it empowers me and it will empower you for the future. Very, very important. One other thing I think is important to remember. This is our fourth anniversary. It seems like a long, longer time than four years, doesn't it? But it has not been. And we're entering into a new phase. We always will be. There's a place where, oh, I think it's in the, let me see if I can find it here. I was, this summer, as some of you might tell by my allusions, various references. I reread one of my favorite old books from the 60s. I read in the 60s, The Lord of the Rings. And there's a great place where one of the heroes dies. He's a great king. And when he dies, I can't seem to find it. When he dies, no, here it is. A phrase that I've never forgotten. It says, when he dies, it says, then a great beauty was revealed in him so that all who looked on him saw that the grace of his youth, the valor of his full manhood, and the wisdom and majesty of his age were all blended together. So he became an image of splendor. That's interesting. When he died, suddenly the grace of his youth and the valor of his manhood and the wisdom and majesty of his age were all blended together and there was this great beauty. What's so insightful about that is, in this world, being in time, you never are able to blend all of those strengths together at any stage of your life. As I was saying to the folks after the four o'clock service, do I miss being 21 years old? Do I miss it? Well, I'm, you know, I miss aspects of it. I miss my stamina. I miss my waistline. I miss my hair. I miss a lot of those things. But I do not miss the foolishness, the lack of perspective that, you know, in other words, I miss the grace of my youth, you know. There was something I had that's missing, but it got out of the way as it went something else is here. And I'm not really a young man anymore. I'm not really an old man anymore. So I'm here in the center. And eventually there's things I will have as an old man that I don't have now. That's the way it is in time. That's the way it is to exist in the world. You have to lose one trait in order to gain another one. And only when Jesus comes back, you know, only when that happens, it'll all be blended together. In heaven, the grace of your youth and the valor of your full adulthood, you see, and the wisdom and majesty of age will be blended together. But that never, never happens here. Now that means that we will never be a young church again, a really young church. We will never have a lot of the things that only a new, young, unformed church, everything happening kind of in a crazy, spontaneous way. Everything happening in an informal way. We will never get that back. And there's a side of us that says, thank goodness. And there's another side of us that says, oh, well, that's just the way it is. There are things in the future that this church will be capable of doing in your life and in this city that the young church never could do. And yet we're going to leave some of that behind and we'll never get it back. Why? That's the way things are until Jesus comes back. When the grace of our youth and the valor of our adulthood and the wisdom and majesty of age will all be blended together. So what I say to you is don't mourn the past. Instead, realize that if we remember the miracle of our past, if we remember the miracle of what God did, in some ways I remember it as well as anybody because I continually was told by person after person that this was not going to work. what happened, we also realize that God wants to turn us into something else, something that we didn't used to be, and therefore something that can get things done that the young church never could. I don't know what that is yet. We're moving into adulthood, so you lose something. But you gain a whole lot of things. And ultimately, as you know, I just speak, since a lot of you haven't reached my advanced age yet, I'll just speak for the others of my generation. You do miss your hair, you do miss your waistline, but you never want to go back. You never want to go back. And the same way as a church, we're moving forward, we're looking to see what great things God has in store for us. What are we going to be looking back at our 8th anniversary and our 10th anniversary? I don't know. But I know there's things that we will be capable of because we're growing, because God is maturing us, because we're walking with our Savior. So it was great to hear these testimonies, and let's spend a little bit of time thanking God for what he's doing and offering a prayer to him. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for the miracle of our past. Those of us who are believers, those of us who sit here with faith in Jesus Christ, we would not forget that that is an absolute miracle. That's an intervention from the outside that you accomplished in our hearts. Otherwise, we would not be able to believe. And we pray that right now you would let that be a fresh thing right now to us, that it would dawn on us again how great you were to give it to us. Father, all of us would have to say our lives have been drastically changed by this community that you established here. Drastically changed. Our lives have been changed forever because of what you've done here. We thank you for it. Forgive us for taking it for granted. Forgiving us for taking it as routine. We pray that you might make us so grateful for it that the thought of it would give us a powerful, grateful joy that would propel us through our day, our week, and our years. Father, I thank you for the people like Chris and Tom who have been moved by the church to care for the city even more deeply. I thank you for people like Steve who, through the church, have actually found that Jesus is the Messiah. I thank you for the people in the future. I thank you that Tom and Chris and Steve are just forerunners of what we pray to be a vast army of people like them. I pray that they're just the first fruits of huge harvest of Christians who get deeply enmeshed in the life of the city of people who don't believe, who come to embrace Jesus as their Savior and Lord. We pray that they'll just be the first fruits and that you'll make us into something new. You'll be continually recreating us. Make us an instrument of your peace in this place. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen. Let's take a look at, we're going through the book of 1 Peter, and today we get to chapter 1, verse 6, 7, 8, 9. Let me read it to you. I'm just going to cover it. We're going through the book of 1 Peter consecutively. And I mentioned before that the theme of Peter, the whole book of 1 Peter, is really about how a Christian can face troubles and suffering in such a way that it turns you or me into something splendid instead of crushing us. And let me just show you that this passage actually gets into the heart of the teaching of 1 Peter. Chapter 1, verse 6 to 9. In this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials. These have come so that your faith of greater worth than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire, may be proved genuine and may result in praise, glory, and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed. Though you have not seen him, you love him. And even though you do not now see him, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy. For you are receiving the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls. This is God's word. As we said before, the great theme of Peter, you can actually see in verse 11 of this chapter. Peter, in verse 11 it says, it just refers to God. would follow. And that's, there it is in a nutshell. In the Christian life, suffering and glory are inextricably bound up together. In the Christian life, suffering and glory is inextricably bound up together because our great forerunner, our great pioneer, our Savior Jesus Christ, came to glory through suffering. And as a result, that is the pattern for all of us. A servant is, servants, you are not above your master. And therefore, suffering and glory is inextricably bound together and there's all kinds of very profound principles that really distinguish Christianity from the way almost anyone else looks at suffering. The Buddhist and the Eastern folks look at suffering as an illusion. And you might say Western, the Western secular culture looks at suffering as an absolute unmitigated curse. And Christianity looks at it as not an illusion, something extremely real, much more realistic than Eastern religion. But on the other hand, far more hopeful than Western secularism. Unique. How can suffering and glory relate in your life? That's what 1 Peter's about. And the reason sufferings and glory are bound up together is because of Jesus. This book, which is, I always recommend her books, Elizabeth Elliott, a friend of ours, and somebody, by the way, who came here and spoke on our first anniversary. Anybody remember that? The first year we had a birthday party, she came and spoke, packed the place out. She was great. Everybody wanted her to be their pastor instead of me. So it was a close shave. We didn't put it to a vote on that day. Anyway, she was here. She's written a couple of books on suffering. This one's called A Path Through Suffering, and I'd always recommend most anything she writes. But she came up with this guy named Edward Shalito. Edward Shalito, evidently, spent a lot of time studying a number of different religions to find out what the truth was, and he became a Christian. And the reason he became a Christian was because he saw this tremendous difference between the various religions when it came to suffering. And he wrote a poem. It's a pretty long poem, but the last line, or the last stanza, goes this way. Here he's talking about the various gods of the various religions, and this is what he says. It's a pretty long poem. Do you see what he's saying? Do you have wounds? There's only one kind of God. There's only one religion that has a God. There's only one God that has wounds that can speak to your wounds. There's only one God who's been through it. In fact, and here's the irony of the thing, it's only through wounds, ordinarily, that you can appreciate his. And it's because of his wounds that your wounds have meaning. His wounds speak to your wounds. You watch what he did. You see what he went through for you. And then and only then have you got a framework for it and a power to deal with your own. But to our wounds only God's wounds can speak. And not a God has wounds, but thou alone. Now, think about that, hmm? The Eastern religions, wounds, suffering is an illusion. We talked about that this morning. Just imagine, you know, David is able to look at God and call him my God. Imagine a Muslim calling Allah my Allah. It just wouldn't work. Imagine a Buddhist talking about the great all soul. I'm calling it my all soul. It just wouldn't work. And here's one of the reasons why. There's an intimacy. There's a sense in which God is ours and we are his. Because we both have wounds. You know, that place in Henry V where he's saying, we few, we happy few, getting all the guys ready to go out there and, you know, kick butt in Agincourt, see? You know, get out there and do it. But there's a great line. He's the king and he's looking at all these people around him. And they're all common men, you see. It was back in the 14th century. So he's a king and they're commoner. And he says, we few, we happy few, we band of brothers. For he who sheds his blood with me this day. vile this day shall gentle his condition. You know, you're the king and you're just a, I'm a king, you're the commoner but we're going to shed our blood together. You see, to our wounds only God's wounds can speak and he's the only God. No God has wounds but thou and thou alone. Now, that's the point of first Peter. We have a God who through suffering came to glory and we have therefore our own path that through suffering and only through suffering do we come to glory as well. Now, let's take a look and see. Now, let's pull the verse apart and see what it teaches us. There's no one passage in the Bible that gives us everything we need to know about this wonderful and profound theme. But we learn an awful lot right here. First of all, let's take a look. Verse six, in this you greatly rejoice. In what? Here's a quick one. The first thing we learn here is that you will never be able to get through suffering unless you know a lot of biblical doctrine. This is awfully easy. I'm going to go through this kind of quickly but I want you to see how important this is. Look, in this you greatly rejoice. What is he talking about? Though you are suffering in grief. You're in grief but you're rejoicing. What? In this? In what? Well, if you go back through the first five verses which we looked at the last two weeks, you'll see that they are crammed with doctrine. To God's elect who have been chosen according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through the sanctifying work of the Spirit for obedience to Jesus Christ and sprinkling by his blood. In his great mercy has given us a new birth into a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead and into an inheritance that can never perish, spoil, or fade kept in heaven for you who through faith are shielded by God's power until the coming of the salvation that is ready to be revealed in the last time. In five verses, Peter gives you the entire ordo salutis. Do you know what the ordo salutis is? A little technical jargon. It's obviously a Latin term and in theology it means the order of salvation. It's also called the golden chain. It starts up here and it's all in verses one to five. One thing, the first thing is you're foreknown and we talked about this two weeks ago, maybe two years ago. We talked about it two weeks ago. To be foreknown by God doesn't mean to be foreseen but to be foreloved. God sets his love on us in eternity. Then he chooses us. Then he sends his Spirit to sanctify us, to set us apart. All of our lives preparing us. Finally, we believe and we're born again. How are we born again? Because Jesus died and rose from the dead. And then when we believe, we're born again and his blood is sprinkled on our soul, which is a spiritual way of saying all of our sins are forgiven. But that's not all. Then we grow in grace and we grow in sanctification. We become more and more holy. And all during this process, God is holding on to us. He's shielding us, keeping us by his power, until the moment, the last moment of history in which suddenly God shows up and wipes all of reality clean and the glory of God comes down into our lives and we receive the final end of it all, which is, you know, we're perfect. We're made perfect. There it is. Foreknowledge leads to election. Election leads to calling. Calling leads to the rebirth and regeneration. That leads to repentance and faith and the sprinkling of the blood. That leads to sanctification. That leads to obedience. That leads finally to glorification on the last day. All in verses one to five. It's amazing. It's all in there. The entirety of systematic theology, the entirety of the order of salutis in verses one to five. And then notice there is nothing in the Bible that's just there to be known. Not a thing. There's nothing there to be written in your notebook and you put it up on the shelf and you say, now I know that. I'm a mature Christian. I know all these great terms. No. In these, you greatly rejoice in your grief. What he's saying is the reason that you're able to keep any joy up in your grief is because you know all this theology. You know all this doctrine. There's people who just turn their nose up at all this stuff. They say, obscurantism, scholasticism, doctrine divides, Jesus unites. Who needs doctrine? I just want to know Jesus. What are you going to do in grief? You look at all these things. You say, I don't know what all these things mean and that's not important. And yet Peter says, this is what's going to get you through. Do you think about that? How well do you know and understand these things? These are the things, these great truths in which you rejoice. So don't forget, as you can see, verse six shows you that Christianity is far more than doctrine. You don't just put it on a shelf. You use it, but it's not less than doctrine. You'll never deal with suffering. You'll never get through it unless you can rejoice, unless you can relish, unless you can look at these wonderful things and say, look at all that God is doing for me. Look at how he's moving heaven. the way you handle the furnaces of life. So that's the first thing we learn. The second thing we learn, however, that's the good news, the second thing we learn, is that Christians are subjected to grief. Now, this word grief, but I sure hope I don't look like I'm being real negative about the translations we use, because there's no perfect translations, but there's probably not a real good word for it. It's a good English word. It says, in this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you have had to suffer grief. Now, in the old authorized version, this word here is called heaviness, and that's not a terribly great word either. But what it really refers to, it refers to be deeply troubled. It's a word that is related to a word that means to have a stormy sea. You know, when the water is, when a river, for example, is stirred up by tremendous rainwater, and it's stirred up, it's not beautiful and blue and clear. Oh, no. It's mucky and gucky, and it's dirty and muddy, because the turmoil and the tumult of the water pulls up all this gunk out of the bottom. See? It's turmoil. It's troubled. The waters are troubled. That's the word that's used here. And it says, in these things you greatly rejoice, that right now you are experiencing distress. You're troubled. You're deeply disturbed. You're in grief and pain. Now, so the second point is the Christians should not be surprised, should realize that this is something that will happen to them. Now, I need to back off here for a moment. This is a paradox, but it's not a contradiction. It says, in these you greatly rejoice, though for a while you have had to suffer trouble. So you are rejoicing, but you're troubled. And they are both, rejoicing is a present indicative, and suffering is, you know, present perfect, but it's the same thing. They're both happening now. It doesn't say you are rejoicing, though you, you're rejoicing now, though you were troubled. And it doesn't say you're not rejoicing now because you are troubled. It says you are rejoicing now, and you are deeply troubled. And we better look at this. Give me a minute or two, because if you don't understand this, you're going to miss the genius of the Christian faith, and you're going to miss. It's so very important for us to understand this, because no matter what you were raised in, no matter what philosophy you come from, no matter what tradition, no matter what ethnic background, this was not part of what you learned or you were raised with. This is unique. I'm afraid I must go so far as to say that in the Christian church, if you were raised in a conservative Christian church, if you were raised in an evangelical church, you're most likely to be screwed up about this. When I, when I, my church in Virginia, we used to sing a lot of the old 19th century revivalist hymns, the bump-de-bump hymns, okay? And they use a lot of, you know, eighth notes and sixteenth notes. And there was one that we used to sing called At the Cross. Maybe some of you ever heard it. And the chorus goes, At the cross, at the cross, where I first saw the light. And the burden of my heart rolled away. Okay, so far. It was there by faith I received my sight. And now I am happy all the day. Yeah, we used to sing that. And, you know, as a pastor, I used to look out there and I used to see people who were undergoing tremendous struggles and who were, who had great pressure on them and they were bearing great burdens and they were tremendously troubled. And somehow, somehow when they were singing that hymn, I used to winch and I used to say, I wonder whether they feel guilty. And I found out as a pastor that they did. Because there was a message that came through in many, many evangelical churches. And that is, once you receive Jesus as Savior, you might experience suffering, but you don't really feel it. You praise God. You keep the victory. You just trust that somehow it's all working out for the good. And you just don't let it get to you. Now, this is not, this verse does not indicate that that is accurate. As a matter of fact, I want to go so far as to say that that kind of attitude misses the very genius of the Christian life. First of all, the Bible again and again and again shows that Christians don't just experience pain and suffering and grief, that they actually are affected by it. They are grieved by it. They are troubled by it. One of my favorite passages in regard to this is the place in the book of Job. You know, Job has gotten this news that his, all of his children are dead, that all of his money is gone. And what does he do? ripped his garments, shaved his head, fell to the ground and screamed, and in all this, Job sinned not. Now, those of you who have got any kind of Christian, if you've been in other Christian churches, you've been raised up in Christian churches, what would you think that the folks in your church would think if somebody in the middle of the evening service did that? Ripped his mantle, shaved his head, throws to the ground, screams out in agony and grief, what would they say? He's lost the victory. He's not praising the Lord. But you know what it says? It says, he ripped, he screamed, he fell, and in all these things, Job sinned not. Paul says in 2 Corinthians 4, we're persecuted but not forsaken. We're cast down but not destroyed. We're perplexed but we're not in despair. That's exactly what Peter's talking about. What the Bible actually teaches us, what the Bible actually teaches us, that Christians are both sadder and happier because of the gospel. That there actually are, there's an, there's a, the extremity of our emotions is a normal characteristic of somebody who's affected by the gospel. First of all, I'll go so far as to say that Christians actually, because of the gospel, are sadder than other people. Well, somebody says, wait a minute, what are you talking about? Yeah, you look at Jesus, who had wonder, had a perfect relationship with his father and had uninterrupted peace in his life, but he was always weeping all the time. Why? Because he was perfect. But you see, the more perfect you are, the more holy you are, the more you see the brokenness around you and even, let me put it this way, I'll go so far as to say that when the gospel gets into your heart and you see that you are utterly and completely accepted and that you are totally loved, that gives you the emotional freedom to finally admit a lot of sin in your life. Until you understand that you are perfectly loved and until you understand that God is going to eventually put the world straight, until that really sinks in and you have that kind of hope, you live in denial. It's impossible for people to really, really admit how wicked they are because they have no solution for it. They look at, they make excuses for their own sin. They look at it and they say, well, yes, but they can't, they repress the nature of it because they have no, they have no mental furniture, they have no hope, they have no way of actually dealing with it. If they were to admit just how bad it was with the worldview that they have, they would have to kill themselves. The same thing with the world. They look out there and they see everything around, they say, oh, legislation will do it. Oh, if we just get the right people into office. If we could just get that stupid party out of power. We could just do this and just do that. In other words, they're minimizing how bad things are. When you finally let the gospel sink deep into your heart, you now have got, your conscience is strong enough and your heart is strong enough. You've got enough hope to finally admit how bad things are. You feel the hurt of other people. You see how unhappy people are. When the Bible says, this is what it means to become a Christian, God says, I will take out your heart of stone and give you a heart of flesh. What does that mean? It's got to mean this. If the gospel doesn't make you more tenderhearted, if the gospel doesn't make you weep more easily, especially men. I will tell this to guys, by the way. When you become a Christian, men in our culture, we're not supposed to weep. We're taught long ago. You know, it's not even something we try not to do. It's so deeply ingrained. We don't cry. I mean, it's not something you try, you don't, as an adult male, you don't sit around and try not to weep. You can't. You don't just say, I'm a grown man. I don't want anybody to see me cry. I mean, you can't do it. And if you don't find yourself more able to weep because you're a Christian, the gospel hasn't sunk in. I tell you, Christians don't just experience suffering. They are affected by it. They experience grief. They experience being troubled. They are troubled. They see it around. Why would you be different than Jesus? But on the other hand, Christians, of course, got a hope and they've got a sublime hope. Look at it. You see? Though you have not seen him, you love him. And even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy. You know, in the old King James, it says, though you do not see him, you love him and rejoice in him with joy unspeakable and full of glory. something that is always operating in you, even when you're in the grief. And therefore, what a real Christian life is like, it's an adventurous life, it's an exciting life, but I'll tell you one thing, it's not a placid life. Oh no. What this is telling us is that Christians have always got this balance. You're always experiencing grief, more grief than before. You cry more easily. You sense the troubles of the world more than before. You care more. You have to. And you also sense your own evil, your own sin. You're able to see it. So you see your own, it humbles you. But on the other hand, you've got this joy unspeakable. Let me just tell you, the problems that come up in the Christian life is when the balance is lost. And when the grief overwhelms your hope. And the solution and the power of the Christian life is that you get back into that balance. Because a person who, a Christian who's really dealing with life is not somebody who rejoices and is not in grief. Oh no. The glory of the Christian life is that we have a hope that overwhelms the grief. It doesn't eradicate it. It sweetens it. It overwhelms it. It balances it. I'll never forget the first time this happened to me. I had had a pretty easy life for a long time. When I was a brand new pastor, a guy I had become very close friends with who was a young man in my church died. I watched him die. And his wife turned to me and said, you know, she had two little boys. And his wife turned to me and said, I'm not going to be able to tell them their daddy's dead. Could you do it? So I had to get in the car and run home to do it. And I remember thinking on the way, I don't see how I'm going to do this. How am I going to do this? The kids have no idea. I forget what they were, 10 and 8 or something like that. They have no idea. What am I going to do? And I just felt this tremendous heaviness of heart. And yet as I sat and thought about that the suffering that this family was going through, they're all Christians, you know. And the suffering that even I was going through, which was certainly less than what they were going through, was nothing compared to the suffering that Jesus went through. Because his cup was the cup of the wrath of God. In his case, he had to give up everything. In our case, what he's just saying is, I'll walk with you, alongside of you. And, you know, as I got there, I said, Lord, you've got to help me. And what happens, actually, is the joy unspeakable sometimes just comes through. It's a hard thing to describe. In a lot of ways, being a Christian is like being, you know, a furnace in a house. The colder the air outside, for a while it gets real cool in the house. And all of a sudden, it's the coldness that makes the heat furnace kick on. And it's the grief that makes you go to your resources. It makes you go to your roots as a Christian. It makes you go to the gospel. It makes you look at what Jesus has done for you. That's what it does. The grief pushes you toward the joy. And it enhances the joy. And the joy kicks on like a heat furnace and overwhelms the grief. But it's there. I'll go so far as to say that if you get into grief, if you get into time of trouble, and you have no tears, and you have no problem, and you say, no, I'm just praising God, that's thought control. That's brainwashing. That's the way the cults operate. That's some kind of psychological control. It's not supernatural. It's not the way the gospel works. Don't you see? So the second principle. The second principle is that a Christian is both happier and sadder at the same time. That the gospel makes you a far more sensitive person, a far more feeling person, but at the same time, a person who is feeling because you're more hopeful than anybody else. A person who is able to sense and see the grief because you have got a joy unspeakable and full of glory. Now, the third and last thing to point out here. The first teaching, of course, is that you're not going to be able to face suffering without doctrine. And I tried to show you why. The second teaching goes along with that, actually. And the second teaching is that Christians experience both the troubledness of life along with the joy of their salvation. And the troubles actually are enhanced in some ways. The feeling of your troubles are enhanced by the gospel. But on the other hand, it's that grief that makes us understand and kicks in the joy unspeakable. And that's how the Christian life works. Now, lastly, and this is something that's a little bit frightening. The last thing is that trials happen not simply because the world is a bad place. I might have up to now given you that impression, but that's not really what he says here. Peter's not saying, in the world you will have trials and troubles, and that's because you can't avoid it. That's just the way the world is. So, you know, you're just going to have to... in this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief. And what he's got here is this. If grief does come into your life, if things happen, troubles come upon you. This statement, and there's many other places that say the same thing, so I'm not basing it on one verse, but this statement is that if you have troubles today, you need them. That's what it's saying. John Newton, the guy who wrote Amazing Grace, put it so perfectly. You've got to memorize this. I try to say it every year or so, but that's probably not enough. You can memorize this. Get the tape and memorize it. You don't all have to buy the tape. Maybe eight of you buy it and then pass it around so you can memorize it. Everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing can be necessary that he withholds. See, that's the implication of this. That's definitely what you have to see is the teaching. If it's in your life, you need it, even if it's bad. If it's not in your life, you don't need it, even though you think you do. Why? Because there's an order to your life. Because your father, your father hates to see the brokenness out there. Your father doesn't like to see the tragedy, but he is monitoring it. He's letting it into your life in stages, in ways that actually will teach you the things he wants you to learn. There's an order about your life. You say, that doesn't seem to me to be the case. It looks chaotic to me. Well, of course, because it's not your order. It's not your agenda. It's not your schedule. Of course it looks chaotic. You didn't expect it, but there's an order. In the book of Hebrews, Hebrews chapter 12, trials of our life are called a gymnasium, a gymnasio, a discipline. There's an order. There's a regimen. There's a plan. It's just not your plan. That's the reason why it seems so awful, but it's there. Samuel Rutherford said, his wise love feeds us with hunger and fattens us with famine. Well, what do you mean? Well, there's a hundred ways. First of all, and just run through them real briefly. Don't forget, we'll keep getting back to this subject because 1 Peter is all about the subject. First of all, you will never learn who you are without suffering. Suffering shows you your faults. It shows you your flaws. If you're in a bad marriage, God hates that. He hates to see us suffering. If you're in a bad relationship, God hates that. If you're in a bad job, God hates that. I'm not saying you need to stay in a bad job. I'm not saying you need to stay and say, well, if this is part of God's will for me, I guess I better stay here and, you know, gee, God, keep hitting me. I'm still breathing. That's not the idea. That's not the idea. It says when you find yourself stuck and there's no way out and you are hurting, God is not actually bringing you into conflict with that boss. He's not really bringing you into conflict with your spouse. He's actually bringing you into conflict with yourself. You're being confronted with yourself, your lack of patience, your lack of foresight, your addictions, your foolishness, your ego. And there is no greater gift that he can give you than self-discovery. And there's no more painful gifts that he can give you than self-discovery. And if there was any other way to give it to you, he would give it to you. He's trying to teach you. Now, how do you handle it? We got to finish it this way. If he gives you things that you need, just remember these things. Number one, look, it's only for a little while. You say, what do you mean define little? It's a little while. It's temporary. Suffering's temporary. There'll be an end to it, he says. Okay. Number two, the second thing you have to do is make sure you go back to the doctrine and rejoice. If you forget that he's your father, if you forget the salvation, you forget all the things in verses one to five, you will not be able to handle verses six, seven, and eight. You have to go back to one to five to handle verses six, seven, and eight. You have to remember his timing. You have to remember it's not my schedule, it's his schedule. Secondly, you have to remember that he's a father, that he's appointed these things, that they're there for you to grow under. And the only way you're ever going to become a glorious person is if you see who you are. And the only way you're going to know who you are is very often if you go through times of grief. So remember this? Let's read it again. The other gods were strong, but thou wast weak. They rode, but thou didst stumble to a throne. and not a god has wounds, but thou alone. And Elizabeth Elliot ends with these words. We bow in gratitude for his willingness to take the cup the Father gave him, a cup so immensely more bitter than the one he gives us ever. Shall we refuse the cup he gives us? Or shall we grasp it with both hands, as it were, realizing it holds just what is most needful for our spiritual wholeness? Ours has really been sweetened at the lip of sweet Jesus. We drink it by trustful acceptance, and God will transform it for his glory. Thus our very suffering may become the substance of sacrifice, a love offering to God, and a sacrifice of praise, and our ambition may be changed as radically as was Paul's, who said, All I care for is to know Christ, to experience the power of his resurrection, and to share his sufferings in growing conformity with his death. This isn't bad news. You're not going to avoid the suffering. Don't say, Oh, this is bad news. What do you mean this is bad news? Whether you believe what I said to me or not, you're going to have hard times in your life. I'm a member of a family of five people. That means somebody is going to have to bury four others, and that's even if everything else pretty much goes okay. You're telling me, Wow, this is bad news. It's not bad news. You've got a hard life in front of you. You know that because you live in this world, and you can either accept what he says. Jesus says, I had a harder life than you. I took the real cup and drank it. Now, these little cups that you have in front of you are for your good. Drink it with me. I will be with you. There's a purpose, and there's a meaning behind it all. It'll only be for a while. It'll only be temporary. That's bad news. Trust him. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask that you would grant that we could now. Learn to trust you. Some of us are facing very hard times, and we don't want to believe that you're behind us. You're not behind the suffering. The suffering is here because the world is full of sin. But you have promised that if we trust in you, you will monitor, you will control, you will walk with us in that suffering in such a way that we can become like your son. Help us to follow him and his path so that through his sufferings, through the sufferings, we might achieve your glory. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
