TITLE: How a Gospel Identity Grows (Q&A)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-a-gospel-identity-grows-qa/

============================================================

Hi, my name is Ken Moy. I am currently a downtown congregation member along with my wife, Janice. And we were at the downtown congregation from the inception, and it's really exciting to be able to be here today. Hi, I'm Janice. I go to downtown with Ken. And one thing of note is that we have a two-year-old at home, so I'm a little bit sleep-deprived. Hi, I'm Jennifer Leibert, and I am part of the family of sleep-deprived parents. Me too. That's great. Not me. Not me. And it's great. So we hear rumors about how great this is. We're a large association. So I'm part of the West Side congregation. I moved to New York 11 years ago. My husband and I have been on the West Side for about six years, and we're very happy to be here. Great. Well, thank you. Thanks for serving on the panel. I know these discussions for me have been some of the richest parts, so we thank you for providing your perspective. I just want to open it up and say, what are questions that came up? What are things that you wanted to respond to? Maybe some things you wish you heard more of. Just open it up to you. Just have that conversation. Anybody who's ready to dive in, go for it. Do we have to take the order of the chairs? No, whoever. So I'll start. And something that struck me, and I was sharing a little bit before we came out just now, I think one of the common experiences for New Yorkers is especially the overachieving lot, the performance-oriented lot. I'm among them. It's hard to take in the idea of a grace-based identity. And so when I hear of the wonderful identity that the Lord gives us, that God gives us, it's not earned. It's entirely by his grace. And I find that juxtaposed with my day and my experience of trying to perform in the office and so forth. And it occurs to me that I am a long way from the Christian identity that we talked about, that sense of complete security that comes in knowing that we are loved, not because of what we've done, but because of Christ. It struck me when you talked about working Christ into that place of supremacy in our lives, that was very special for me because it said to me that this was a process and that I don't need to be distressed because I am not where I need to be. But there's this process of working Christ into that place of supremacy and having the other loves in my life reordered. And I just wanted to comment on how refreshing that was and hopefully that was an encouragement to someone else that this grace allows us to be in process rather than to have arrived. That's actually helpful. Well, first of all, I'm glad it's certainly always glad when you say that encourages you. I was I and actually it helps me, too, because I was saying that that idea of working Christ to the top of your identity, I was you heard me say what that does is it shows that our identities are not exclusive. That is that you it doesn't it Christ doesn't efface the other or he doesn't destroy the other aspects of our identity like our race and culture. So I was thinking that it was trying to show that the grace based identity is a that image of working at the top was a way of including so many other aspects of humanity. So it doesn't it appreciates that you actually show me it also means it is not an all or nothing. And I actually hadn't thought of it. It encourages me, too, that it does mean you were not you've never arrived. Now, there are other places where the Bible does say that. I mean, Paul actually talks about not that I've arrived. He actually says I'm I'm, you know, trying to get to the prize, but not that I'm perfect, not that I'm arrived. So but yeah, I would say our culture is so performance based that that's a very important word to hear. Maybe I would summarize it like this. We're supposed. beat ourselves up when we haven't gotten there. Not to not aim high. Or, well, maybe we can keep talking about this, but I do think the practices imply that it's a process and you're never there. And even the calls by Paul in both Colossians 3 and Ephesians 4, when he says, put off the old self, put on the new. He doesn't say, some of you still need to do this. Some of you have got the new self on, but there's a few of you behind. He doesn't say that. He assumes everybody. And Ephesians was a circular letter to probably a lot of different churches that none of them have arrived. It actually reminds me that we're preaching through 1 John. And there's this one passage where it says, behold, what manner of love the Father has given unto us. And the Greek there, I only know this because I had to preach it, but the Greek there says, is a word that says, what country, what planet is this love from? And so there's something so fundamentally foreign to a love that is not based on performance. We don't have the categories to even begin to grasp it. And so there are moments where it breaks through and we say, wow, this is possible. But it's almost as if we don't know how to live out of that. And so we need these practices to constantly reorient us to that because the categories aren't there. We've never experienced a love like that apart from Jesus Christ. We'll never just, it's not just all or nothing. It's always a process. Let's keep going. But the only danger is you don't want to go to the other side and say, oh, well, you know, we're all imperfect. I do get tired of Christians saying, well, we're just all broken and, you know, we're all a mess and I'm a mess, but Jesus loves me anyway. It does feel like a person like that is saying, you know, I don't really need to get this gospel identity into it. You know, God loves me anyway. Well, yeah, he does. I got to tell you, you know, I had three sons. I still have three sons. And it's true that when they disobeyed me, didn't try to obey me, it didn't mean they became less sons, but it was very irritating. So I'm sure it's like, yeah, yeah, God loves me even though I'm a broken person. Yes, I know. But if you really love God, see, God loves you, but if you love him back, you really, you want to please him. You want to satisfy his heart, which means you're going to try to live out of that gospel identity. And so it's tough not to, you know, go one way or the other. You've got to keep the tension. Yeah, what were other thoughts or questions? I know, but definitely agree with the in-process part because when Janice and I got married, there was so much pressure from my church as well as my friends that, hey, Ken, you've got to step up your game. You're going to be a married man and such. Ken, you do, though. Right. By the way, they were right, Ken. Right. We both agree. But I'll tell you, we use our failures as husband and wife and as a wonderful testimony, I think, to other folks that are either single or even married saying, listen, it's not the end of the road. When you get married, that's the beginning of problems. Right. That's where you actually have to rely more on grace even more. And I have to tell you, throughout our marriage, our six-year marriage, we've seen the Holy Spirit work so actively as well as behind the scenes that we stopped and said, my goodness, praise God. He's continually working in us. And I think it's a really wonderful process, as you mentioned. You know, I mentioned that Peter was not able to look in his heart and see the cowardice because his performance-based identity, which is based on this idea that he was brave, made it impossible for him to see, is false. And it's only the gospel, the more you have that gospel identity, the more that gets in, the more you actually have the ability to admit what's wrong with you. Now, if you don't do that when you get married, here's what's going to happen. Your spouse is going to see the cowardice in your heart. Your spouse will see, better even than your parents, what's wrong with you. And if you don't have the gospel to enable you to agree with him or her, it's just going to create a deeper and deeper rift as the years go by. So guess what? You do have to step up your game. Sorry. Well, I'll tell you, she's not alone in this thing because she not only gives insight into my flaws, but she has a partner, her mother. And constantly I'm reminded of how flawed I am, and it's really humbling yet discouraging. Next question. This is not a marriage counseling class. Does anybody have another question? I'll ask a question. Good. So this was actually back to Jennifer's question about what also struck me was when you were talking about... well, well, why have you ever come up to this? couple people, so thank you. Thank you. so this was actually back to jennifer's question about um what also struck me was when you were talking about working jesus right to the top as the supreme validator and my question it's personal and yet practical it's it's the how do i do that in the mundane and in the all the ways that my child and husband and work and all these things are you know i'm in the midst of dealing with all this how does christ's validation rise to the top well choose one here's a that's perfect great question choose one place where you know uh some some something that you do wrong habitually in your response to things maybe it's a response to your child maybe it's a response to your husband maybe it's something else that you you you habitually do it wrong and you know that it's because of a at that moment you're not oriented toward your gospel identity you just know now i'm not i'm not going to give you examples because everybody's got them then what you do is use all the practices on it for a while it's a little too big to say how do i get this gospel identity no choose someplace where you say you know because i really at the bottom of my heart i don't believe god loves me that's the only reason i always respond to that situation like i do i just so what do you do one is you get some accountability that's one of the practices you find a couple people that you can trust and say you know if i know that that every week or month i'm going to be talking to you about how i'm doing in this area uh that'll help me okay that's one thing then you actually i i do think you have to go looking for passages of scripture that speak to it and that actually are what i would i got this years ago sometimes god makes certain passages radioactive uh in the sense of you've got you i mean this is not probably the best metaphor but i've used it for years on myself in other words it's sort of like your heart's got sin in it and the sin is is the false identity it's the it's besetting sins it's a rebellion against god not wanting to believe in grace wanting to earn my own salvation i think of that as cancer like a tumor and so there's certain sometimes i read certain passages scripture and because of the holy spirit maybe we ought to talk more about this the holy spirit will just take that text and make it radioactive to my tumor i could just feel it shrinking not a very good maybe image but it just it it goes after me and i say oh you know if if i had that in my mind and sometimes by the way it happens i mean some of you might remember some years ago i think i put this in a sermon once where not that this was an issue but i remember uh i had that day read a passage of scripture where it said be kind to the immigrants and the aliens for you were an alien but i brought you out of egypt i was actually in line and the cashier this is a gristides and the cashier was taking so long mainly because the cashier's english was terrible didn't understand was going so long and i was actually getting furious and suddenly the verse came to mind you know be kind to the immigrant and the alien among you because you were an alien but i but i brought you out and i said oh no and i was just you know there there's a especially you know i'm an older white man i mean we're much more likely to say why can't these people learn english what are they doing here i mean we don't say that out loud but we think it and that's just so self-justifying it's so awful and so it that was radioactive to my tumor now the that was an accident in a way i was god did that to me just to show who's god um but the point is if you're looking for passages like that uh and you are you're also looking for uh so in prayer and devotion you're seeking to deal with that particular problem and you're trying to live out of gospel identity and you have accountability to somebody so you're focusing your practices on a particular place where the gospel identity is something you're trying to grasp i think that's way way better way that's a better way forward than this global thing how am i going to just sort of not worry about performance anymore and never be upset when people criticize me i know that that's too much so that's what i suggest is use the practices on a particular place in which you fail in that gospel identity that's why one of the reasons why i think historically they've been called practices is when you practice something what you're doing is you're taking what seems like an impossible task and you're breaking it down and you're doing it repeatedly and as you do repeatedly develop muscle memory so that when you turn to the impossible task you can lean on the muscle memory that you've developed over those days and years and that sort of thing yep when you think about spiritual practices that's essentially what you're doing so when you wake up each morning and evening or in your in prayer or in scripture you're doing it you're doing it muscle memory of the soul so that in the moment when at work, you know, things just are blowing up or at home or whatever, in that moment, in the heat of that moment, you can lean on a spiritual muscle memory to say I can respond in a different sort of a way, you know, or I can learn to be attentive to God. I learned to be attentive to God through those times of daily devotion, but those times of daily devotion are intended to help me to be attentive to God throughout the day, that he's always sending me overtures of love. He's always sending me out to love. I'm just missing it so often because I'm not attentive to it. So the practices, I think, relate directly to how do I begin to respond more instinctively out of that gospel identity and not out of these other things that we tend to slip into. Yeah. Good. Other thoughts or questions? Sure. Let me go back to a comment that Tim made and Abe, you referred to the Spirit as well. Tim, my sense is that we don't receive a lot of teaching on the Holy Spirit. It's there. It comes and goes. And as I think of this task of growing in our faith and becoming more like Christ, having Christ as our supreme identity, it seems to me, and I think you mentioned this as you were speaking, that we will need the Spirit's help in that. And the Scripture has so much to say about the Spirit. I wondered how we could just talk, if you could talk to us a little bit more about how the Holy Spirit helps us to that place of maturity. Well, that's really, really important. And by the way, the complaint department for the teaching is over here now. But I believe you're on the west side, so that goes to David. That's right. You've got to make sure you go to the right complaint department. So anyway, excuse me, sorry, there's got to be some advantages to doing what I've done. The great danger with talking about practice is especially to Presbyterian types. I mean, in every one of our denominational traditions, we've got all these different traditions. These traditions are great. They all have their specific strengths, and to some degree, they often have weaknesses too. And, you know, the Presbyterian and Reformed tradition is very intellectual. It's very rational. And there's a great danger that when we're talking about practices, we are going to say, there it is. And we think the practices do it. We are also modern people who want technique. And so it's a technological society. So, and I know that's, listen, I can just tell you, those of us who are trying to say to everybody at Redeemer, practices, practices, practices, we have to backtrack a bit and say the practices are not techniques really because they are ways to release the power of the Holy Spirit that's in you because of the, you're born again. I actually made a reference to this, I think, last night. There, you have such resources in you. Christ is in you. The Holy Spirit is in you. You know, Titus chapter 3, I guess it is, uses the word for regeneration, that the Holy Spirit, you're regenerated by the Holy Spirit. It's the same word that Jesus uses when he talks about at the end of time, at the regeneration of all things. You will sit down and eat with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So he uses the word for the renewal of the whole world. It's where God comes back and all suffering and all evil is gone. But in Titus, Paul says, that's already started in you. In other words, the same spiritual power that is going to renew the world and wipe it clean of death and suffering and disease is already in you. And I have to say, a lot of us are saying, looking and saying, really? I mean, how could that kind of power be in me? The changes haven't been all that drastic. Practices are there as a way to release that power. And they are useless without it. And that keeps you from subtly, we talked about this, I guess, this morning, right? Subtly thinking of the practices as a way for me to get back in charge and God will have to be pleased with me because I'm reading the Bible every day now. So then you subtly move into a kind of works righteousness thing and it's also very modern because you feel like if I do this just right, I can solve my problems. No. I'm going to prove that there's a God. And what he does is he puts up the altar, and he puts the fuel on the altar, but God sends down the Holy Spirit or the fire, and he doesn't light it himself. And basically, your practices are just that altar. It's you're Elijah, and you're building the altar, and you're saying, Lord, I really, I am looking for your power in my life, and I'm building that altar, but I cannot light it. These practices, I can't put the fire in them, but you can, and that fire is the Holy Spirit. So I think that's really important just to have that attitude so you don't fall into that technique I approach or that pride or thinking the practices are what is going to change me. No, they're not. They're basically ways of releasing the regenerative power that you've got in you. So it's really great to bring that up, and actually, we should be talking at Redeemer more about the Holy Spirit than we do. I think we do. And by the way, that is partly my fault. In other words, I mean, I've been doing most of the preaching. It's not your fault. Yeah, it is. Yeah, it is. But anyway. I mean, I always kind of joke that the phrase spirit-led Presbyterian should not sound like an oxymoron. What? I know, right? What? Because I agree. I think, if anything, Presbyterian or Reformed theology tells us that the Spirit is not only the Spirit who does redemption, but it's the Spirit of creation. So everything that we look at is the work of the Holy Spirit, everything around us. And so there's a sense in which the folks who should be talking perhaps most about the Spirit are Reformed and Presbyterian folks. We should be talking way more about it. Except that the Spirit is almost always taking us back to Jesus. You know, that's kind of part of the challenge, too. But I agree. I think it's a great, great question. By the way, can I say something triumphalistic? It's near the end. Is that all right? Go for it. And besides that, you know, we can always clip this out if it's being recorded. Because it would be easy. No, one of my best friends in my life was a Pentecostal man, young man, who had become a Christian at a very, very Pentecostal church. And he was at Gordon Conwell with me. And one summer, he decided to read Calvin's Institutes. And he read through them, especially the parts on the Holy Spirit. And the next year, he became a congregational minister. He says, you know what? I'm Reformed in my theology. And I said, why? He says, because I've never seen such a high view of the Holy Spirit. What the Reformed theology believes is you can't believe without the Holy Spirit. You don't have any power to do that. You can't enjoy a sermon without the Holy Spirit. You don't have the ability without the Holy Spirit to even understand the sermon. And he said it was such a high view. He said, I'm Pentecostal and I can be Reformed because I've never seen such a high view of the Holy Spirit. That's kind of triumphalistic maybe, but I think it might. It's also saying we should be talking more about it. I know one of the practices you mentioned was attention. And with that repetition, a lot of times when we try to read the Bible and we're not feeling it, there's a bit of drudgery in there. How do we deal with that? Do we just press on? Do we press pause? Do we? No. No. And I do think that's the repetition. Some years ago, I decided that it would be better for me to spend 20 minutes in Bible and prayer morning and 20 minutes in the evening than 40 minutes in the morning. By the way, I'm not trying to tell you, oh, Tim does it. That must be the key. Let's not go there. But because I needed repetition to frame it. And very often what will happen is in the morning, my heart's kind of dead. But by the evening, for whatever reason, maybe because of the experience, my heart's more alive. I would generally say that repetition is really critical. It's better, I think, to have devotion more than once a day because it frames your day up. It keeps you from forgetting what you learn in the morning. The other thing is, generally speaking, when I, over in my lifetime, when I have been very cold spiritually, I have not been doing devotion much. It takes me, I'll just tell you, it takes me about three weeks for my heart to warm up and without missing a day. And you might say, wow, that takes a long time. I said, yeah, that's me. And maybe you're like me. But you cannot expect to suddenly get, you know, all sorts of great insights just by trying it for a week. So I would, that's why I jumped in there a little bit, a little bit, a little bit facetiously saying, yes, you, you just. I, you, you know, in a marriage, you better keep talking whether you're getting something out of it or not. You know, don't just say, well, you know, the last couple of times we've talked, I didn't really get much out of it. And what you can really say is, well, you're really not going to get anything out of your marriage if you don't talk. So I would say, yeah, repetition, sticking with it. Now, if somebody really says, I've been reading the Bible for months and months or years, I get nothing out of it. Then I'd want to sit down and say, will you tell me how you're doing this? And I actually might even wonder whether the person understands the gospel. I mean, I'd probably look at that too. But in many cases, some people just, you know, I might say, you know, why sometimes people say so much of it doesn't make sense. Well, then maybe we ought to start at certain parts that are a little more, a little less opaque. Maybe we ought to give you a Bible study help. So there's lots of things that can be done, but in general, just do it, just do it. But ask the Holy Spirit to send the fire. That's basically what you do. What I tell myself in those moments is the first thing I tell myself is perseverance is a biblical category. And then secondly, this is what perseverance feels like. When, when those moments of drudgery kind of come on, it's okay, just got to keep persevering. Keep persevering. Yeah. Right. I think we got time for maybe another question. So, Tim, earlier you elaborated on how the music captures your imagination and how you have to really join in on the scene. Then you mentioned narratives and you didn't quite go into it as much. I just wondered like what you meant by those stories. Are you talking about stories of scripture? Are you talking about stories of heroes, of our own testimonies? Well, no. Yes, yes. And more. So, for example, the reason why nobody sits down and says, no, here's a traditional identity, six bullet points. Here's a modern identity, six bullet points. You don't say to an eight-year-old, you know, here's the one we want you to do. No, you make a movie. You make a Walt Disney movie. How does that song go again, Tim? Yeah, never mind. And the Walt Disney movie tells a story and sings songs that basically move you from a traditional to a modern identity. And it's much more powerful than bullet points. I guess what I'm saying is we actually have a tendency in the church to think bullet points is what's going to change people's minds. And so you not only need a hymnody, which is singing, you also need stories. And when you ask me about stories, yes, you actually, well, for example, I, when I read the story of Eric Little's life, the guy, you know, the, the, uh, the guy that ran in slow motion, you know, it's astounding, it's astounding. A guy who was like that slow and he still won the gold medal. But anyway, his life is wonderful. I mean, in other words, so yes, heroes, there are people that I, that I consider heroes. Uh, there, there's also fiction where, you know, uh, where Christians have written fiction that actually lift up, maybe not even necessarily a gospel identity, but at least an identity that's not modern. So, I mean, there's, there's lots and lots of, by the way, great, uh, fiction, anything written just pretty much before 1850, uh, uh, in many, many cases, it actually lifts up, uh, other ways, you know, basically the idea of transcendent values. So it's, it's, uh, stories that embody the truths of, uh, the Christian worldview, even if they're not necessarily overtly Christian stories, stories about Christians. But then, yeah, the Bible's, the Bible stories, uh, one of the things that we, here's a dirty little secret that all ministers find out. When we preach on a narrative text, everybody remembers it afterwards. And we preach on a epistle, nobody remembers it. And it's because unless you, you know, anyway, we, you have to work on that. But, uh, people remember the stories with the characters. And then the Bible has to be seen as a full story. It's this, not just a set of do's and don'ts. Uh, so we actually have to show that it's creation, fall, redemption, restoration, and Christ the hero. So, yeah, in all those ways, there, there really is a way of preaching and teaching that is bullet pointy and not narratival. And that's what we're trying to avoid. Right. And I think every single one of us, when we seek to make sense of our lives, uh, we make sense of our lives, not usually not through rational arguments, but we make sense of our lives by putting ourselves into a particular story. Uh, my life has meaning because, and usually that ends up being some form of a story. So, and Jesus, of course, teaching in parables. I mean, there's lots about the, Or even parable of the prodigal son, which you were sharing earlier. There's a power to that story that an epistle would never capture. Well, yeah, see Romans 1, 2, and 3. Basically, Romans 1 is the Gentiles who are living anywhere they want. Romans 2 are the Jews who are trying to obey the Bible. And they're both missing it. And Romans 3 is the gospel. But honestly, the parable of the prodigal son, we have a younger brother and elder brother. It's much more vivid. It's just a way better way of grabbing hold of it. See, that's a, and we do have to make sure that we lift up the narratives, that's all.
