TITLE: How to Change (Part 3)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:17-24
TOPICS: Sanctification
SERIES: Lord of All
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/how-to-change-part-3/

============================================================

Let me read from Ephesians chapter 4, again, verses 17 to 24. It's on how to change. Let's look at it. Ephesians 4, well actually we're just looking at, let's take a look at chapter 4, verses 22, 23, and 24. That's what we're concentrating on, and that's what we're going to look at one more time, at least, tonight. You were taught, you were taught with regard to your former way of life to put off your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires, to be made new in the attitude of your minds, and to put on the new self created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness. That ends the reading of God's word. Put on, be made new, put off. We're looking at this subject, and I want to finish up on what it means to put off the old self, start talking about and deal with being renewed in the spirit of your mind, or the attitude of your mind, and maybe push into what it means to put on the new self. Let's not overlook the basic premise of these two verses, three verses. Put off, be renewed, and put on. We mention it each week. I'll start right out again by saying it. It means, one of the great sensational things that the Christian message says, it means you can change. Over the years, Kathy and I have tried to figure out what it is we most admire about people. The people that we really admire, that we tremendously respect, that we try to stay in touch with, that we look up to, who are the people that we like the most? They aren't necessarily the smartest people. They aren't necessarily the people that have things most together. They're not necessarily the people with the most pristine, moral record. The people that we admire the most, we realized over the years, that the highest compliment we could possibly pay somebody is to say, you know that person? You know him? You know her? He can change. It's the best thing you can say about somebody. He can change. She can change. And the change sticks. Underneath these three verses is this sensational truth. You can put off and you can be made new and you can put on because if you're a Christian, you can change. Or it means, for a Christian, change is always possible. Always. There's a verse that you should always read in connection with these three. I mentioned it before. Let me just remind you of it again. Some of you know that this is a key verse. Some of you may have never heard this, in which case, this is a radioactive verse. And you need to open it up and let it do a light treatment on your tumors. It'll shrink them out. 1 Corinthians 10.13. No trial has overtaken you except that which is common to man. God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the trial will give you a way of escape that you may be able to endure it. Now, that is an assumption. That principle is assumed under these three verses. First of all, it says, No trial has overtaken you except that which is common to man. That's a very key biblical point. What's common to man mean? It means whatever your problem is, it has two features. One is, in the basic, at the top level, your problem is unique. No one's ever had it before. You know why? Because no one's ever been you before. And it's never been December 3rd, 2nd, 1990 before. And it's never been this place before. So, your problem is always unique. It's never been seen before. At one level, but at the deepest level, there is no problem that you have got involved with. There's no problem that you have that isn't basic to every other human being that's ever lived. Why do you think Paul is able to talk to the Corinthians, who lived in a secular urban Greek city, and continually make reference to the Old Testament people of God, the Israelites, who were nomadic wanderers, who wandered centuries ago, centuries before the Corinthians lived, and he could constantly say, be like that, be like that. And a lot of people, by the way, very small tangent, an awful lot of people say, well, the Bible, that's very interesting, but times have changed. You know, Paul said this and this and this, but, you know, people don't feel like that anymore. Times have changed. How can you take the Bible so seriously when you consider that? And the... as far removed from those people as the New Testament is removed from us, and yet Paul never said, well, times have changed. These are nomads, right? They lived in a rural area. They lived centuries ago. You're modern. You're urban. You're sophisticated. And therefore, obviously, there's going to be differences. No, Paul says, essentially, everything that every human being has ever faced, every human being has ever faced, most of our problems are essentially the same. Our problems are common. There's other people who have faced the same thing. Other people have done that. And so when it says, no temptation is overtaken, you accept that which is common to man, it's a way of saying, do not ever say your problem is utterly unique. It's partially unique, but not basically unique. Then it goes on. The verse says, God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your ability. God is faithful. That is an amazing statement. He says this. God is saying, I stake my integrity on this, that there is no problem that has overtaken any redeemed son or daughter of mine that cannot be handled if you do it my way using my resources. Hear that? He says, God is faithful. What does that mean? God says, I stake my integrity on it. There is no problem that you're facing now that is either unique or unhandleable, provided you do it in my way using my resources. It's a blanket statement. When somebody comes to me and says, I want your counseling, I'll say, well, I'll try my best, but I give no guarantees that I can help you. God never says that. God says, I stake my integrity on it. There is nothing unique about this. You can be out, you see. And then it says, God is faithful. He won't be tempting you beyond your ability. Very interesting. Look, if there was such a thing as the perfect gym coach, the perfect gym coach would be somebody who would look at you and say, in order to get you into shape, I will give you exactly, exactly, exactly the kinds of exercises and the kind of regimen that is perfectly matched to your ability. Not one push-up, not one stroke, not one lap too much, and not one lap too little. That would be the perfect gym coach. Why? One stroke too much and you'd be injured. And one stroke too little and you will not get all the benefit out of the exercise because the exercise has got to push you to your limits or else it won't push your limits ahead. It won't push forward your horizons. In other words, the exercises can't injure you or leave you flabby. If they're too easy, you don't grow. If they're too hard, they injure you. If only there was such a perfect gym coach. And if there was, and a lot of us have maybe been under coaches who weren't exactly perfect, but they were mighty good. And you know how they felt? You know how they felt. It always felt like he was killing you. It always felt he was killing you. It always felt that he was giving you more than your ability. And yet, when you actually did it, in some cases you quit. But when you actually followed through and listened to him, you found, incredibly enough, as hard as it was, you made it. And it pushed back the horizons of what you thought you could accomplish. It wasn't one stroke too much or one stroke too little. It didn't injure you or leave you flabby. Whenever you find a really great coach, it feels like it's killing you, but when you follow through, you can do it. The Bible says God is that perfect gym coach. And that means that the troubles and the trials and the problems that you are facing, that you say, I can't do it. I can't change. I can't adapt. I can't face it. The answer to that is, of course that's how you'll feel if you have the perfect gym coach. The perfect spiritual gym coach, of course it will feel that way. Anybody who's had a really good human physical gym coach knows that that's how it feels. And God says, however, it is not one stroke too much. If you give up, if you leave the regimen behind, I can't answer for the consequences. If you stick with me, I'll bring you through it. I can bring you through it. I will. But then, the final part of that wonderful verse, 1 Corinthians 10, 13, that you have to read Ephesians 4, 22 to 24, in tandem with. The last part is, it says, he says, I will not, pardon me, he says, I will, along with the trial, always send a way of escape, that you may be able to endure it. Now, if you look carefully, you have to read that very carefully. Here you have this promise that says, I will never put you in a situation that you cannot handle. You can't say, can't. A Christian never can say, I can't. a responsibility, if it's something that you have to do in order to be obedient, if it's something you have to do, you can do it. You can't say can't. I will never take it beyond your ability. I won't do that. But then look, it says a way of escape that you may be able to endure it. There's two ways that God will enable you to handle your problem. One is to escape it, and one is to endure it. Now, some of us are saying, I was afraid of that. I was hoping it was just escape. Look, some of you have heard me use this illustration to you when I've talked to you one-on-one. If you're going along a very, in a boat, in a rushing river, like the Colorado River, you know, and you're in a narrow gorge, so there's no bank, basically, and you're rushing along, and suddenly you see there's a great big rock sticking out of the water, five feet up out of the water, and there's no way around it. You will be smashed to smithereens on it. So you pray, even if you never have before. And so what do you say? You say, I need a miracle, Lord. You have to remove the rock. Well, now, there's really more than one way God can do it. God could remove the rock, or he could raise the level of the water, six feet. Right? In other words, he either could help you escape the rock, or else he could actually not leave the rock, but enable you, enable the level of the water to go up over the rock. That means when you have a problem, and you say, I can't handle it, but I'm going to rely on this promise. God says, okay, you rely on this promise. You decide, I'm going to use your resources. I'm going to handle it your way. I'm going to use God's word, and I'm going to obey. Then God will do one of two things. He will either take it out of your life, it'll be the way of escape, or he will change you so that that thing that looked like it would crush you, that thing that said, my patience is too thin, it's going to break through. My anxiety is too thin, it's going to break through. My ability to forgive that person, it's too thin, it's going to break through. Instead, God says, I'm going to strengthen that ice. I'm going to strengthen that faith. I'm going to strengthen that patience. I'm going to strengthen that ability to forgive. He could take it away, or else he could strengthen it. He could remove the rock, or he could raise the level of your patience over it. He could raise the level of your endurance over it. Well, somebody said, that's what I was afraid of. But you see, in the short run, escape feels great, but it doesn't bring change. In the long run, endurance, if he would actually raise the level of your water, as hard as it is, and it always takes a lot longer, endurance is the way you can actually become somebody like Jesus. Now, I don't think that you necessarily have to tell God what he should do. You have to be very careful about saying, I want escape, and I want it now. I want her to change her behavior, because I can't forgive her if she keeps talking and acting like this. I can't. She doesn't change her behavior. I'm just going to claw her eyes out. And of course, God could remove the rock, and the next day, she could come and get down on her knees and say, I don't know why I was such an idiot. What can I do for you? Can I kiss your toes? Can I serve you day and night for years? And you say, well, now this is going to be a big help. I mean, it'll be much easier now to forgive you and put away my anger. That's removing the rock. Is he going to do that? What if he says, no, no, no, no, no? You know, Paul said, I have a thorn in my flesh. We don't know what it is. Please get rid of the thorn. And God says, no, I think I'll raise the level of your grace in your life so the thorn is covered. He can go either way. You know, when you read, for example, it's astonishing when you read the Johnny Erickson books. Johnny Erickson is really one of my favorite authors, and many of you know who she is. A Christian woman who was paralyzed in an accident when she was 18 or something like that, was it, about that age? And she's a quadriplegic, but she has developed a tremendous depth that she didn't have before. A tremendous wisdom, the suffering has turned her into a great heart. She has a marvelous ministry to handicapped people, and she has the audacity to say in one of her books, she says, I realize that from one perspective it's an awful thing to say, but the fact of the matter is I'm glad it happened. And she says, of course, I couldn't have said that five years ago. I probably couldn't have said that, you know, eight years ago. I certainly couldn't have said it for a long time after it happened. But she says, now I see that. What happened was she prayed to be healed? And there's one whole book on why she wasn't healed. Why wasn't I healed? The fact is, you cannot say God will always answer prayers for healing. If that's true, nobody would die. Nobody dies of old age. You know that. People die of something. The older you get, something breaks down. If it was really true that God could always heal in relationship to prayer, people wouldn't die. Why? The fact is that God doesn't always heal. Why? Because sometimes... to raise the level of the water. He doesn't always escape. He often can make you able to endure it. And if he leaves the rock there, that's how he gets you to change. And that's how you become like Christ. Now, last week we talked about putting off the old, and there's just a couple of mop-up things we need to say about it. But it's pretty important. Look, verse 22. Put off, you were taught with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self. Now, last week I gave you a lot of illustrations. Just let me summarize, but there's a couple of quickies. Let me just review, basically. Sometimes the best way to learn is to hear me review the week afterwards, because I'm a lot more concise when I'm reviewing than when I'm explaining. First of all, it means to put off means, as we said before, to reorient every part of your life. Putting off the old self is a radical statement. It means that everything you do has got to be changed. You know, there's a place in 2 Corinthians 5 where it says, if any man is in Christ, he is a what? A new creation. The old has passed away. Behold, the new has come. A lot of people say, what does that mean? I was a musician before. Does that mean now I'm going to be an engineer? You know, I enjoyed watching football before. Now does it mean I'm going to enjoy watching basketball? What does that mean? Everything's become new. That's silly. I guess a few things have become new, but not everything. And I think I tried to say, last week, and I'll say again, yes, everything. Because nothing you do is the same. Look, I mean, I don't want to be trivial. Do you like fishing? You're going to fish differently when you become a Christian. How could that be? Well, first of all, your motive. What does fishing accomplish in your life? Does it relax you? Fine. Does it untense you? Does it, you might say, restore your energy? Now, as a Christian, you look around for ways to restore your batteries, to relax yourself, not simply because you like the feel. Now you say, I've got a lot to do before I die. I've got a lot to do for Christ. There's not that much time. You know, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80 years, and I'll be at the judgment seat of Christ. It won't take long at all. I no longer, I'm a leisure-oriented person, and yet, now, I've got to be involved with leisure because I know it's one of the ways in which I restore my battery so I can have the longest and most fruitful life so that my mind can be clear when I am working and doing my best for Him. You know, you're actually fishing for a different reason. Not only that, when you're out in nature and you're enjoying nature, instead of just letting nature hit you, you meditate and you say, what a glorious place. Or as John Bradford used to say, if this beautiful universe and this beautiful nature and this great creation, with all of its infinities and immensities, if this is the kind of universe that God gives to His enemies, what kind of universe is He going to give to His friends? You meditate on that. You think about that, right? And not only that, even fishing, you say, I want to now not break the rules, but I'm careful about conservation. I'm careful about it. I realize there's some places I should fish and there's some places I shouldn't fish. Because I'm a steward of nature. God has made me a steward. He said, I have to have dominion. I am a caretaker. I'm a gardener of everything in this earth. And therefore, I'm much more careful about what I do when I'm fishing. Listen, you don't even fish the same way. Everything is reoriented. And that means the Christian life is an examined life. And the non-Christian life is an unexamined life. Can I explain this here? I tried to say this again last week, but the more I thought about it, the more I said I better put it in another perspective. Before you become a Christian, you do things because that's the way your group does it. You say, I'm Irish. I'm Italian. I'm Greek. I'm born and raised on Park Avenue. You see? Therefore, we do things in this way. That's why we do things. That's the way our group does it. That's the way we do them. And that's it. A Christian never again can act like that. Because when you become a Christian, you're picked up to a certain degree out of every group. You no longer are really there. The Bible says you're a new ethnic. It says that in 1 Peter 2, 9. It says you are a new ethne, a new ethnic. In a sense, you're a new people. And that means is you say, I have a king, and he has given me his word, and I have to examine every single area of my life to say, is this what my Lord wants me to do? So there's nothing that you do unconsciously anymore. Before you become a Christian, there's all kinds of stuff you do because you say, well, that's just the way we are. That's how we do it. I mean, that creates problems. It creates a lot of problems because you have to... brain at the door. A Christian is somebody who thinks far more, in a far more analytical and thoroughgoing way than anybody else. Frankly, if you can just get people to think, you've got them. Christianity has always said, if you can just get people to think, people don't, people, people who disbelieve in Christianity generally don't disbelieve because they're thinking. They disbelieve in Christianity because they're reacting. If you can think, you have them. If you can think, he's got you. Jesus, I mean. Now, it doesn't matter. He said, well, I'm Irish, I'm Italian, I'm Jewish, I'm Park Avenue, I'm from this side of the tracks, I'm from that side of the tracks. That's how we do things. Oh, no. Now you look at things. You know, a good friend of mine, he was a New York City policeman for 10 years. He told me a lot of stories that I'll have to start telling you just because they're so instructive. But one of the things he told me about being a New York City cop was that lots and lots of money gets thrown at you. Lots of bribes to everybody. But he says it was very clear, as soon as he got into the police culture, he realized this, you always take bribes from pimps. You take bribes from people that are trying to keep you away from what the police call victimless crimes. But you would never take money from drug dealers because those are crimes that hurt people. That makes a lot of sense, doesn't it? I mean, there's a certain common sense about this. I can't pick up every prostitute in New York City. The pimp says, look, you know, here's 50 bucks. Just stay away from the corner of so-and-so and so-and-so a place. You know, my friend used to say they would go in to a place, they'd come on out to their squad car, there'd be envelopes. This is a normal thing every day. There'd be envelopes of money in their squad car with a note from a certain person saying, please, you know, tonight on your beat, just stay. Here's how much money. Stay away from this corner, please. I'm working this corner tonight. And ordinarily, he just took it. Suddenly, this guy becomes a Christian and he says, is this right? Is this a victimless crime? He begins to think. He gets into a lot of trouble with the other guy in the squad car. A whole lot of trouble. He can't just act. He can't react. He's not just a policeman anymore. He's not just Russian. He's not just Italian. See? He's not just black or he's not just white. He's not just a lawyer. He's not just a doctor. He is a Christian first. And he has an examined life now. An examined life. In every area of your life, you're looking and you're saying, will I be willing to obey God anything that he tells me here? And will I be willing to trust God and accept anything he sends me here? And when you can answer yes to both those questions in any area of life, then you have begun to practice the Lordship of Christ and you lead an examined life. Now, then you put off the old self. You see, you're looking at every area and whenever you see a place that you have to change, you put off the old self. You say, I am no longer that. That's not me anymore. I have nothing to do with that kind of life. Yes, of course, it's easy for me to go into it again. It's easy for me to act like that. But that's not me. I won't have anything to do with it. And that's what it means to put off the old self. Now, examine your life. Reorient even the things that are used to do before you will continue to do and begin to put off the old self. And then you have to turn to the positive. And the positive is be renewed in the spirit of your mind. Now, it's the only other thing we'll talk about tonight. What does that mean? If you see, the New International version that I read goes this way. It says, to be made new in the attitude of your mind. Hmm. All right. I've just got to pick and choose. Okay. What does that mean? First of all, you have to, first of all, you see this? This is something that is not a middle step between put off and put on. It says put off, and then it says be made new, and then it says put on. Don't think this is a middle step. It doesn't mean you put off, and then God does this, and then you put on. The tenses are all wrong for that. Put off and put on are single past and present past tenses. Put off and put on. But the be made new is a continuous present. I've mentioned that before. What it means is that as you are putting off and as you are putting on, God is doing this. This is the key. If you put off and put on, and yet God is not renewing you in the spirit of your mind, then all you're putting off and all you're putting on is futile. This is the secret. If there's a secret to change that sticks, this is it. The reason you've tried to put things off and put things on, and it hasn't worked, if that's true in your case, it's because this hasn't happened. That's a nice categorical statement I can make. If you say, hey, I've tried to put worked, it's because you have missed this. This happens inside. You see, it happens during, it happens within. You're putting off and putting on. God is making you new in the spirit of your mind. Number one. Number two, this is something that you can quench. It's actively passive. You see, be made new is an actively passive statement. You can't make yourself new, right? God alone can make you new, and yet you have to be made new. You have to live in a condition of holy availability. Now listen, don't ask me, well, what the heck does that mean? I'm not totally sure either. One of the greatnesses, one of the adventures of Christianity is that Christianity is not just a nice little rule book that tells you exactly what buttons to push, which time. It's saying here that on the one hand, only God can make you new in the spirit of your mind, but on the other hand, you have got to be made new. That means you have to make yourself available. You can quench it. You can stop it. And we have, regularly. So it's something that we have to do, and yet it's something we can't do. We have to make ourselves available for it. But then what is it? The NIV talks about the attitude of your mind. Some of you have an older version, and it talks about the spirit of your mind. And it's a tough phrase to translate. What does it mean? And without going into all the details, I'll tell you what I think it means. It doesn't mean the Holy Spirit, because you never talk about the Holy Spirit as our spirit, the spirit of our minds. No. And it doesn't just mean the general spirit of your heart. You know, there's places where the word mind and heart and spirit are all used interchangeably for your soul. Same thing. But it couldn't mean that, because we're talking about the spirit of the mind. The word spirit originally means breath, or life, or power. The life of the mind. The power of the mind. It's a very, very deep concept, and a very important phrase. It's not just saying, be renewed in your thinking. It's not just talking about that. It's talking about something behind the thinking. It's talking about the spirit of your mind, the governing principle, an interior principle that captures and leads your mind. It talks about it in Genesis 6, when it says, Every imagination of the thoughts of the mind was only evil continually. And that means behind your thoughts is something called the imagination. Now, the trouble with the imagination, the word imagination, is to you, it means creativity. But in the Bible, it means something different. It is the faculty of the soul that assigns value. It's the faculty of appreciation. You know, for example, here's two people, Mr. A and Mr. B. And they both eat a mouthful of lamb. And they're eating the same piece of meat. One of them says, yuck, I hate lamb. And the other one says, I love lamb. All right? Hopefully that second guy is Greek, and the first guy is not. But the point is, what happened? What's the difference? It's the same stuff. The difference is taste. And what the taste bud is to the body, the imagination of the spirit of the mind, is to the soul and to the heart. Now, to give you an example of how it works and how this is the key to all change, it's not enough just to put off and put on. And you've actually got to be renewed in the spirit of your mind. Let me read you an amazing story out of the Old Testament. And actually, it's referred to in the handout. It's in the book of Judges. In Judges chapter 7, there was a man named Achan. Achan, very important guy. When the Israelites were asked to go and capture a city, the city of Jericho, God said to everyone, if you see any money, if you see any plunder, you do not take it for your own. What you must do is you bring it into the tabernacle, and it becomes part of the tabernacle. It becomes part of the money that supports the tabernacle, and the priesthood, and the sacrificial system, and so on. Achan, however, when he was in the battle, he found, as we'll see, some things, and he took them and hid them and stole them. Then Joshua finds him and brings him out, and he tells him to confess. And this is what Achan says down in chapter 7, but down in, of Judges, pardon me, whoops, pardon me, it's in Joshua 7. Did I say Judges 7? I led you astray, and I, gosh, your fearless biblical leader. Here we go. All right. Joshua 7, down in verse 21. carefully, it is true, I have sinned against the Lord, the God of Israel. This is what I have done. When I saw the plunder of a beautiful robe from Babylonia, 200 shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold weighing 50 shekels, I coveted them and took them, and they are hidden in the ground under my tent with the silver underneath. Now, would you see very carefully this chain? This can make all the difference in the world to your own lives. There's a chain. I saw them, first step. But then the second step is he saw that they were beautiful. The third step was I coveted them. That's where his thinking came in. He began to say, I want them. And then, fourthly, he took them. And fifthly, he hid them. Where is the key? Where is the crucial link? It's the second link. You notice it says he saw them, but what did he see? He saw a beautiful robe. Not just a robe, a beautiful robe. And look at this. He also saw 200 shekels of silver. How did he know how many shekels there were? You know, he looks at this, and here's a pot, here's a case, here's a cache of shekels. How does he know there's 200 in there? He counted them. And then a wedge of gold weighing 50 shekels. How does he know how much it weighs? I suppose it could have been stamped in some way. It's very unlikely from what we know. All right. He weighs the shekels. He counts. He weighs the gold. He counts the shekels, and he lets the robe look beautiful in his eyes. Here's what he's doing. He has taken these things, and he's turning over the beauty of them on the palette of his soul. Before he even thinks, I want them, first of all, he begins to fill his mind. This is what we call the imagination, because the imagination is that which makes things vivid, that which creates pictures, that which assigns beauty and value and appreciation. He sees them. Then he lets the spirit of his mind be captured by them. Then he begins to think, I want them. What could he have done at this point? You know, I suppose, at the thought level, he could have started to argue with himself, which is where most of us try to capture. We try to stop our behavior. We get to the thought level, and at the thought level, we say, you know, your thoughts are going, I want that. And you start to say, that's wrong. That's bad. You know, you'll get in trouble. Oh, yes. And you can start to argue at the thought level, but you should have gone back and renewed yourself with the spirit of the mind, or at least made it available for God to do it. Here's what you do. Instead of turning over on the pallet of his heart, on the pallet of his soul, instead of turning it over and saying, look how beautiful that is. Hey, look at the number. Look, there's 200 here. 50. 50 shekels this thing weighs. Look at that. If instead of doing that, he had weighed in his heart and turned over on the pallet of his soul what God had been doing for him, if he had been saying, I was a slave, I was nothing more than a slave, I was living the life of a dog in Egypt, and God, in his infinite mercy, let us all out. And instead of a dog now, I'm a man. Instead of a slave, I have my family, I have a clan, we're on our way to the promised land. He has taken us out again and again and again of one peril after another, in spite of the fact that we have belly ached and grumbled all the way. What a great God it is. What is that doing? He's renewing, he's being renewed in the spirit of his mind. As he thinks about the truth, as he turns it over on the pallet of his heart, the spirit of God then burns those thoughts into his heart and changes his heart so that the actual conscious thoughts that come out would not have been covetous thoughts. Do you see? I saw, I was, my imagination was captured, then I coveted them, then I took them, then I hid them. Now, you know, you can, there's all sorts of ways in which you can look and see how this is operating in your own life. But I want you to, like, for example, okay, just for example, you know, I mean, this is a way oversimplification, a big oversimplification. So what happens if every time you brought your, you know, every year you brought your report card home, every time you brought your report card home for your dad, it had all A's on it and one B plus, and what did your dad do? He'd get it out and he'd say, what's this? Every time, right? Nothing about the A's, the B plus. So what sinks down, what captures the spirit of your imagination? You better be good. Hmm? You better be good. You better not fail. You better be perfect. No slip-ups. What happens as you get older? How can you be renewed in the spirit of your mind? Well, what you have to do is you have to say, Lord, yeah, I do fail, just like everybody else, even the people that look successful. But I know this. I know who I am in Christ. I know how to do the spirit of your Mother Monday Mc欢 to祝 Mea in Christ. I know that S-R-L-T. And I know that S-R-L-T. have to do is you have to say, Lord, yeah, I do fail, just like everybody else, even the people that look successful. But I know this. I know who I am in Christ. I realize that Jesus is my Savior. Jesus is my advocate right now. I stand before Jesus Christ stands before the Father, and he's my high priest. And we're told that all the names of the children of Israel, the names of the children of God are on his effort, on his breastplate. They are engraved on precious stones over his heart. And when God looks at Jesus Christ, this is what the gospel tells me, he sees me. And when he looks at me, he sees Jesus. He regards me through Jesus. When I received him as Savior, that means all of his righteousness. You heard what we were talking about when we baptized the verticios. That's what the Bible says, that his righteousness is imputed to you. Look at Jesus Christ. Look at his perfect humanity. Look at his pristine moral beauty. Never an unseizable word. Total compassion. Great courage. Complete humility. Steadfast love. What a record! That's your record. God regards you as if you'd done everything Jesus has done and suffered everything Jesus has suffered. Do you know what you're doing? You're not hearing me. You're overhearing me. This is how you have to talk to yourself. To be renewed in the spirit of your mind is to preach to yourself until your imagination is captured. You go studying the Bible, you go reading Christian books, and you look for radioactive truths. Do you know what I mean by that? Look, some years ago, I was, especially when I started going around, when you preach to the same place every week, after a while you start to get pretty relaxed in a sense. You say, well, I know how I do, I know these people and they know me and I know what I'm doing. When you start, when you travel around a lot and you're always up in front of a different group of people, you begin to get, you really begin to deal with stage fright. One day I was reading the letters of John Newton and one of a great Anglican minister lived a couple hundred years ago. And John Newton at one point says this. He says, I find that it is to keep my eye upon Christ as my only peace and my only life is the hardest part of my Christian calling. I find to keep my eye on Christ as my only peace and my only life is the hardest part of my Christian calling. The day I read that, I felt it just go right on into my imagination, right into the spirit of my mind. And I started to do something I might have told you about before. I started to get up in front of audiences and quietly, not out loud, under my breath, looking at them, I would say, you are not my peace. What you think of me, how you react to me, whether you receive me well, you are not my peace. Christ is my peace. It freed me. See, now what happens is you spend your time studying the scripture, you spend your time talking to friends, you spend your time listening to the word of God preached, you spend your time reading Christian literature, looking for those radioactive nuggets, which means you take the truth and you just roll it over on the palate of your mind, trying to get the sweetness out of it, until very often you'll find the Holy Spirit himself will come and take one of these nuggets, like you are not my peace, and just burn it on in there. And at that point, the spirit of your mind begins to change. It begins to get captured. And as a result, you can deal with temptation. As a result, you can make the changes. Look, you're having trouble forgiving somebody? Are you really? It all has to be, what are you going to do about it? Well, at the thought level, you can say, I'm not going to keep thinking all those bitter thoughts about him. I'm not going to do it. And you can try, and that sometimes works. My little diagram shows that sometimes you can move from the putting off to the putting on by not going all the way down to the level of the spirit of the mind. You might do it at the behavioral level. Some of you have got good self-control. I'm not going to think those nasty thoughts about him anymore. But it's more likely this. You're having bitterness problems because the spirit of your mind is captured by all the things that he or she has done to you. You're thinking about them. More than that, it's captured your mind. It's vivid. It's on video in your heart. You know on audio, you have a little voice that says, you ought to forgive her. God says forgive her. But on video is all the things she's done to you. That spirit of your mind has captured you. As a result, you are not able to change. What should you do? You've got to put onto video what Jesus has done for you. Look at what he's forgiven you of. Look at what he's put up with. Look at all that he's done for you and yet look at what you have done for him. Look at the ingratitude. Considering how he constantly forgives you. Considering how he always forgives you. Considering that your debt is infinitely greater than her debt to you. What are you doing holding it over? preach to yourself. The spirit of your mind is captured and you can make the change. Then you can put off and you can put on. Are any of you shy people? Are you right now, are you afraid to do something because you're afraid of the reaction you might get? How do you put off fear and put on courage? You talk to yourself. I'll never forget the day that I heard one preacher say, who cares about the approval of the serfs when you have the honor of the king? I've never forgotten that. I said, good night, that's it. What the heck am I afraid of? Who needs the approval of the serfs when I have the honor of the king? What happened at that point? The spirit of the mind was renewed. Now maybe the things I'm telling you are not doing it. You see, the thoughts, the truths that the spirit has used in my own heart to just push them on in and deal with stage fright, push them on in and deal with bitterness, push them on in, you've got to go get your own. Be made new. You can't be passive. You can't sit back and say, okay, I'm waiting. I'm waiting. You've got to study. You've got to give all diligence. You've got to think. You've got to pray. You've that's what you have to do. And if you do, in Hebrews 12, it talks about the fact that we're surrounded by such a great cloud of witnesses, egging us on as we're running the race. Who's the great cloud of witnesses? All the dead, I think all the dead saints. There's Moses cheering you on. There's Peter. Huh? Sure. There's Jonah. And you know what? When you look up and say, you know, there's Thomas. A doubter became a man of faith. There's Moses. Hmm? There's Moses. A coward became a great leader. There's Peter. A coward became a great leader. Who knows what you could be if you simply would be made new in the spirit of your mind? You can change. Are you in a box? I remember reading a book long ago that ended like this. Do you feel, even though you're a Christian, that you're in a box? And there's absolutely no way out? Paul and Silas were in prison, and they prayed. They were renewed in the spirit of their mind. They weren't afraid. They knew that God was the king. And the earth shook. And all the prison doors burst open. There is a way of escape, even though it may be the way of endurance. God can change you. You can be changed. And maybe the great change you may have to make is to, first of all, and above all, put off the old man for the first time by repentance and put on the new man for the first time by giving yourself to him. Because all these promises, every single promise that I'm making to you tonight, and that I'm saying God is making to you, is contingent on this, that you belong to him, that you're his, that you've received him, believed on his name, and he's given you authority to become his children. Friends, you can't say can't. Let's close. Our Father, now all we ask is that you would help us take the promises and burn them into our hearts, really renew the spirit of our minds through the truth. It's so simple that it's hard. By your spirit, help us to show the world that by your power we can change. By your power we can become like your son, who came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
