TITLE: I Am the Resurrection and the Life (Easter)
SCRIPTURE: John 11:16-27
TOPICS: Death Easter Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-am-the-resurrection-and-the-life-easter/

============================================================

John 11, 16 to 27. Then Thomas, called Didymus, said to the rest of the disciples, Let's also go, that we may die with him. And on his arrival, Jesus found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb for four days. Bethany was less than two miles from Jerusalem. And many Jews had come to Martha and Mary to comfort them in the loss of their brother. When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went out to meet him, but Mary stayed at home. Lord, Martha said to Jesus, if you had been there, been here, my brother would not have died. But I know that even now God will give you whatever you ask. Jesus said to her, your brother will rise again. Martha answered, I know he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day. Today, Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will live, even though he dies. And whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this? Yes, Lord, she told him. I believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God, who was to come into the world. This is God's word. Friends, historically, this faith, the Christian faith, seeks converts. It seeks to convert people. And that has bothered many thoughtful people for years. And the question goes this way. Why can't you just look upon people with your Christian faith and love and look upon them with love and with peace and accept them as they are? Why do you have to persuade? Why do you have to persuade? That's bad for the social fabric. It's bad for community harmony. And the answer to the question, why do you have to persuade, is here. It's Easter. Why was it that 5,000 Jewish people were converted to Christianity the first two times that any sermons, any Christian sermons were preached? Why did that happen? Because the first two sermons were about Easter. The first two sermons were about this. The claim of Easter, which is that the rejected and the executed Jesus Christ is now alive again from the dead. And news like that can't be suppressed. Imagine for a moment that you were one of the 500 people that Paul said saw the risen Christ at one time after he was raised from the dead. Paul tells us that there was a place in which we don't know where it is, but the risen Christ appeared to 500 people at once. Now let me ask you, just for a moment, imagine that you were one of those 500 people and you've just heard him speak and now he's just disappeared and your eyes are just beginning to recover from the sight of his glory and his power. Remember, what's the first thing on your heart? What do you say? You immediately say, well, I'm going to have to keep a lid on this. It'll be bad for the social fabric. My word. I mean, there's people that my neighbors have are a different persuasion. I wouldn't want to do anything to harm social cooperation. I have to make sure that this doesn't get around. Come on. You couldn't possibly talk like that. You couldn't possibly think like that. The Christian church was not the result of planning or development. The Christian church was the fallout of an explosion of joy. The Christian church was the result of that explosion, a radioactive fallout that wasn't lethal, but it healed people as it came on down. Go look and see how the faith spread in the early days. Read about it in the New Testament. You will see the Christians did not go out on the streets and grab people to talk to them about Jesus. The reverse was true. Look at every sermon in the early accounts of the spread of the gospel. Look at every place where Christians so-called testify to their faith. In every case, they were simply responding to questions. Because the people outside the church recognized a reality inside the church that they could not account for. They couldn't understand. There was a generosity. There was a courage. There was a change of lives, the peace, the love. And so the people outside the church came to the people inside the church and they kept asking them questions. What's happened to you? And that is how the faith spread. And what's the answer? What happened to you? The answer is the resurrection. All of the early sermons that you see that immediately created that explosion were sermons about the resurrection. Sermons about the resurrection. What the Christians were saying is, look, Jesus Christ who was crucified has now been raised and he's seated at the right hand of the throne of the universe. under his feet and all evil has been put down. That is the reality up there that all human beings from henceforth have got to take into account. And that's the reality in here that once known and experienced experience leads people to come at you and gape and say, what's happened to you? In other words, the resurrection, it's a reality up there in Christ and it's a reality in here in me. And this one verse that I want to look at this morning, this verse 26, the classic example, the classic comprehensive statement of the doctrine of Easter talks about these two realities. I am the resurrection and the life, he said. Anyone who believes in me, though he die, yet shall he live. And anyone who lives and believes in me will never die. What Jesus is saying is, on the one hand, there's a resurrection reality in him and there'll be a resurrection reality in you. Let me just show you those two. The structure of this is the same thing as the structure of those early sermons. There's a resurrection reality up there that we've all got to account, to which we all have to give account. And there's a resurrection reality in here, which can be known and experienced. So let's take a look. At first, the first part, I'm just looking at that one verse. I am the resurrection and the life. And then, he who believes, what happens? First of all, when Jesus says, I am the resurrection and the life, what does he mean? There's a lot he means, but I'd just like to take a look at this. First, let's stress the first two or three words. Excuse me. I am the resurrection. Here, Jesus is trying to show you that he has been raised for you. I want you to learn that this morning. He's been raised for you. Jesus is not saying, I will be resurrected, though he will be. And he's not saying, he's not saying, I will be resurrected, nor is he saying, I will show you how you can live so you will be resurrected. He's not saying that either. He is saying, I am the resurrection. I am your resurrection. I am the way anybody gets resurrected. My resurrection is yours. I have been raised for you. Let me say something that I've tried to say before. The essence of Christianity is personal pronouns. If you were here this morning saying, Jesus was, the Son of God was born. He died. He was raised. He ascended. He's coming again. That doesn't make you a Christian. But if you say, the Son of God was born for me. He died for me. He was raised for me. He was ascended to the right hand of the Father for me, and he's going to come again for me. That's the essence of Christianity. And Paul says it here. He says, Jesus, he says that in Romans 425, he says, Jesus Christ was raised for our justification. You're not a Christian, and you don't understand Christianity if you just understand that Jesus was raised. You have to understand that he was raised for us. Paul says, for our salvation. Well, somebody says, how could that be? I know he died for us. He died to pay for our sins. But how could he be raised for our salvation? What did that do for us? And here's what it did. You go in, especially in a place in New York, you go in and you buy an item in a store, make sure you get that receipt. Make sure they staple it onto your bag because there's always all these strange people who walk around at near any windows, any doors who are watching. And you better have your receipt with you. Because you see, if you have a receipt, that's your way of guaranteeing that you will never have to pay for that item again, ever. So if you're walking along out toward the door and one of these plainclothes people says, wait a minute, is that really your merchandise? What do you do? What do you do? Huh? What do you do? You whip out your receipt with confidence. You defy them. You pull out and you say, look at this. I never have to pay for this again. And what does that person say? All right. You're free. You're free to go. Friends, listen, there are a lot of people here. I know, because I've talked to a lot of you. There are a lot of people here who don't believe you can ever be free from the sins of your past. Never be free from your failures. Never be free from your inadequacies. You've been taught or you're teaching yourself or both that these are not things you can ever put behind you. They're not things that you're ever going to really be able to live down. You'll never be able to forget them. You always have to live with them. And God says, no. On the cross, Jesus Christ paid. And I have given you your receipt. What is the receipt? Christ paid in full for everything? How do you know that Jesus Christ paid so that you never have to pay again for any of those things in your past? How do you know God has given you a receipt? What is that receipt? When Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, God's stamp paid in full across the pages of history in letters that anybody who will open their eyes can see. God said, this payment is sufficient. You never have to pay for these things again. Never. Do you understand that? Do you have your receipt? Do you look at the resurrection and you say, that's God's way of saying to me, I'll never have to pay for any of these things again. Do you live in that? I am the resurrection means I've been raised for you. But let's look at the last part of the statement. I am the resurrection. Jesus is not just telling us that he was raised for us, but Jesus is also saying, what I've done for you is I have achieved victory and power over death. I am the resurrection and the life. Victory and power over death. Look, death looms over and casts a huge shadow on us. And right now in our modern Western culture, I see at least two ways that we have to deal with this monstrosity. Death is a monstrosity. Nobody, nobody can live a day without some kind of strategy for dealing with the reality and the inevitability of death. Now, right now, there's two basic ones that we use in our modern Western society. The one is denial. Let's not talk about death. Death is obscene. Death is something that we're just not going to talk about. As a minister who does funerals, I've noticed something. And that is that people are really like a bunch of prisoners in a jail who have decided the way they're going to deal with their condition, the way they're going to handle it, is that they're going to, they have made a promise never to talk about it, never to mention that they're in jail, never to make any reference to it at all. And so they won't, they won't remind each other about it, so they try to forget it about themselves. So it's a kind of a conspiracy of silence. Let's not admit that we're in jail. Let's deny it. Let's never talk about it. Let's never make a reference to it. But at a funeral, unfortunately, it's like all those prisoners are suddenly being made to gather together and stare at the jail gate, at the door, at the bars. And it's tremendously embarrassing. The number one thing I notice at funerals, the number one emotion I feel is embarrassment. And one writer put it this way, and it's an amazing statement. He says, for society's sake, we must hide the unbearable disturbance caused by the ugliness of dying. People need to believe that life is happy, unquote. For society's sake, we must hide the unbearable disturbance caused by the ugliness of dying. People need to believe that life is happy. That is the most bleak admission of despair. He is saying if anybody begins to actually admit to themselves the inevitability and the reality of death, life will be drained of all joy. So that's one way we deal with it. We just deny it. The other way is we sentimentalize it. See, psychologists have rightly been telling us for a number of years that if you deny something that you fear, if you fear something but you refuse to face it, what actually happens is that thing controls you unconsciously. If you're afraid of something that you refuse to face, you deny it, then it still runs your life. And because of that, a lot of people have said, wait a minute, then the way in which we are dealing with death is here, we're afraid of it, but we act as if it's not there. And so there's a second approach that tries to get around this problem. And the second approach is to say, right, let's not be afraid of death. Let's face it, and let's say it's our friend. Death is a natural thing. Death is not an awful thing. Death is a beautiful thing. Death is a peaceful thing. Death is just the final stage of life. You've heard that? And when you hear it, you know in your heart it's a damnable lie. That's a cosmetic statement that works about as well as putting lipstick and rouge on a skeleton. All it does is make it more hideous. Listen, the Bible gives us an understanding of death that is the only way, I believe, to live in freedom in this world. The Bible says, first of all, death is an enemy. In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul calls it the last enemy. It's an enemy. It is not a friend. We know it's not a friend. Golly. When you get in the presence of death, you sense that it's not a friend. Oh yeah, for a little while. At first, sometimes, under some circumstances, when someoneを... just leave them alone for three or four days. And you will see that death is a twisting, perverting, destructive thing. It's abnormal, it's not a friend, it's an enemy, we hate it, we know we're not meant for this. And even in the presence of Lazarus, here is Jesus Christ, ready to raise Lazarus from the dead. What does he do? He weeps. Do you see Jesus Christ walking up and saying, you guys don't know what I'm going to do, you're all weeping, but wait till you see. Jesus weeps, because in the presence of death, he senses what we sense. It's a hateful thing, it's an enemy. This friend stuff is ridiculous. We know we're not just a little drop of water slipping back into the ocean. This is our enemy. But on the other hand, Christianity alone, of all the world faiths, sees death as a defeated enemy. Oh death, where is thy sting? Paul says, oh grave, where is thy victory? How can anybody in their right mind have the audacity to taunt death? When Paul says in 1 Corinthians 15, oh death, where is thy sting? Oh grave, where is thy victory? He's teasing it. He's taunting at it. He's sticking his tongue out at it. How does anyone have the right and the audacity and the power to do such a thing? And the answer is, any Christian man or woman has the power to do that. Because the Bible says that Jesus Christ has broken the bands of death. Peter says in his first, the first sermon in history, he says Jesus Christ broke the bands of death. It was not possible for them to hold him. And as a result, death cannot harm us. If Jesus died so you don't have to pay for anything in your past, and he's risen to be your living Savior, then what can death do to you? You know the George Herbert poem that we've used here in worship a number of times? There's a great place where George Herbert has this dialogue between death and the Christian. And death says, let losers talk, yet thou shalt die, these arms will crush thee. And what does the Christian say in that poem? Spare not, do thy worst, and I shall be one day better than before. Thou so much worse, and thou shalt be no more. What is George Herbert, what is the Christian saying? He says, come on, death. As you reach out your hands to strangle me, instead of breaking me, you'll make me. The worst thing that can happen to a Christian is the best thing. The worst thing that can happen is that you die, in which case it creates more power and glory in your life than ever. Death becomes, to the Christian, a dark tunnel into the ballroom. That's all. Do you understand that? That's the way a Christian lives. That's the reason why you sang, and do you know what you sang? The last verse of the first hymn. Ours, the cross, the grave, the skies. That's based on 1 Corinthians 3, where Paul says, If you're a Christian, all things are yours. Whether life or death, all things are yours. And what is he saying? If you live on Monday, then you're with God. If you die on Monday, you're with God. A Christian says, come on, cross. Come on, grave. The lower you lay me, the higher you'll raise me. Come on! What can you do to me? There's a taunting. You bid death, scorn and defiance. And death is the number one power arrayed against a human being. Christians look it right in the eye. And they say, come on. Spare not! Do thy worst! And if you try, you will only make me better than before. Thou so much worse, that thou shalt be no more. Let me ask you quickly, because we've got to just go on to that other part. Do you have your receipt? And if you have your receipt, do you have this peace with God? And do you have this scorn and defiance in the face of death? And therefore, is fear really banished from your life forever? One of the ways you can tell whether or not you have peace with God, one of the ways you can tell whether you have your receipt, is how you handle death. Do you deny death? Do you sentimentalize it? Do you repress it? Are you afraid of it? You see, if you are, then that probably means Jesus Christ might be your moral exemplar. He might be your model. He might be a great example for you. But he's not your resurrection and your life. You see? You might have made him your example, but you've never said, Oh Lord, I cannot ever be acceptable to the Lord, to the Father. But if you, because you died, because you were raised, if everything you have done comes... it means to make Him your resurrection in your life. And when that happens, you've got your receipt. Do you have your receipt? Are you living this way? Are you rejoicing in this? Can you bid scorn and defiance to death, or is death still an unbearable disturbance for you? Do you hear me? Now, let's take a look at the second part, just briefly. Jesus' resurrection reality, we've seen. He was raised for us, and His resurrection destroys death. But we have something else. Jesus says, and therefore, if you believe in Me, two things happen. On the one hand, He says, He who believes in Me, see, the resurrection reality of Christ comes into us through that little word, believe. He who believes in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, and he who lives and believes in Me shall never die. Now, Jesus is actually talking about two resurrections that come into our lives. The first one, He says, He who believes in Me, though he were dead. Now, that's an aorist subjunctive. Now, it's an aorist past, which means, it's a Greek tense, it means, though He died at one point, yet, then He uses a future tense, in the future He will live. And what Jesus is saying here is, when you die, you won't stay dead, but your body will come back to life. You will get a new body. And therefore, it's talking this way. When you die, my friends, the Bible tells us we immediately go into the conscious presence of God. Hebrews talks about the spirits of just men made perfect, worshiping at God's feet. But unlike the Greek religions and the pagan religions and the Eastern religions, Christians do not envision a bodiless eternity. We don't see the body as a bad thing at all. No, God created my body and my soul, and He's going to redeem my body and my soul. And Jesus says, the same thing that we read this morning from Job. Job says, I know that my Redeemer liveth, and on the last day He will stand upon the earth. And though worms destroy my flesh, yet in my flesh shall I see God. On the last day, though your old flesh has been eaten away, you'll get a new flesh. And by the way, that verse says, literally, it says, I know my Redeemer liveth, and He will stand against the earth on the last day. And you know what I think that probably means? It means Jesus Christ is going to look at the earth on that last day and He says, Earth, you've got my people in there. Dens, caves, oceans, mountains, give them up to me. They're mine. And out we will come. And we'll all get our new bodies. And nothing will be able to withstand His command on that day. Because He has the name which is above every name. And on that day, we're all going to come, all of our bodies will suddenly, you see, we'll get new bodies. Our souls in heaven will be united with our new bodies. And we will say, O grave, where is thy victory? But then Jesus talks about a second kind of resurrection. And here's where we have to leave it. And it's a very, very, very searching question. Jesus says, He who believes in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. And he who lives and believes in Me shall never die. Now, He's talking about a different kind of life here. He's not talking about how your body gets renewed and resurrected. Here He's talking about a kind of life that once it starts, never goes out. He says, And if you believe in Me, he who liveth and believeth in Me will never die. And He is saying this, There's a spiritual resurrection that happens now. When My Holy Spirit comes into your life, when you believe on Me, that Spirit of God comes in and renews you and changes you. And you are transformed from one degree of splendor into the next until the moment of physical death, in which case that process actually becomes perfect. And you burst like a flame into the presence of God, burning with His own joy and His own energy and His own purity and His own perfection. And so we're talking about a kind of life that starts now. That's Jesus' whole point with Martha. Martha says, Yes, I know that my brother will be resurrected sometime in the distant future. And what does Jesus say? Hey, hey, He says, I am the resurrection. The resurrection is not a future possibility. It is a present certainty. Jesus says, Wherever I am, there is life necessarily. And that means that if you are in the presence of God, the presence of Jesus Christ, wherever He is, there has to be a resurrection now. And this is the teaching. This is the teaching, and it's very searching. Listen. Is there anything going on in your life that's revolutionary? Have you had an experience that you... way, that your heart has been changed? So where there was hardness, now there's softness. Where there was stagnation, there's freshness. Where there was blindness, there's sight. Where there was death, there was life. Can you say that something so revolutionary and so amazing has happened to your heart and your life that you'd have to say there's been a spiritual resurrection in my life? Can you point to a moment? Can you point to a process? Can you point to it? If you can't, Jesus Christ is saying here this morning on Easter, I'm not in your life, because wherever I am, there is life necessarily. He says, I am the resurrection and the life. If I am in your presence, you don't talk about a future resurrection only. There's a resurrection happening now. And that means moral reformation is not the same thing as conversion. You see, it's possible, for example, unless you're spiritually resurrected, it's possible to morally reform yourself. Hey, if you read the Bible and believe the Bible, but only as a morally reformed person instead of a spiritually resurrected person, you know what will happen? You will just feel more and more superior to other people. But if you're spiritually resurrected as you read the Bible, you will find that the Bible is alive in you. It's at large in you. It's sort of like, have you ever tasted something so sweet that it electrifies your whole body and you just can't help but stuff it in? And in the same way, the Bible becomes alive. It begins, it melts in your mouth. It dawns on you. It shines. It's alive and active. A two-edged sword, Hebrew says. It's not my word, a hammer. It's not my word, a fire or a hammer that breaks a rock in pieces, the Bible says. And it becomes alive in you. Is spiritual resurrection going on in your life now? This cuts two ways, does it not, my friends? On the one hand, look at yourself. What is looming over your life? What are the biggest obstacles in your life? If you are a Christian, if you believe in Him, if you've made Him your resurrection in life, not just your moral example, you realize that nothing, nothing can actually stop Him from accomplishing His purposes in your life, and that is to make you holy and joyful. That means whatever is in your life that's holding you back has got to come down. And the book of Jude says it this way. Someday He's going to present you perfect before the throne with great rejoicing. And let me tell you this. The greatest joy possible is to rejoice in your own beauty, but without a shred of self-importance, without a shred of pride, just delighting in knowing that you please Him and also that He has done it in you. Do you hear me? You see, on that day we're going to say, look at me. And Jude says He will present you faultless and spotless and blemishless and without a fault, spotless before the throne with great rejoicing. The greatest joy possible is to rejoice in your own beauty, but without a shred of self-importance, without a shred of pride, just knowing that you're pleasing Him. Do you want that? Is there a part of you that desires that? Are you rejoicing in that? But there's another side to it. It cuts two ways. On the other hand, are you using this resurrection power that's in your life? The best thing you can do today on Easter, Christian friends, is to kill a sin. Because those things are still the things that hold you back and keep the life-giving resurrection power from just flowing through your body. Go kill one. Today. Don't look for an Easter egg. Don't pick a lily. You want to celebrate Easter today? If you're a Christian, my dear friends, if you're a Christian, look at a sin, look at something in your life that's holding back the resurrection power, something that's continuing to allow decay and breakdown to happen in your life and say, I'm going to kill it. I'm going to make myself an active enemy of death in my life today. Kill a sin. Take this text and turn it into a prayer. Yes, Lord, I believe. If you believe for the first time this morning or for the nth time, then all of that resurrection reality comes in. What is the link between I am the resurrection and the life and all the great things that can happen in your life? Believe. Believe. Make a new resurrection and life. And really celebrate Easter. Let's pray. Now, Father, as we listen to the music during the offering, we pray that we would really celebrate Easter by offering ourselves to you. There's some of us that have to realize that death is still an unbearable... with you. We're still afraid of death. And as a result, we see that maybe Jesus, oh Lord, you might be a good example, but you're not our resurrection in life. I pray, Father, for those folks that now, even during the offering time, they can come to you directly and give themselves to you. And Father, I pray for those of us who simply are not realizing the death-breaking power that's in our lives. We're not really giving it scriptural freedom to work. And we pray now that you would help us to put to death those things within us that are keeping us from rejoicing in our growing beauty, knowing simply this, that it pleases you. And now we pray these things in Jesus' name. Amen.
