TITLE: I Am the I Am
SCRIPTURE: John 8:31-36; 51-59
TOPICS: Understanding the Gospel Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: John – On Knowing the Christ
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-am-the-i-am/

============================================================

Jesus is. And there's no more direct way of finding out the answer to that question than to ask him. And of course, ask him in the way it was asked. If you see right here in the middle of the passage, they say to him, who do you think you are? Now let's ask the same question. In fact, let's ask three questions to the text because all three are addressed here. Who does he think he is? Who do they think he is? The listeners. Who do you think he is? Okay. Who does he think he is? Who do they think he is? Who do you think he is? First, who does he think he is? Well, the answer, the climax to that is right here at the very end. Before Abraham was, I am. He calls himself, I am. If you're going to understand that, you want to understand, you have to put that into context and you have to see what led up to it. Jesus in this increasingly hostile conversation. Don't forget, it's with people who believed him, see? See at the top at verse 31, these are folks who have been attracted to him. They believed him. They liked him. They said, we want to follow you. Now he starts off by making two claims that are enormous, claims as to what he can do for us. Two claims as to what he can do for us. The first one's very confusing. He says, I can set you free. And they come back and they say, we are Abram's descendants and have never been slaves of anyone. How can you say that we shall be set free? Now, when they ask that question, they're really saying two things. First of all, when they say we've never been slaves of anyone, interesting. Now, of course, we would say, well, surely they were slaves in Egypt. They were slaves in Babylon. And that must mean that they're not talking so much about politics or economics or that sort of thing. They're talking about inner freedom. They're talking about spiritual freedom. You remember in Braveheart, there's one place where Mel Gibson says it. I won't say how he says it. I'd split your eardrums. But he says, they can take away our farms, right? They can take away our land, something like this. They can take away our land. They can take away our families. They can take away our lives. But they can't take away our freedom. And what is he talking about? What do you mean? If anybody can take away all that, doesn't that mean your freedom's gone? No. And you know immediately when he says it, you know what he's talking about. And that's what they're talking about. Spiritual inner freedom. And then they say, we're Abraham's children. Now, let's not get distracted by this. Here's what they're saying. They were saying, we are the followers of biblical religion. If you're going to talk about slaves, talk about the pagans. They're a slave to sex and drugs and rock and roll. They're into all that. You see, we're good people. We're moral people. We're religious people. How in the world can you talk about us being spiritual slaves? But what Jesus Christ says here is actually something, it's startling and it's also important if you want to understand who he is. Because he says, this message comes up continually throughout all of the gospels. He says, to be religious and moral is just as much spiritual slavery as to be irreligious and immoral. And notice, look here, in verse 35, he gives us an illustration. He says, imagine a slave of a great head of a household and a son of a great head of a household. He's imagining a Roman, an estate, a great house. He says, imagine a slave and imagine a son. He says, in some ways, on the surface, they look exactly alike. First of all, they both live in the home. They're both fed by the master. You see, they both, they live in the home. They're fed by the head of the home. They also obey the head of the home. But he says, the relationships are utterly different because the slave, the servant has a slavish relationship to the head of the home. He lives in fear that if he doesn't perform, he could be thrown out at any time or beaten. But the son has a totally different relationship. Yes, fed by the head of the home, obeys the head of the home, but the son has an assurance of an unconditional love. And Jesus looks at them and says, I want you to know that you have a slavish relationship to God. You are just as much inside, spiritually bound up and enslaved as those pagans that are addicted to sex drugs and rock and roll. You see, there's a different kind of slavishness in you. And unless you come to the father through me, you will remain slaves. I can give you a relationship with the father. That's one that's based on intimacy and insecurity, whereas your relationship to the father is based on pride and compulsion and fear. And he makes this enormous statement. What he's really saying is, I'm not just a teacher or a prophet because a teacher and a prophet comes to change your behavior. If I was a teacher or prophet, I would say, You're gonna be telling Jesus, was a young man, his sister or daughter,哀 ScholarsLER bosch is to of 15 years to get down from place. And he could have worked on the street last state. compulsion and fear. And he makes this enormous statement. What he's really saying is, I'm not just a teacher or a prophet, because a teacher and a prophet comes to change your behavior. If I was a teacher or prophet, I would say, do this and do this and do this, change your behavior. But I come to change your status. I come, and through me, your relationship to God will move from slavery to sonship. That's what he's saying in verse 35. I can do it. And then, you know, the second claim, which is pretty astounding, is in verse 451. Then he says, I tell you the truth, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death. And see, he's going on, and he's saying, I'm not only saying that I can give you an inner experience of liberation and freedom right now, but this, I can give it to you in such a way that it lasts forever. In other words, through me, you can be assured that three zillion years from now, you'll still have God. Now, here's just an aside. You can see why suddenly they start to say, who do you think you are? See, immediately, his claims as what he can do for us lead to questions, well, who do you claim to be? But just give me one tiny aside. Let me just look at you. This is New York City, and I know this. I know that lots and lots of you were raised in religion of some kind. And when you got to college, or at least when you got to New York, you got rid of it, and you felt liberated. Because the religion and the faith that you knew was constricting, it was smothering, it was stultifying, it was narrow. And you really became better people when you got rid of it. There's an emptiness, there's a fear, there's an insecurity, but it's nothing like what it was. Now, all I want to tell you is that it's not what Jesus is talking about. Whatever it was, it is not the relationship with the Father that he says he can give you, no matter what. If what you had was narrow, stultifying, and smothering, it's not what Jesus Christ is talking about at all. And some of you are very confused. You say, well, now, wait a minute, wait a minute. I was raised in a Christian church. I was raised reading about Jesus. I was baptized in Jesus' name. I was reading all about that. But was it narrow? Was it stultifying? Did it crush you? Did you become really more tolerant, more loving, more happy people when you got rid of it? It wasn't what Jesus is talking about. That's it. He's talking to religious people. He's talking to people who are good. And he says, you're slaves. It's a self-imposed slavery. Inside, you don't have the freedom that I'm talking about. Now, they can't believe what he's saying. So they say, who do you think you are? And he comes through with a two-fold answer that is really untoppable. All right? It's untoppable. First of all, he says, they say, you know, why are you talking to us like this? You know, we're children of Abraham. And so he picks up on this and he says, Abraham rejoiced to see my day. Now, there's only two possible ways to read that. There's only two possible ways to read it. One is terrible and one is laughable. And they desperately try for the laughable one. Let me tell you what the terrible one is. The terrible one is this. When Jesus Christ says, Abraham rejoiced to see my day, this is a very important statement he's making. They can hardly believe their ears. Because Abraham, like all of Judaism at that time, was looking forward to what the prophets called the day. Go back into Isaiah. Go back into all the prophets. Go back into them. And you'll see, they're always talking about the day. It's often called the day of the Lord. But it's always, or sometimes it's just called the day. But what is the day? It's the day the Lord comes back. Psalm 96. The heavens will be glad. The earth will rejoice. The sea will roar and all that fills it. The fields exult and all that's within it. Then shall the trees of the woods sing for joy, for he comes to judge the earth. See, the Lord will come back and put down suffering, put down injustice, make everything right. The day. That's what they all were looking for, including Abraham. And Jesus has the audacity to say, Abraham rejoiced. He longed to see my day. And what he's saying is, I am the fulfillment of all of Abraham's hopes for salvation. He's saying, my day, my day is the day. My coming is the coming. I am the salvation. And they can't believe their ears. I mean, that's incredible. And it's the only other possible way of reading it. It's not a terrible way. It's a laughable way. Abraham rejoiced to see my day. And so they, and they try the laughable one. They're almost desperate. They hope that you can laugh this guy off. They hope that all he's saying is, and they say, oh, are you saying that you were a contemporary of Abraham? That he actually saw you? That you knew him? How? Time machine, maybe? Three wishes on a lamp? You know, they start to try to laugh. They say, oh, so you knew Abraham, did you? Oh, that's very interesting. They're desperately hoping that he means the less insane of the possible meanings. But he turns around and he won't let him off the hook. And he, and he says it, he says it more starkly, more untoppably than any. says before abraham was i am he doesn't say before abraham was i was he says you don't you don't understand me he says before abraham was i am and they exploded inside now you know why they exploded they picked up not a rope to hang him they picked up not a sword to cut him they picked up stones because they knew what he meant do you know what he means their minds immediately race back to exodus chapter 3 where moses met god in the burning bush and moses says who are you what is your name who should i say has sent me and god says i am that i am and now ever since that moment moses and his descendants always knew that this was the greatest the highest expression of divine self-reference there has never been a more profound revelation of who god is in that it's the most profound revelation to the understanding i am that i am made him a unique god in the world of gods and of religions and philosophy because when he says i am that i am he's saying i am uncaused i am self-existent god is saying unlike the gods of the east or of the west i am simply because i am now eastern religions would say i god is because god is the emanation of the life force of the universe or western religions i mean they had millions of them they always had the gods would always arise out of sort of the the the raw material of the universe in the deeps of time but god says no no no no i am self-existent i am self-determined i am not caused in a sense i do not exist i am existence i depend on nothing and no one everything that exists depends on me let me see i have no beginning i couldn't have begun if i would have begun something would have caused me i am the cause of all causes i'm the uncaused cause i am transcendent above the universe i existed before there was a universe i caused i was there's no beginning no ending to me so you see it's the most profound revelation to the understanding but it's also the most profound revelation to the heart because you see up until the moment of exodus 3 the name elohim was used it's the it's a generic word for god and everyone knew who god was but when he spoke this name out of the bush it's uh the you see the consonants of that phrase i am that i am spell yahweh it was the covenant name it was the intimate name it was the name for people into with whom he was entering into a deep relationship and as a result moses and his descendants knew that this was the most holy and the most sacred possible name and they refused to pronounce it and they refused to spell it they refused to write it i could tell you some stories about that you know some people say well i thought the name of god was jehovah do you know where the word jehovah came from it's an accident because you see when the when the scribes were writing the bible when they were when they were writing out the manuscripts the copies to to spread out whenever they got to the name yahweh which of course was the the consonants yahweh in hebrew you you write the consonants in the uh across but the vowels are always uh expressed through the little points the pointing underneath the consonants and when when the scribes would come to yahweh they would not put the proper vows underneath they would write the vows for the word adonai which means master or lord because anyone who was reading the text in worship was not allowed to say yahweh but was supposed to say adonai and idiot gentile christians got a hold of those manuscripts and they put they put the consonants yahweh with the vows for adonai and they came up with the word jehovah did you know that's where it came from why am i saying this this was the holiest possible word this was the this was the highest expression of divine self-reference and jesus christ does not in here simply take it on his lips see he takes it on himself when jesus christ says before abraham was i was no he says before abraham i was i am and you say well that doesn't you know that's something the tenses are even wrong you don't know what he's saying they knew what he was saying he was saying i didn't begin before abraham i never began i have no beginning i'm off the scale i'm not i am not a being who exists i am existence you exist because of me i am the uncreated beginningless God. In me all things have their beginning. That's what he's saying. And the reason they picked up stones was because stones was the execution, was the penalty for blasphemy. They knew what he was saying. Now do you realize that nothing higher could be said? If he had just gotten up and said, I'm God, you and me, we would all do everything we could to interpret that in terms of a lower or a more generic or vaguer view of God. You know, some people say, I believe God is the spark in all of us. Some people say, I believe God is the life, is sort of the emanation of all living things, the life force in all living things. Some people might say, like in Eastern religions, I believe God is an impersonal life force, and many people are manifestations of God, bodhisattvas, you see. High consciousness of God. But Jesus Christ, by not just saying I'm God, but saying before Abraham was, I am, was in the most unforgettable terms, taking the most transcendent concept of God that the world has ever known, and saying, that's me. Now, that's who he thought he was. Who did they think he was in response to that? Well, look through it. Just take a look. Look on down. Look at absolutely everything he says, everything they say, and I want you to know there's one thing that they never say. They never say, you know what? You're a great teacher. See, here's why. Because this man is saying this. Now, think about this. Imagine you go to a lecture. You know, Barnes & Noble, somebody's going to speak on principles of this. And the person gets up and says, something along these lines. I am ultimate reality. I have always existed. I created the world. If I even, I'm the one that holds your atoms and molecules, you know, I'm the one that actually holds you together this very second. And at the end of time, I'm coming back, and your relationship with me will determine where you spent eternity. Now, you wouldn't leave there going, what a great speaker. What, how vivid. You know, finally, you know, you guys say, finally somebody who believes in something. Yeah, he believes in something. Great illustrations, great analogies, great insights for living. No. Absolutely not. Look on through here. Here's what they say. You have a demon. Because, you see, once you understand what Jesus is actually saying, there is only two alternatives. They do not believe he's a great teacher. What they do believe is he's demonic. Now, there's a couple ways of reading demonic. You can be demonic in the sense that you are deluding. You are a shyster. You are a fraud. You're trying to get power over people. Or you could be demonic in the sense of you are deluded. You are deranged. But the point is, he's either demonic or he's divine. Nothing in the middle. No middle way is possible. Not in the slightest. In fact, this passage, there's not even the slightest hint of anybody saying, what a great teacher, what a great model, what a great prophet. Not even the slightest hint. And probably there's no passage in the Bible that better illustrates this most famous of all the passages in all of C.S. Lewis' writings, which you just can't not read if you read John chapter 8. And here's what Lewis says. He says, I'm ready to accept Jesus as a moral teacher, but I don't accept the claim that he's God, unquote. That is the one thing we must never say. A man who is merely a man and said the things Jesus said cannot be a great moral teacher. He would either be a lunatic on the level of a man who says he's a poached egg, or else he would be the devil of hell. Isn't it fascinating? It's exactly what happened here. You can shut him up as a fool. You can spit at him and kill him as a demon. You may fall at his feet and call him Lord and God, but let us not come up with any patronizing nonsense about his being a great moral teacher. He did not leave that open to us, and he didn't intend to. You see, the one thing that Jesus Christ does over and over and over again throughout his teaching is he tries to get you off the fence. He's trying to get you off the fence today. He always wants you off the fence. He basically says, crown me or kill me. I'm either the Lord or I'm demonic. You can either make me the center of your life, or you must hate me and do everything you possibly can to have nothing to do with me and to stamp out my very memory. But anything in the middle is a lack of intellectual integrity. He was constantly pushing this, constantly. You know, M. Scott Peck, very, very famous, and obviously by now pretty wealthy author, who wrote all the roadless travel. his roadless travel books. When he started to read the Gospels, he said this, I was absolutely thunderstruck by the extraordinary reality of the man I found in the Gospels. I discover a man constantly frustrated. Listen, he says, this leaps out on virtually every page. He's continually saying to people, what do I have to say to you? How many times do I have to say it? What do I have to do to get through to you? If the Gospel writers had been into PR and embellished an embellishment as I had assumed they would have been before I read this, they would have given us a Jesus that most Christians still are trying to create. One with a sweet, unending smile on his face, patting little children on the head, strolling through the earth, unflappable. But the Jesus of the Gospels is the best kept secret of Christianity. See, on every page, he is saying, crown me or kill me. He's trying to get you off the fence over and over and over and over and over again. Now, I know there's plenty of people that do everything they can to stay on the fence. And one of the main ways to stay on the fence is to say that these statements in the Bible where Jesus claims to be God are later insertions. They're later insertions. Jesus was this great moral teacher and the religion got off the ground and it was great. But he said after later, much later, people began to worship him as God and they went and they inserted it back. So if you want to get back to the original teaching of God, you got to, of Jesus, you have to take away all these statements about him being God. But, dear friends, if you believe that without ever having tried it, if you've heard that in Religion 101, and that's your way of staying on the fence, nobody wants to call him a demonic person. Hardly anybody. But nobody hardly wants to call him Lord and center of their lives. Almost everybody is at the place where Jesus Christ, every day, every time he spoke, as Scott Peck was saying, was over and over and over and over again saying, you mustn't stay there. You mustn't be there. What's wrong with you? But that's where everybody is. And one of the main ways you stay on the fence is you say, well, he didn't claim to be God. These were later insertions. But don't take any comfort in that unless you've actually tried it. Go ahead, read the Bible and try to take them out. Just try. On every page. Listen, you know all the places where he looks at people and says, all your sins are forgiven? That happens all the time. That's one of the main promises of Christianity. But listen, listen. A person can only forgive the sins that are against you. You know, if John punches Joe in the mouth, Tim can't come up and say, Joe, I forgive you. You know, John's sitting there saying, you forgive him. You know? Well, the point is that when Jesus Christ, and he continually does that, whenever Jesus says, I forgive you all your sins, that means that all their sins are against him. That means he's God, he's creator. And that's on every page. Or what about all the places he calls himself the son of God? Not a son of God, the son of God. Do you know why they picked up stones to try to stone him in John chapter 5 when he called himself the son of God? See, the reason we read that, and it doesn't bother us, we say, oh, you know, and he does that on every page. But you see, in the ancient times, in Semitic times, when you were the only son, the unique son, that meant you were going to get everything. You were going to get it all. You were going to inherit everything of the father, and therefore you were equal with the father. And when people heard him calling himself the son of God, they knew, not just a son, but the son. They knew what he was saying, that he was equal with God. In fact, if you read through, what's the most fun thing is to read his throwaway phrases. You know, you'll miss them. Read through them. There's one place in Matthew 23 when he says, I keep sending you prophets and wise men. Here's a man saying, all the prophets and wise men that have come to you from over the centuries, I was sending them. There's another place in Luke 10 where he says, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning. Oh. But let me press you. If he is not God, he can't promise you total forgiveness, which is the main point of Christianity. If he is not God, he can't say, I go to prepare a place for you in eternity, unless he's from there. But let me go one step further. If he's not God, the cross, the crucifixion, should destroy your faith in God. Because here's this wonderful man who's done all these good deeds, and God abandons him. If he's not God, the cross is cruelty, and let's get rid of a God who lets that happen. But if he is God, the cross is self-sacrifice. The cross is God coming down saying, I'm going to suffer with you. I'm going to enter into the injustice of this world. I'm going to enter into the suffering of this world. I'm going to enter into the evil of this world. If he's not God, the cross makes not only no sense, but the cross destroys our view of God. Let me see you next time. Thank you. Thank you. never had before, but there's nothing in the middle. Get off the fence. Get off the fence. You can't take his, you know, this and their acclaim to God away without the whole thing falling apart because there's never been a Jesus Christ that didn't claim to be God. Never. Never. Crown me or kill me. I'm a demon or I'm divine. That's what they thought of him. And they went that way. But you know what? He pushed and pushed and pushed and pushed until everybody did get off the fence. And the only people who actually saw what Jesus Christ was and did were two kinds. Either the ones who killed him on the cross and the ones whose lives were so transformed by him that they turned the whole world upside down. Now, lastly, okay, in other words, he got the point across. He finally got it across. He yelled and he screamed every page, as Mark, as Scott Peck said, until finally you either their lives were transformed because they threw everything over and said, you're number one in my life or else they went after him and they nailed him. And those are the only two logical places to be. He asked for it. He wanted that. He says, these are the only two places. You know why? Because people who are out to kill him are the most likely to see who he is. It's the indifferent people, the people who are sitting on the fence where most of us are in this world who have no idea what he's really saying. At least the people who are angry at him have heard him and they might believe him. Now, lastly, who do you think he is? Now, let me just suggest this and I hope you don't think too much about this illustration. Nobody really sits on a fence with one leg on either side. It hurts too much. So, when you sit on a fence, you have to put both legs one way or the other. Don't think about that too much, all right? So, some of you are sitting with both legs towards skepticism. In other words, many people in New York say, I like God. I like Jesus. I like Jesus. I don't like the church. You got good reasons for that. Honest to goodness. I don't like a lot of what's in Christianity. You got good reasons. I believe you. You're right. But you see, your legs are over towards skepticism. You think, well, I believe that Jesus was a great moral teacher, a great lover of people. And I want you to know the reason you're able to have that is because your view of Jesus is a fantasy. Here's what I'd like you to think of. Three things. You know about his claims now, but then think of three other things. First of all, look at the wisdom and shrewdness of his moral teaching. He does have wonderful teaching. Love your enemies. That's new, religion. That's new, by the way. Love your enemies. You're not going to find that in the ethics of other religions. Read the wisdom of his moral teaching. Then secondly, look at the beauty of his life. Notice where he says, if I glorify myself, it means nothing. Now, here's what's so weird about Jesus. His teaching was totally egocentric, but his life was not. Let me ask you a question. Why do you think that we've had other egocentric teachers in history? We've had other people say, I'm God. Worship me. We have. But they all died like the fellow in Waco. They died in flames with a very tiny little group of very dysfunctional people around them. There's never been anybody who's made claims like Jesus Christ has made who was able to actually create a sustainable movement. And the people, every other megalomaniac who had talked like Jesus turned his followers into stupid lemming-like slaves that walked right off the edge. But Jesus Christ, you have to remember the people around Jesus Christ were Jews who were the last people on the face of the earth to be willing to be open to the belief that a human being could be God. So, you know? And yet, he transformed their lives so they were lives of such beauty and of such bravery and of such love and of such self-sacrifice that they literally turned the world upside down. How could that be? And the only answer is this. The reason that everybody else dies in Waco with a little group like this is because egocentric teachers always have egocentric lives. People who get near them see it. Egocentric teachers abuse people. Egocentric teachers are hypocrites. Egocentric teachers are filled with insecurity. See? Egocentric teachers have egocentric lives. But Jesus Christ had the most egocentric teaching, but he had the most incredible life. See? Tenderness without compromise. Strength without harshness. Convictions without condescension. Humility without insecurity. You know, P.T. Forsyth put it this way in a tiny little quote I've never forgotten. If God is not like Jesus, then he is less than the God we crave for and we need. When we look at Jesus Christ, we see the holy love that deserves to be almighty. So now listen. You know why people don't want to get off the fence? They don't want to call him a demon. he's either a demon or he's a divine. But as you're on your way to deciding he's a demon, ask yourself, could a demon teach like this? Could a demon love like this? Could a demon change his followers like this? No. And now those of you who are Christians, in other words, you're on the fence though. There's a lot of Christians on the fence. Your legs are on this side. You face Jesus. But you go to him when you're in trouble. And you believe all the doctrines. But you don't throw yourself at his feet and treat him as he says he is, which is God. If he's God, you have to take the limits off your allegiance. I cannot help but remember one of the most critical statements I ever heard in my life was a woman who was teaching Bible class years ago when I was a new Christian. And she put it this way. She said, if the, if a piece of paper, uh, pardon me, if, if the distance between the earth and the sun, 93 million miles was just the thickness of a single piece of paper, I want you to know that the diameter of our galaxy would be a stack of paper 310 miles high. And our galaxy is just like a piece of lint in the whole universe, which is just filled with more galaxies than there are grains of sand on the seashore. And Jesus Christ says, I created that and I hold it together with my pinky, a word of my power. And then she looked at us. Is this the kind of person you ask into your life to be your assistant? Is this the kind of person that you say, don't call me, I'll call you? Is this the kind of person that you say, well, you know what, I'll do this and I'll do that if you do this and you do that? As Yates said in that one great line, what do you see in the manger? You see the uncontrollable mystery on the bestial floor. Christmas means into your life comes God. So get rid of your light, tiny little ambitions. Get rid of hoping that somehow he'll get you into the grad school you want. He's going to take you to the stars. But on the other hand, get rid of the idea that you can tell him what he should be doing. He's God. You need to say, command me. He needs to be number one or he shouldn't be there at all. Go and learn what this means. If the sun sets you free, you'll be free indeed. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for Christmas. Now we see what it means.
