TITLE: I Am the Bread
SCRIPTURE: John 6:5-13; 32-35
TOPICS: Atonement Salvation God's Love
SERIES: John – On Knowing the Christ
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-am-the-bread/

============================================================

There is so much being said in this miracle of the feeding of the multitude with just the little loaves of the poor boy. There's so much being said that you could take a shaft and put it down into each of these sections and spend quite a bit of time on it, but it's also helpful to actually get a survey of the overwhelmingness of it because let's take a look at everything it's saying. This miracle of the feeding of the multitude is at least three things, and we'll look briefly at all three of them. It is a demonstration of power to engage the intellect. See, it's bread for the mind. Jesus is offering bread for the mind. It's a demonstration of power designed to engage the intellect. But secondly, it's bread for the body. It's a sign of the kingdom designed to shape our actions in our life. But thirdly, it's bread for the heart. It's life forever he's offering. And it's designed to convert us at our root. Now, let's look at those three things. You see what I mean? It's just ridiculous. It's overwhelming. First of all, one of the things when you read this whole chapter, one of the big issues is this. This is bread for the mind. This is a demonstration of power designed to engage your intellect, designed to get you thinking, who is this? It is a demonstration of power in that sense. And one of the big issues is how the miracles of Christ relate to proof that he is this divine man, this divine power. Now, this is a very, very famous miracle. It's the only miracle outside of the resurrection, if you want to consider it. It's the only miracle that's named in every one of the four Gospels. And what we know is that Jesus Christ had been trying to get away from the crowd. He wanted to get apart from the crowd for his disciples. He goes to the other side of the Lake of Galilee to an area that's now called the Golan Heights. It was very remote in those days. But he found a whole crowd had gone around the north part of the lake, realizing Jesus was going to be there and met him anyway. How big was the crowd? Well, a lot of people say 5,000, but if you look carefully, in those days, the way everybody always counted in the census was it says 5,000, but it says 5,000 men. What it means is heads of families. It's not counting single men. It wasn't counting women. It wasn't counting children. It was a way of counting families, basically. And what it's really saying there is 5,000 families. So who knows? 15,000, 20,000 people. And we know that as day was late and they were a long way from home, and Jesus says to his disciples, how are we going to feed them? And the disciples look and say, what do you mean how are we going to feed them? We can't possibly feed them. But then Jesus takes this little lunch of a little boy and multiplies and feeds everyone. And afterwards, there's 12 baskets of crumbs taken up, 12 baskets of leftovers. And what is the effect of this? Well, we're told in verse 15, I didn't print it there, that when they saw this miracle, they said, let's make him king. They said, this must be the prophet come into the world. And the second section that we have a piece of, there's verse 32 to 35. This happens the next day when Jesus has gone back to the populated area, and everybody's talking about the fact that he had fed them in the wilderness. Well, that was one of the signs of the Messiah. Someone who was a second Moses in a way. Anyway, just as Moses fed, you see, the people in the wilderness through manna. Now, is this the Messiah? And so they come to him and they sit down. And right before verse 32, they say, we've heard about this thing over there. Now, do it again. Give us another miraculous sign. Show us the bread here, now, in this populated area. Do this again. Show you the Messiah. And so, you see, this engaged people. This was evidence that this was not just a teacher, but a divine person. However, divine, supernatural person. However, somebody out here says, I can hear, wait a minute. Miracles can't happen. And therefore, these have to be legends and these miracle stories don't prove a thing. Now, can I talk to you a minute about that? Thank you. By the way, this just proves my point. Miracles make you think. You're just proving the point. And if you really want to go into a whole lot more detail about what I'm about to say, you should either go to our Credibility of Christianity class, which is always offered and comes around all the time, every seven weeks it repeats, and gets into this subject, among others. Or, if you want to, if you don't go to any other class, come and see me right afterwards in the question and answer time, and I'm ready today to talk to people who say, we can't, miracles can't happen. But you see, if you say miracles can't happen, just keep this in mind. You're either in one of two positions. Either you say, I believe in God, but miracles can't happen. But miracles can't happen. believe in. But you see, if you believe in God, it is unreasonable to rule out miracles and to rule out these stories. Why? I mean, why would it be a greater problem for God to renew life and resurrect life than it would have been for him to create life in the first place? It's unreasonable if you believe in God to rule out miracles. But somebody says, well, I don't believe in God, and therefore I don't believe in violations of the laws of nature. And of course, now if you don't believe in God, which is the only other possible position, and you don't believe in miracles, you've got even less reason to rule out miracles. Because you see, if you don't believe in God, and you've been reading what has happened in the last 20 years, if you've been reading about quantum mechanics and chaos theory, then here's the point. If you don't believe in God, then there are no laws of nature. You know there's no laws of nature, and therefore anything could happen. Anything has happened. All I'm trying to say, no matter who you are, no matter where you stand, you must not do this kind of intellectually shallow, dismissive, dogmatic, a priori statement that says miracles can't happen, so you don't come to grips with these kinds of narratives, these kinds of accounts. You mustn't. But when you say, I don't think miracles actually prove anything, Jesus agrees with you. You say, what do you mean? Well, you see, one of the big issues in this chapter is this. When they say, we heard you did a miracle, that means you may be the Messiah. Do it again. And what does he say? This is very helpful and very practical for those of you who are saying, how can I know Christianity is true? How can I know? If you read verse 32 to 35 as an answer to the question, and that question is, give us another miracle. Prove that you are who you say you are. You see, what they're saying is, take us to a miracle. What does Jesus say? They say, okay, let me do the miracle. Stand back. No, he doesn't. He refuses. And here's the reason why. Miracles are not primarily, in Jesus' life, proofs. People who saw miracles never really got their hearts converted. All the miracles in the world wouldn't have done it. What he's actually saying here, if you read carefully, he says, take us to a miracle. What does Jesus say? Take us to some more bread. And Jesus says, I am the miracle. I am the bread of life. So here's Jesus' first point. Very important. What is the evidence? What is the proof that Christianity is true? Jesus is saying, it's me. It's not just my miracles. It's not just arguments. It's me. My whole life, me. Put it this way. I was listening to a tape a year or two ago by a pastor, and he put it this way. He said he once talked to a skeptic who said, I'd love to believe in God. I'd love to believe in Christianity, but if somebody would just give me a watertight argument. And the pastor came back to him and said, well, here's the problem. The Bible doesn't exactly, Christianity doesn't give you a watertight argument, but it does give you a watertight person. Jesus is saying, don't just look at the miracles. He says, look at me. I am the miracle. I am the bread that you're looking for. If I brought bread down from heaven, right now, if you saw the loaves coming down out the clouds, he says, that wouldn't prove anything, would it? There's all kinds of possible explanations for that. He says, there's only one real proof. See, a lot of you would say, gee, I've come to Redeemer, and it would be great to see that there's really something behind this Christianity. Well, what if we started doing miracles here? What if we started doing them? Right here. Would that really be proof that Jesus is the Son of God? See, Jesus says, no, there's only one argument that really is the proof. Look at my life. Look at everything. Look at what I do. Look at what I say. Look at how I live. And you will be thinking, and you will say, well, now, wait a minute. If a person says that and does that and acts that way, who must that be? See, Jesus is not saying, don't use your intellect. I'm not certainly saying that. I'm saying the miracles point to the watertight argument, which is the watertight person. If you want the evidence for Christianity, if you want to be completely convinced, if you want to see, in a sense, that against which there really can no argument, counterargument be made. Again, you have to read the story. You have to read the account. You have to read his life. You have to read the whole thing. See, Jesus says, look at my whole life. The miracle is just to get you to look at me. But it's me, not the bread, not the fire, not the walking on water. None of that stuff. All that stuff can be accounted for some other way. But I can't be. Look at the whole picture. So Jesus himself says, to engage your intellect. Think. Now secondly, Jesus is not just offering bread for the mind, not just a demonstration of his power to get you to engage intellectually, but he's secondly also providing bread for the body, a sign of the kingdom that will shape the way in which we live here. Completely. See, when I said that miracles are not primarily proofs of his power, they're demonstrations that get you to think, but they're not primarily proofs of his power. And here's why. Because if they were, if the main point of miracles was to show you how great and powerful he was, he could have done a much better job. I can think of a whole lot better miracles, can't you? I mean, what he could have done is he said, bread from heaven. Come on, stand back. Let me watch. He said, you see that tree? And he could have just thrown a fireball at it and it would have gone like this and everybody would say, oh my word, I can think of a better way. Now you think about this. It would have been so much better. He could have, you know, if he's got super power, he could have flown to Rome. Why not? Why not? How hard could that be for someone who has this kind of power? For a person that has, who claims this, he could have flown to Rome and of course, hopefully when everybody was in the Colosseum, he could have done skywriting or something. And then he could have touched down. And then all the lions came after him. And with a flick of his finger, you know, he just, you know, he wipes them out. Then the gladiators come and that would have been great. And he goes, well, how hard could that have been? Which just goes to show something. The miracles are not demonstrations simply of his naked power. They are signs of what he came to use his power to do. They're signs of the nature of his power. They're signs of his mission. They tell us what he came to do and how we can be part of it. And here's what it tells us. This miracle, in fact, all the miracles. First of all, the miracles show that he came to deal with suffering. Do you realize every one of the miracles comes against assault suffering? Which means the miracles show that God doesn't like this world any more than we do. Look at it. He feeds someone who's hungry. He heals someone who's sick. He opens the eyes of the blind. He resurrects the dead. Even the calming of the storm. What are we talking about here? What we're saying is this. People say, why in the world does God allow all this evil and suffering? Well, I think almost every other religion has to say, I don't know. I don't know why God does that. And Christians also have to say, I don't know. But Christians can say one more thing, and it's pretty important. One thing we know is he hates it. Well, how do you know that? Look at miracles. Every miracle. None of the miracles were tricks to show you how powerful he was. Every miracle was an assault on the destruction and devastation. It was an assault on decay. It was an assault on injustice. It was an assault on disease. And it's an assault on death. When John the Baptist sends Jesus a message, it says, how do we know you're the Messiah? What does he say? He says, the blind see, the lepers are cleansed, and the poor have good news preached. Now, look at this. The blind see, physical brokenness. I come against that, he says. The lepers cleansed is spiritual uncleanness. The lepers were not allowed to go into God. They were not allowed to go into the tabernacle. I come against that, spiritual alienation. The poor. I'm here to liberate the poor. Social injustice, social alienation. Jesus Christ says, I hate that stuff. And I've come to do something about it. As a matter of fact, listen. If you think of miracles as primarily proofs of his power, then you're going to think of miracles as mainly a suspension of the natural order, right? You're going to say, oh, yeah, walking on water and healing the blind. That's a suspension of the natural order. But if you understand miracles as primarily signs of the kingdom, you will know that what he's actually doing at that point is he's actually temporarily, not suspending the natural order, temporarily he is restoring it. You see, Jorgen Moltmann put it this way, and this is my first Jorgen Moltmann quote, I'm sure, in the history of my career, at least in his sermon, anyway. He says, listen, great. Jesus' healings, this is mind-blowing. Jesus' healings are the only natural things in a world that is unnatural, demonized, and wounded. You see, if you understand this as a proof, then you're going to basically say, oh, this is a suspension of the natural order. But what are we finding out? Jesus Christ has come back and said, this is not, the way things are now is not the natural order. I'll tell you what the natural order is like. Eden. When he feeds the hungry, he's reminding us that God designed a world without children with swollen bellies. When God heals, he is saying he remembers he's looking back to the world, the natural world, the world that God actually invented. And he's not just pointing back to Eden, he's pointing ahead to the new creation that he's come to restore. Jesus has not come to forgive our sins and bring us to a spiritual paradise, but to restore all the brokenness here in every area, the physical and the social and the spiritual and the psychological, every area. And Jesus has the audacity to say in John chapter 14, if you believe in me, you will do the works that I do. Now, let's apply that for a second. What's that mean? First of all, it means this. With all due respect, can I say something to those of you? Listen, in New York City, I found two things about most people. And a lot of you, this would be true of a lot of you here. Two things about most everybody, most people in New York. One is you're secular. That means you really say, I don't know if there's a God, doesn't matter. All I know is the here and now. Don't really believe in the supernatural. Don't believe in eternity in heaven. All I know is that this life is all there is. And secondly, you say, I am morally outraged against injustice and suffering. I want to do something about it. Now, I respect that. And therefore, what I'm about to say is in all due respects, with all due respects, if there is no God in this world is all there is, how can you be morally, totally morally outraged against what is absolutely natural? If this world is all there is and there's no God, then everything you see out there is natural. What other thing? Entropy. What is disease? What is decay? What is death? Entropy. Everything's running down. It's absolutely natural. Disease, decay, and death is absolutely natural. There's no God. And when you see the strong trampling on the weak, what is that? That's not entropy. That's evolution. And that's natural. Utterly and absolutely natural. Now, really, with all due respect, how can you account for your unbelievable non sequitur? This incredible moral outrage against something that is utterly natural. And I don't even know how you're going to keep it up when you realize that that is absolutely inevitable. You'll never reverse it. See, I think the reason is, the reason that you are morally outraged that what is absolutely natural, at least as far as your intellectual furniture is concerned, is because that deep down underneath your intellectual beliefs, you know that he's there. You know this world's not natural. You know that sickness and death and disease and injustice isn't natural. And unless there's a God, it is. But you cannot not know that it isn't. Get that one. You can't get the tape. See whether or not I had so many negatives in there that I've, you know, doubled back on myself. You can't not, you cannot not know. So, you can't avoid knowing that this world is utterly unnatural. And therefore, you know there's a God. Christian friends, though, let me turn to you. What are you doing sitting there like passive lumps looking at all this injustice and this suffering? You say, oh, well, someday Jesus Christ comes here to say, I'm against it all. And not only that, this is the kingdom. The kingdom is moving in that direction. I am moving in that direction. You've got a model. You've got a hope. You've got a confidence. And when you see Jesus Christ feed the hungry with five barley loaves, you know what you've got here? You, of course, say, oh, God, there's a great example of our compassion for the poor. Yes, he's compassion on people who don't have food. And that's right. That's one of the things we need to do. But, interestingly enough, the barley loaves are important because barley was the bread of the poor. Barley was the cheapest grain. Barley was meant that this little boy was a poor boy himself. He's from the bottom of the ladder. And instead of Jesus Christ saying, forget this, I can do this better, he takes the poor's own resources and multiplies them. What does this mean? It means that we not only get involved, like Jesus, sign of the kingdom, with the poor, but we partner with them. We don't treat them like children. We learn from them. And what does this mean? A lot of you only do one thing for the poor every year. It's usually at Christmas. Here's what I suggest you do. Say, Lord, I promise this Christmas not to only ever do this just at Christmas. I'm going to put it into my lifestyle. Bread for the mind, designed to intellectually engage us. Bread for the body, designed to completely shape our radical new lifestyle. But lastly, bread for the heart. This is Jesus saying that you need to be converted at the very root. And he makes some claims here that are just as so staggering that at the end of the chapter, how the matter what it looks like today. Not at that. As quick as I guess, I hope this is for maybe one hour or three to five years ago, but there'll be a mesh search for that. But here still, get closer to this last year. You put your head on this and at the end of the chapter? that you need to be converted at the very root. And he makes some claims here that are just so staggering that at the end of the chapter, at the end of the chapter, in verse 60, his disciples come to him and say, we can't accept this. And in verse 66, we're told that most of this, many of the disciples, many of them left, not followers, not crowd, disciples. Who knows how many he had before the 12, you know? They left. They wouldn't go. In fact, Jesus even has a dialogue with Peter and the others. He says, are you going to go away too? And Peter says, where else can we go? Now, that's not exactly saying, oh no, Lord, we understand what you're talking about. He's saying, I don't get it either. I'm just too scared to leave. What Jesus says here is so overwhelming. And not only that, when they say, we can't accept this, Jesus actually has the audacity to say in verse 65, that's why I said, no one can come to me unless the Father draws him. Jesus is saying, what I'm telling you is so overwhelming, unless you have divine help, you will be offended. You'll never get over it. You'll never get through it. What is he saying? Here's what he's saying. A, he's saying, everybody's got a spiritual hunger. Everybody. Underneath your physical hunger is a spiritual hunger. And he says, don't labor, he says in verse 27, for the food that spoils, but labor for the food that gives you eternal life. And what he simply means is that we're looking, we've got some kind of hunger in us, it's very deep, and anything we put there, whether it's family, or whether it's food, or whether it's social acceptance, or whether it's money, or whether it's comfort, whatever we put there is never going to satisfy us. Then secondly, he says, I am the bread of life. Now, when he says that, this is where people are moving away from him. If he said, I have the bread of life, I will give you the bread of life, then he's a teacher saying, I can show you the way to spiritual reality. But when he says, I am the bread of life, he is saying something utterly unique. Historically, there's never been anybody, this egocentric, verse 34 to verse 40, count the number of times it says, I, me, or my, 17 times. There's never been a person this egocentric that ever got together more than a tiny little group of lunatics around him. There's never been somebody who taught like this and really had an impact on the world. And he says, I'm the bread of life. Without me, you will starve eternally. But then he doesn't just say, I'm the bread of life. He also says, by using the metaphor, I'm not just the ultimate person, I'm also a broken person. By using the term bread, he's making a very, very strong metaphor here. He's saying, I will give you life. I'm not going to show you the way to life. When you come to me, you're not getting a guide to life. You're not getting a set of rules to life. You're getting life. When you come to me and you take me, you don't say, okay, now what do I have to do to do the works of God? I have done the works of God for you. You have life. When you come to me, when you pick me up, when you believe in me, then what I have done on the cross, my brokenness becomes your life. I'm broken like the bread is broken, then I can live. If the bread stays intact, I fall apart because I starve. If I'm not to starve, the bread falls apart. And Jesus says, I am the bread. What does that mean? I am being torn limb from limb for you. I am being broken in the little bitty crumbs for you. Out of love for you. Now, what are we supposed to do about this? Just this. Jesus says, only if you come to me and see who I am, not just a teacher, but the truth itself, come into human form. Not just somebody who comes to show you what to do, but because of my brokenness, I have actually done everything you need to do before God so that when you accept me, God accepts you. When you rely on me, God accepts you. Now, what are we supposed to do about this claim? First of all, some of you are afraid of going away. I'm afraid you're going to go away. Some of you are saying, ah, we can't believe in this sort of thing anymore. We can't believe that one person could be the bread for the whole world. We can't believe that a human being could be the God more than anyone else. We can't believe in this anymore. Just take out the word anymore, would you? That's conceited for you to think that we are modern people and we're offended by what Jesus says, but back then they weren't offended. They were just as offended. They were probably more offended as Romans, Jews, and Greeks. And some of them went away and died. And some of them, I mean, they went into nothing, but then there's some of them that hung on. People like Peter, people like John, who wrote the gospel, who were there saying, I don't understand it. Please stick with it. If you're feeling overwhelmed by what we just heard, stick with it. Whitefield, the great Anglican preacher of the 18th century, used to always end his sermons. He used to repeat the verse, and then he would say, go and learn what this meaneth. Well, now, wait a minute. I thought, wasn't that what the sermon was about? Weren't you telling me what the verse was about? But he never presumed to do anything more than introduce the verse, introduce the truth. He said, now, I want you to go home and think about it. I want you to go out. Go and learn what this meaneth. And all I can say to you is, don't have the conceit that says, I'm modern, I'm intellectual, I'm, you know, I'm an open-minded person. That's why I can't accept the idea that Jesus Christ is the person who, if I grab hold of him, I will live forever. That he's the only way, that he's the main way, that he's the life for the whole world. I can't believe it. Don't be so conceited. They couldn't believe it either. And they held on until they understood. Hold on. Christian friends, if you are saying, I often get overwhelmed by what, you know, look at Philip. God, Jesus comes and says, can't you feed them? And Philip says, what do you mean? See, now, Jesus does that to you sometimes. Even though he knows what he's going to do, he comes and says, he puts stuff on you and you feel overwhelmed. So that you, so you're really willing to recognize that your little loaves can't possibly do it. But see, the purpose of this passage is to say that that's not so bad. I'll tell you this. I never even began to be a good husband until I realized I wasn't. Every 12-step group starts with the first step. What's the first step? We are powerless over our problems. A guy named J.N. Darby once said that here's a spiritual principle. When you get, when you get out of your nothingness, you get into it. You know what he means? Here's a spiritual principle. When you stop knowing, when you stop believing you're nothing and begin to think you're something, that's when you really become nothing. When you say, I can do it, that's when you know you, that's when you can't. I can, I'm a match for this issue. You're not. I'm no match for this issue. Now you are. That's the principle. Get into your nothingness and you get out of it. Get out of your nothingness and you get right into it. And therefore, if right now God is showing you that you're a bad husband, it's to make you a good one. God's showing you that you're a bad wife to make you a good one. God's showing you that you're inadequate to make you adequate. To show you, until you see my little loaves will never do it, will your loaves ever do it? Don't go away just because you're overwhelmed. Instead, make him your life. What does that mean? To be saved? It means this, to say, not what I have done, but only what Jesus has done is now my life. Because of what Jesus did, oh father, save me. Make him your life. Don't point to your life. Point to his life. Don't point to your record. Point to his record. If you do that now, right now, you pass from death to life. Just like that. Christian friends, if you are to feed on him as your bread of life, it means constantly thinking about this. Every problem I've got is because something, I'm making something my life rather than Jesus. It says that in Colossians 3. It says, Christ is your life. It's hidden with God. What does that mean? If you're worried today, don't say, I've got to stop worrying. You have to say, I'm making something my life instead of Jesus. Something more important. Something that, on which I've pinned my hope. Something on which I've pinned my security. It's more than Jesus. If you're angry today, it's something you've made your life more than Jesus. See, I am the bread of life. It's something that you can do. It's a solution to all your problems. Jesus says, feed on me. Devour me like you devour a book. The word feeding, eating, devouring means comprehensive intensity. Realize what he's done. Realize who he is. Make him your life. Don't go away. Feed on him. I am the bread of life, he says. He who comes to me will never hunger, never thirst again. Go and learn what this mean is. Let's pray. We pray, Father, that as we come to the table, we can actually appropriate, finally, appropriate these great truths. For some people, Lord, we know that we have to actually come to you for the first time. He says, I am the bread of life, Jesus says. He who comes to me. So, Lord, some people today may just need to come for the first time. The rest of us, Lord, need to feed on him in our hearts by faith. We need to realize how different we can be if we really make Jesus our life. Thank you, Lord, that you didn't come just to give us ideas and concepts and not even. our hearts at the root by making Jesus Christ our life. Rather than anything else, we will be completely transformed. Help us to learn what that means, we pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
