TITLE: I Am Sending You
SCRIPTURE: John 20:19-22; Luke 24:36-49
TOPICS: Prophecy Hope The Bible
SERIES: St. John’s Passion
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-am-sending-you/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading begins with the Gospel of John, chapter 20, verses 19 through 22. On the evening of that first day of the week, when the disciples were together, with the doors locked for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood among them and said, Peace be with you. After he said this, he showed them his hands and sighed. The disciples were overjoyed when they saw the Lord. Again, Jesus said, Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, I am sending you. And with that, he breathed on them and said, Receive the Holy Spirit. Continuing on from the Gospel of Luke, chapter 24, verses 36 through 49. While they were still talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, Peace be with you. They were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost. He said to them, Why are you troubled? And why do doubts rise in your minds? Look at my hands and my feet. It is I, myself. Touch me and see. A ghost does not have flesh and bones, as you see I have. When he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet. And while they still did not believe it, because of joy and amazement, he asked them, Do you have anything here to eat? They gave him a piece of broiled fish, and he took it and ate it in their presence. He said to them, This is what I told you while I was still with you. Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms. Then he opened their minds so they could understand the Scriptures. He told them, This is what is written. I am going to send you what my Father has promised, but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high. This is God's Word. As Matt just said, right after the service tonight, usually I rush off and go over to the other side to preach, but what I'm doing tonight is I'm going to stick around. We're going to do a question and answer time. And what I'm going to do right afterwards is I'll just sit down here like I do at the end of open forums, and those of you who want to stay should sit close enough so I can hear your question. And as soon as the music is over, the post is over, we'll do 45 minutes. And if you have a question about the sermon, fine, or about anything else, fine, as long as it isn't anything to do with auto repair. It's the week after Easter, and it's right to ask this question. If you believe in the resurrection, so what? What difference does that make? If we believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, what should we be doing? Where should we be going? How should we be living? The answers are in this text, because when Jesus met with his disciples in the days and the weeks after his resurrection, those were the very questions he addressed. He sat down with his disciples and he said, Now that I have been raised from the dead, that means this is how you have to live in the world. And these two passages are not two different appearances. There are two versions, two accounts of one very significant appearance, the first time the risen Christ meets with all of his disciples in a group. And here we're going to learn, under three headings, what he tells us. And that is, the risen Christ shows us, sends us, and gives us. He shows us the future. He sends us into the world on the basis of that future. And he gives us what we need for the mission. He shows us our future. He sends us into the world and gives us what we need for our new life. Let's look at these three things. First of all, he shows us the future. Something that I never really thought about until more recently was that when you look at this risen Christ that we see in the pages of the Gospels after his resurrection appearing to the disciples, we're actually looking at our own future. Because the Bible says he's the first fruits from the dead. Instead. Instead. Instead. Does the actually looking at our future. And here's three characteristics of Jesus that will help us understand something about where we're going if we believe in him, what God has in store for us in our future. Three characteristics, and they're really very, very intriguing. First of all, contrary to what the Greeks and Romans would have thought, Jesus is physical. See, the Greeks and the Romans believed that to move to a higher plane was to shed your body and move into the spiritual realm because the body was bad and the spirit was good. And so the idea of a resurrection from the dead is crazy. A physical, maybe a spiritual resurrection, maybe coming up spiritually, but Jesus is absolutely physical. And it's very clear in the text, especially the Lucan text. He says, I have flesh and bones. He eats a fish. He shows them his hands and his feet, his scars. And he even, later on, of course, when it comes to Thomas, he lets people touch him. He's physical, contrary to what the Greeks and Romans would say. Secondly, he's ordinary. Contrary to what the Jews might believe. Why? Well, we said last week that the Jews, some of the Jews did believe in a future general resurrection. They believed that someday there would be a resurrection of the dead at the end of time. Well, what did they believe about that resurrection? In Daniel chapter 12, verse 1, from the Old Testament, we read this. At that time, multitudes who sleep in the dust of the earth will awake, and those who are wise will shine like the brightness of the heavens, and those who lead men to righteousness will shine like the stars forever. And so, if you were Jewish, and you were making up a story about a resurrected person, you would assume that they would be radiant. They would shine. If you were making up these accounts, if Jewish believers in Jesus were making up accounts, and they were trying to create, invent stories about the risen Christ, they would have him radiant. But he's not. When they meet him on the road to Emmaus, when the disciples on the road to Emmaus meet Jesus, they don't recognize him at first. And, of course, we'll talk about that in a second. But the point is, they just thought he was just a regular person. He wasn't radiant. There wasn't these beams of light from his face. And surely, if you were making it up, especially in light of Daniel chapter 12, verse 1, you would think that the resurrected Christ would be glorious, and his effulgence would fill the room, and people would have to put on their sunglasses. But no, he's ordinary. In fact, one of the most, almost a comic place in the Bible is John chapter 21. There's another one of these resurrection appearances where Peter and the other disciples are out in a boat, and they're fishing, and they see Jesus on the beach, and they come in to meet him on the beach. And when they meet the risen Christ on the beach, he's cooking some fish on a fire. I mean, really, this is Jesus saying, I am the risen Lord of heaven and earth, and I was cooking some fish here. Would you like some? What's he doing cooking some fish on a fire? See, the ordinariness of Jesus, he's physical. I mean, this isn't the sort of thing you make up. And see, historians, this is what drives people nuts here. Historians, most historians do believe that these stories were made up, that they didn't really happen. But here's the problem. If you're Greek or Roman, you would never make up stories about Jesus eating a fish because you'd want it to be a spiritual resurrection. But if you were Jewish and you wanted it to be a physical resurrection, you would not only have the person be radiant, but lastly, the other thing that's really weird about Jesus' body is, though it's a physical body, it goes through doors. It goes through locked doors. You see that? It goes through walls. It can appear and disappear at will. Now, see, if you're trying to get across the idea that this is a body and not a spirit, you wouldn't do that. But if you're trying to get across the idea that it's a spirit and not a body, you wouldn't have the eating of the fish. The fact is that there is no worldview, there is no religion, there's no philosophy that could conceive of the reality that we see here. And that is our future reality. What is it? What kind of body could go through walls? It's not really a body, then, is it? Yes. It's the only person I know who kind of comes to grips with it, and I'm sure it's because of his profound reflection on Jesus' resurrection body, is Paul. And there's a place where Paul, in 2 Corinthians 5, is talking about his possible death, or I guess he was thinking about his death. And he says this. For while we are still in this tent, that means this body, this life. While we're still in this tent, we groan, being burdened. Not that we would want to be unclothed. to be fully clothed, so that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life. That is fascinating. See, what is he saying? He says, when we're in our body, we groan. That means we feel the decay, we feel the aging, we feel the limitations of our physical body. But we don't want to be unclothed. We don't really want our soul out of our body. We want to be fully clothed. What does that mean? That our body be swallowed up with life. What does that mean? Jesus' body and our future bodies are not going to be less physical than this current body, but more physical. More physical. You say, what do you mean, more physical? Yeah. Our future bodies are going to more do what bodies are supposed to do. They're going to be more indissoluble. They're going to be more solid. They're going to be more perfect. They're going to be more beautiful. They're going to be able to be and do and bear the burdens of what bodies are supposed to do in a way that our bodies can't. You say, well, how can bodies be more physical? Let me count the ways. For example, one of the job of your body is to embody your soul, right? Are we not embodied souls? And our bodies express our souls? One of the things that you'll know about New York if you're here for a while is there's a lot of really, really ugly souls out there with beautiful bodies. And there are a lot of really, really beautiful souls out there with ugly bodies. Now, that ain't right. You know why? Because the bodies aren't doing their job. But these bodies will. Or another thing that the bodies are supposed to do is sense the world. We have five senses. We've touched, tasted, tasted, smelled. And because of my sight, because of my hearing, I sense things out in the world. Parts of reality. Now, if a person has been born blind, really, really never ever had had the faculty of sight at all. Completely blind. If that person says to you, is read something like the sound of a trumpet? You're going to have to say, not really. You're going to have to say, look, you can't experience red with your ears. You can't really experience red with your tongue. If you don't have the faculty of sight, that's part of reality you just aren't going to be able to experience. You know, plants have some senses. They don't have sight, however, and therefore they can sense heat and cold and a lot of things, but they can't see. And therefore, there's parts of reality that they're just not aware of. But what if? See, here's how bodies could be more physical than less, than now. What if, and Jonathan Edwards, the great Christian thinker, said this, wouldn't it be natural that our resurrected bodies would have a hundred senses instead of just five? Or a thousand? Or ten thousand? You say, well, how could that be? You know why? Nobody knows what it would be like to even have six or seven or eight, really, in spite of the movie. Because that means, why not? Because there might be all kinds of aspects of reality that we don't even see or hear or whatever, that they're out there and we can't even, we can't sense them. Why not? Because compared to what our future selves are going to be, right now, we're tomatoes. We're cucumbers by comparison. And when Jesus, when they looked at Jesus, they would see him and then they, at first they never, this is another one of those counterintuitive things. This is another one of the reasons why these accounts of Jesus, the resurrected Jesus, just could never have been made up. They just aren't. They couldn't have arisen from any existing world, human category of thought, really. And the idea that when Jesus would appear, they would not recognize him at first. They couldn't tell, remember Mary didn't recognize him and the road, the disciples on the road to Emmaus didn't recognize him, but then they looked more carefully and they realized it was him. It's a little bit like if two of, let's just say you were 12 and your best friend was 12 and then you don't see your best friend for another 18 years and you're both 30 years old and he or she walks up and says, do you recognize me? Do you know me? And you say, no. And you say, it's me and gives your name and you say, oh, wow. You know, maybe I remember that kind of awkward little 12-year-old boy but now look at this incredible prone man. You see, it would be a little bit like that but it would be more like the continuity would be, the difference between our present selves and our future selves would be more like the difference between an acorn and an entire forest than a 12-year-old and a 28-year-old. And when we find each other and when we see each other in that new heavens and new earth, we're going to look and we're going to say, it is you. It is you. I'm going to say, this is you. It is you. I saw flashes of this in you, but now look at you. And yet as glorious as all this is, it'll still be, it's ordinary life. Jesus ate a fish. He was cooking fish on the fire, fireplaces and food and dancing. You know, do you see Jesus hovering as he's talking? You know, he's not hovering. He's not six feet off the ground. He's touching, he's walking, he's hugging, he's loving. And that's your future. We're going to walk. We're going to dance. We're going to sing. We're going to eat in the kingdom of God with the son of man in degrees of power and of satisfaction that we cannot now imagine. And that's your future. That's where you're going. Isn't that amazing? Ah, but that's not all. Secondly, on the basis of that future, now Jesus Christ gives us a new mission in life. And we're told what it is in chapter 20, verse 21. Again, Jesus said, peace be with you. As the father has sent me, I am sending you. Now, if you were reading that in Latin, the word sending or sent is the word missio or mission. And what Jesus is saying, I'm a missionary. And now all of you are missionaries too. What he's saying is that the shape of my life is sentness. I have been sent. I have a mission. And now my mission is the model for your life. Well, what is his mission? Well, Easter tells us now, finally at Easter, we see it. Jesus' mission is a dangerous rescue operation to redeem and restore the world from all that ails it physically and spiritually because of sin. So what that means is on the one hand, you'll see Jesus Christ saying, as part of the mission is forgiveness and repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached to all nations. In other words, I want people converted. I want people in a love relationship with God through me. I want people to believe the gospel, right? And yet it also says, and we'll get back to this. He says, everything in the prophets has been fulfilled in me. And if you were here before Christmas and we looked at what Isaiah and Amos and the prophets were saying about what God wants to bring about, you know what it is. It's the kingdom of God. And what's the kingdom of God? It's the new heavens and new earth, a healed material creation, the lion lying down with the lamb, the child playing with the cobra and the adder without fear. See kingdom of God, absolute wholeness, absolute wellbeing, physically, spiritually, socially, economically, every way. So when John the Baptist says to Jesus, when he sends a messenger from prison and he says to Jesus in Matthew 11, are you the really the Messiah? Are you the one who's bringing the kingdom of God? And what does Jesus say? The blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the poor have good news preached to them, the dead are raised. See, that's the kingdom of God. Shalom, absolute healing, total wellbeing in every way, spiritually, physically. Now here's what, here's why the Christian mission now is unique. Easter shows us God invented both soul and body. Sin has corrupted both soul and body. Both our souls and our bodies are diseased and dying. And Easter day shows that God is going to redeem both soul and body. He doesn't just redeem Jesus spiritually. He gives, he redeems his body. God loves this material creation. Now religious and secular people, Eastern and Western people, Christian's mission is unique. It's not any of that. See, religious people have traditionally always said the main thing in life is getting your soul right with God. The world, you know, it's all going to fall away. Eventually, we're all going to lose it. We're going to go to heaven. The important thing is to get your soul right. And secular people said, no, the important thing is social and economic structures. But the Christian mission is radically holistic, radically, because on the one hand, of course we want to get people right with God. On the other hand, we look out there at that material creation and we say, God loves this world with its heats and its colds and its colors and its tastes and its living beings. And he came into this world and died and suffered in order to make it all right. And we are not going to be passive about injustice. We're not going to be passive about poverty. We're not going to be passive about hunger at all. We care about all of it. And of course, we're sent now. And as Jesus Christ came into the world and died in order to redeem and restore this world, we're ready. We're ready to sacrifice. results of sin, spiritual and physical. Do you know how unique this is? The uniqueness of the biblical salvation, when you consider the Eastern understanding of the material world as all being an illusion, and the Western idea is, you know, if you're a Western secular person, it's all going to burn up someday, and the Western religions, various religions believe you're just going to go to paradise and this world's going to fall away. That's not the biblical view of salvation. Vinath Ramachandra, Sri Lankan Christian, this is a beautiful quote, so I keep coming back to it, says this, biblical salvation lies not in an escape from this world, but in the transformation of this world. You will not find hope for the world in any of the religious systems or philosophies of humankind. The biblical vision is unique. That is why when some say, don't you think there's salvation in other faiths? I always say, what salvation are you talking about? Not this salvation. No faith holds out a promise of eternal salvation for the world, for ordinary world, the ordinary human life, fireplaces, and friends, and food, and hugging, and kissing, and dancing. No faith holds out a promise for eternal salvation for the ordinary world that the cross and the resurrection of Jesus Christ do. Do you get that? Do you see how real, how unique it is? Our concern about this world being mattering. Johnny Erickson Tada, great Christian woman, great Christian writer, and she's been a quadriplegic, she's been in a wheelchair since she was 18, and there's some place where she says, do you realize, oh, all these other religions are fine, and you know, people always say, don't you believe there's salvation in other faiths? And you know, the right answer is, not this kind of salvation, because as she said, the biblical salvation is the only salvation that offers me a new spinal cord. Think about that. It's the only one that offers me a new spinal cord. The only one that says, someday you're going to dance again. Nobody else says that. I mean, dance in the body, this body. Martin Luther, in a very inspiring moment, was once asked, what would you do if you knew Jesus was coming back tomorrow? Now, you see, religious people, if they were told Jesus is coming back tomorrow, would say, I better go pray. I better get my heart right. I better get my soul right. Okay. And secular people, if they were told Jesus is coming back tomorrow, would say, wow, this is a problem. Or whatever they'd say, I don't know. But you know what Martin Luther said? If he knew Jesus Christ was coming back tomorrow, he said, I'd plant a tree. Would that be your way of, would that be your instinct? No, it's not my instinct either. You know why? Because I haven't let this radically unique biblical understanding of salvation really, really, really penetrate me. Why would he say, why would he do that? Because he said, I want to plant a tree because when Jesus comes back, think of how it's going to flourish. Think of how it's going to grow. Because you know, Psalm chapter, I read Psalm 95 and 96 virtually every morning and Psalm 96 ends like this. Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before the Lord, for he comes to rule the earth. I want to see my tree sing. I want to see it grow. Okay. The only biblical salvation that offers a new spinal cord or a new set of lungs or a new heart or whatever. Now, lastly, if that is our future and that's the mission on the base of the future, this mission is a rather demanding mission. You know, it's not like live for yourself. It's not even just get your soul right. Right. It's not just simply work on social structures for a while to make things a little bit better. It's new heavens and new earth. It's redeem and restore, uh, this world, knowing that that's where God is going and being willing to sacrifice enormously for it. But where do, where, where do we get what we need to do that? And the answer is we get a sure and certain hope, a sure and certain hope. Now, where do you see that sure and certain hope? Every time Jesus shows up in, in these, uh, or most of the times that Jesus shows up in these, these resurrection narratives, he starts off by saying immediately, what? Peace be unto you. Peace be unto you. Now read one way you could say, ah, that's just a normal way that people talk back then. And it was, by the way, it was a kind of normal greeting, but when the resurrected Jesus continually first words out of his mouth, when he shows up, says, peace be unto you. And it's the word shalom. Most commentators, and I certainly, is, the shalom, the future well-being of the world is now, because I'm raised from the dead, yours. It is yours. It is guaranteed. And what Jesus is actually giving us here is what the Bible calls hope. Now, I know the word hope is not in the text, but that's what he's doing when he says, this peace, this future well-being is guaranteed. The word hope, the biblical concept of hope is not well served by our English word. Our English word hope is very weak. You hope in something only when you're not sure about it, right? But that's exactly the opposite of what the Bible means by hope. In the Bible, hope is life-changing certainty that something is coming, though you don't have it now. Life-changing certainty that something is coming, though you don't have it now. Let me give you a perfect example. I can't give you a better example than this. Two women are both given a job. And both of them are given the same job, that in very, very, very boring, drab, tedious, under conditions, they are going to have to do a very, very boring, drab, tedious job over and over again all day. It's 80 hours a week for one year and no vacation. But one woman, identical, identical conditions, identical work. But one woman is told, and at the end of this time you will have earned $15,000. Another woman is told, at the end of this time you will have earned $15 million. I want you to know that those two women, though they're in the same room or in the same conditions, doing the very same job, they're going to experience their day extremely differently. The one woman is going to find it boring, is going to find it a grind, is going to find it, you know, just unbearable. And about three months into it, she's going to quit. And the other woman will be whistling as she works, happy, able to handle that, yes, it's tedious, but it's okay, it's okay, why? Because her mind is saturated with the future. She's thinking what she's going to do with $15 million. Now here we have two people having the very same experience of the present, and yet experiencing the present absolutely differently because of what they believe its connection is to the future. What you believe about the future completely controls how you experience the present. Now think, do you believe, point one of this sermon, do you believe that through Jesus Christ, that's what's coming? Do you realize what that would do? See, if it really came into your life, one Christian minister puts it like this, Christian faith isn't just a belief, a feeling, or a decision. It invades life so deeply, you have to talk about dying and being born again. When some song or poem assures us that there's always spring to follow winter, it ends comforting, but in actual fact, the precise opposite is true in real life. Ultimately, transience always triumphs over everything. But when the Holy Spirit makes Christ's resurrection so present and real to a Christian, then it creates a living hope in God's future. And the moment of rebirth is the moment in which the knowledge of that future pierces you like a shaft, touches us in time, and puts an end to the transience. A truly new life begins only when this happens. Has that happened to you? See, you could be blind. And if you're blind, you're imagining people who see, and you can be very envious. But if you've been pierced with the knowledge of that future, if you really know about this future, which is vastly better than $15 million, and you can imagine a hundred senses all working perfectly, then you realize that though you're blind and other people can see, compared to our future selves, everybody's blind now. Or maybe somebody here has lost their love. Or maybe not had their love. And you're lonely. And you look around at people that seem to have loving friends or a great marriage, and you wish you had it. Well, you know, it would be very easy to be resentful, unless you've been pierced with the hope of the resurrection. Because if you know, really know, that eventually we're going to experience love with every other person in the new heavens and new earth, it's a trillion times better than the best marriage on earth can even possibly muster. With everybody. And if you know that, if you're thinking about that future situation, and you know it's coming, and it's infinitely better than $15 million, then you know that those of you who are without friends or lovers, and those people with great marriages, compared to that future, we're all lonely now. The differences are negligible. When you think about... pierces you like a shaft, you can face anything, absolutely anything. Not only that, when Jesus Christ shows them his hands and his feet, what is he showing them? His scars. And at this point, there's something pretty amazing going on. The last time the disciples saw Jesus' scars, they thought those scars were ruining their lives. You've got to remember something about the disciples. The disciples thought that they were on a presidential campaign. And they thought that their candidate was going to probably win. And they thought they were all going to be in the cabinet. And they were banking on all this. And when they saw the nails going into the hands and feet, and when they saw the spear going into the side, they believed those wounds had destroyed their lives. And now Jesus Christ is showing them that in his resurrected body, his scars are still there. Why would that happen? If you're going to have a resurrected body, wouldn't you want to get rid of all the scars? No. Because, here's why. Because now that you understand the scars, now that you understand why he did that, now the memory and the sight of those scars only make the eventual glory and joy of your life greater. For them to see Jesus Christ with the scars, it reminded them of what he did for them. And it made that horrible stuff, the horrible things, those scars that they thought had ruined their lives, it actually makes their eventual joy and glory in Christ greater. And I want you to know that on the day of the Lord, the day that God makes everything right, the day that everything sad comes untrue, on that day, the same thing will happen to your hurts and your sadnesses. You will find that the worst things that have ever happened to you only will, in the end, make your eventual glory and joy greater. On that day, all of your sadnesses will be turned inside out and you will know joy, joy beyond the walls of the world as poignant as grief. More poignant than grief. And now lastly, how can we really be sure of this, that our future is redemption, even our past will be redeemed? How can we, how can we have this sure and certain hope, this sure and certain hope should change our lives, make it possible for us to do anything, face anything? Actually, the answer of how we can be sure is, is easily missed. Very easy to miss. It's, it's right here where he says, and he said to them, this is what I told you while I was still with you. Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the Psalms. Now this is not the first time he did that, did this. And the road to Emmaus, he does this. He sits down and says, it's really important if you're going to do your mission, you have to understand that everything in the Bible points to me. See, the Bible had three parts. It was understood there was the law, the Torah, the law of Moses, the prophets, and the wisdom literature. Now if Jesus had said, the prophets are about me, oh, you could say, yes, I understand that. Yep. The prophecies were about the Messiah. But when Jesus has the audacity to say, no, the law is about me. Now, wait a minute. Why, how could the law of Moses be about me? The law of Moses is a set of rules. You must do this. You must do this. You must do this to please God. Isn't that about me and you? It's not about Jesus. It's about us, right? But he says, no, the law, the prophets, the wisdom literature, everything in the Bible is fulfilled in me. Everything in the Bible is pointing to me. Do you know what that means? When Jesus Christ says the law of Moses is really not about you. It's about me, Jesus Christ. What he's saying is I have fulfilled that. I have obeyed the 10 commandments. Well, what about the ceremonies of Moses? You know, the sacrifices for sin and the tabernacle and the clean laws. He says, I'm the ultimate sacrifice as Jesus. I'm the ultimate priest. I'm the ultimate temple. I'm the ultimate way that you are clean before God. Well, what about all the stories? Abraham and Isaac. Jesus says, he says, I am the true seed of Abraham who was offered up. Isaac. I am the true Jonah who was thrown into the deeps to appease the wrath of God. I am the true David who stood before the great giants of evil and sin and didn't just save his people at the risk of his life like David, but at the cost of my life. I'm the true David. I'm the true Jonah. I'm the true prophet, priest, and king. I'm the ultimate sacrifice. There's two ways to read the Bible. And the one way to read the Bible is basically about you, what you have to do in order to be right with God. In which case, you'll never have a sure and certain hope. Because you always know that you're not quite living up and you'll never be sure about that future. Or you can read it as all about Jesus. must do in order to make yourself right with God but what he has done to make you absolutely right with God and Jesus Christ is saying unless you can read the Bible right unless you understand salvation by grace you'll never have this sure and certain hope but once you understand that it's all about me Jesus Christ then you can know that you have peace you can know that you have this future guaranteed and then you can face anything oh look at the wounds of Jesus he's showing you his hands and his side know what it means let it pierce you like a shaft and change you as it can there's that great poem about it by Edward Shilito Jesus of the Scars and it ends like this the other gods were strong but thou wast weak they rode you did stumble to your throne but to our wounds only God's wounds can speak and no God has wounds but thou alone let's pray our father we thank you we thank you that because of the resurrection we know where we're going we have a new mission in life we have a sure and certain infallible hope and it's all based on the fact that your son Jesus Christ has fulfilled the law and the prophecies about the kingdom and the wisdom literature you are wise you are obedient you've done all this in our place and as a result we have a new mission in life oh father the magnitude of what your son said to us after the resurrection is yet to really dawn on us but let it dawn on us a little bit more because we spent this time together studying your word tonight we pray in Jesus name amen amen
