TITLE: I Sing in the Shadow of Your Wings
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 63:1-11
TOPICS: Worship
SERIES: The Lord’s Prayer 1999
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-sing-in-the-shadow-of-your-wings/

============================================================

Our series, that which we're going to be doing all summer, is we're going to be looking at Jesus' model of spirituality in the Lord's Prayer. And what we're going to do is take a phrase from the Lord's Prayer every single week and choose a Bible passage, a biblical text, that sheds light on what that particular phrase means. So, for example, this week, I want to choose the phrase, hallowed be thy name. Now, you know, almost every week, well, every week, millions and millions of people are saying, hallowed be thy name. They're reciting it, and they haven't the slightest idea what they're saying. Nobody, what does hallowed mean? What does hallowed be thy name mean? Well, that's what we're going to look for tonight, so that nobody will continue to perjure themselves and say things that they don't really mean or mean what they say. Hallowed be thy name means what? To hallow something means to recognize and treat something as ultimately valuable. To hallow something means to praise and adore something as supremely beautiful and important. And if we're going to understand praise and adoration, we're going to take a look at this text. One of the best places to find out about it, which is Psalm 63, a Psalm of David. Let me read it. Oh, God, you are my God. Earnestly, I seek you. My soul thirsts for you. My body longs for you in a dry and weary land where there is no water. I have seen you in the sanctuary and beheld your power and your glory. Because your love is better than life, my lips will glorify you. I will praise you as long as I live, and in your name I will lift up my hands. My soul will be satisfied as with the richest of foods. With singing lips my mouth will praise you. On my bed I will remember you. I think of you through the watches of the night. Because you are my help, I sing in the shadow of your wings. My soul clings to you. Your right hand upholds me. They who seek my life will be destroyed. They will go down to the depths of the earth. They will be given over to the sword and become food for jackals. But the king will rejoice in God. All who swear by God's name will praise him, while the mouths of liars will be silenced. This is God's word. Praise and adoration. You're going to learn everything you need from this passage. This psalm is so filled. And what we're going to do is we're going to notice from this passage these things about praise and adoration. The power of it, the parts of it, and the key to it. The power of praise and adoration, the parts of it, constituent parts of it, and then the key to it. The key to doing it. The key to doing it well. Now first, the power of it. You know, one of the things that's interesting about this is when you, at least our computer program that prints out the psalms, if you punch in Psalm 63, 1 to 11, it prints it out and puts it in a bulletin. But for some reason, our computer program does not ever put in the headings to the psalms. And you know, when you read in your Bible the psalms, it always has headings. Not always, but most of the psalms have headings. And the heading of this psalm is this, a psalm of David when he was in the wilderness of Judah. Now you cannot understand how this psalm attests to the power of adoration and praise of God unless you understand something about the circumstances under which it was written. When was David in the wilderness of Judah? When was he in the wilderness? Well, verse 9 kind of gives you a little bit of a hint. He's on the run for his life. Look, those who seek my life. But he's the king. So when was he on the run for his life out in the wilderness? And the answer is when his son, in some ways, his favorite son, when the son he loved most, turned on him and betrayed him. His name was Absalom. And what his son did was he did a coup d'etat. He took the throne. He took the kingship. David had to flee for his life. He'd lost, in a sense, his family. He'd lost his kingdom. He'd lost his people. And now he was on the run with a few followers, and he was about to lose his life. That's the situation. And we have to go a little deeper if we're going to understand something about how David would have felt. You say, wow, that's terrible. Well, it's worse than you think. Because the roots of this situation go back for the years before this, when David fell in love or fell in lust with a married woman, Bathsheba. And he had an affair with her, and he had her husband murdered, who was a trusted military officer. And of course, it came out, as you know the story. And he repented, and he was forgiven. But Nathan the prophet came to him. but, and I quote, the sword will never depart from your house. This is what he was saying. He says, yes, God has forgiven you, but I want you to know, says Nathan, you have sown seeds in your family. You have permanently poisoned your family by sowing seeds of bitterness, seeds of jealousy, seeds of distrust, and the sword will never depart from your house. And without tracing it all out, Absalom's rebellion, his pride, his bitterness, his anger, his hostility, his murder of his brother, his seeking to murder his father, all that comes from this. So when David is out in the wilderness, and he's on the run, he's lost everything. He has the knowledge that the reason he's lost everything is his fault. He's lost his kingdom. He's lost his people. He's lost his family. He's about to lose his life. And he has to live with the fact that it's because he'd failed as a king, abusing power. He'd failed as a man. He'd failed as a father. He'd failed in every way. He was out in wilderness, and he was about to die, and he's being hunted down largely because of his own sins. And if you read about this in 2 Samuel 17, 18, and 19, you will see at various points he acts. At one point he has to be rebuked by Joab. He's depressed. He's virtually suicidal. He's ruined. And only if you understand that will you understand the significance of this prayer. Because when you get to verse 11, there is a climax here that is absolutely astounding. And it's only astounding if you read the heading, which wasn't printed by the computer, but never fear, that's what preachers are for. When he gets to verse 11, he doesn't just say, I. He doesn't say, but I. Many times David does. Many times he says, this is happening and that's happening. I'm devastated. I'm on the run. They're after me. And it's all my fault. But I will rejoice. He doesn't say I. What's he say? The king. And Derek Kidner, in his commentary on this psalm, says this, and I quote, David's term for himself, the king, is a clue to the meaning of the psalm. It is surely more than a synonym for I or me. Written from his banishment at the hands of Absalom, it becomes a reassertion of his calling. Now, here's what's going on. How in the world, under these circumstances, do you have a man who'd failed utterly and was about to lose everything and actually had lost almost everything? How do you have a situation like that? And yet, his head is up. His eyes are up. His voice is up. His heart is up. And he says, it doesn't matter what I've done. It doesn't matter what's going on. I'm the king. I know who I am. Where do you get confidence like that? He should be crushed. He was crushed at the beginning. Look at him. He's pining. He's yearning. He's thirsting. He's dying. He was crushed. But by the end, he knows who he is under circumstances that should just totally break you. How was he able to do it? How was he able to face this? How was he able to get that kind of poise, that kind of power? The answer is adoration. There is nothing else happening to him except he goes into the sanctuary. He hungers and thirsts for God. He beholds his power. He beholds his glory. And he begins to experience his power and glory. And he's satisfied with it. He doesn't say, give me protection and say, I know I'm going to be protected. He doesn't really say that. He doesn't ask for protection. He doesn't ask for forgiveness. He's been forgiven. What's he asked for? He just asked for God. He just asked to see God. Adoration has given him the power to face something that would crush anybody else. And listen, if it can help him handle those circumstances, I think it can handle yours. Whatever yours are. Now you say, well, now how could that be? Why would that be? Now before we get on to how, you know, to get into the parts of praise so we can understand what to do, let's talk for a second about this. Why was it that David was able to turn around and say, I know who I am now. I'm the king. Why would he reassert? Why would he have that kind of confidence after he's done in praise? And I'll tell you why. Let me read you this and I'll unpack it. Basically, it goes like this. Your view of yourself in the world is totally refracted through and totally controlled by what you worship. What's on the palate of your heart? What's the beauty of your life? May I repeat that? Then, your view of yourself. completely dependent on what you're worshiping, what's at the center, what's on the palate of your heart, what's the beauty of your life. And the only way you can fundamentally change anything is change what you worship. The only way you can fundamentally face anything is to change what you worship. Worship. Everybody's worshiping something, and it's where your identity comes from. And if you worship God, your identity can stand up to anything. And if you're worshiping anything else, your identity comes and goes with it. See, here's what I mean. What am I talking about? Well, think. First of all, for a minute, there's a part of you. There's a place. There's a center. There's a private place. And you especially come to understand something about what's going on in there. When you are in solitude, when you're waiting and you have nothing else you have to think about, what do you think about? What do you fantasize about? What do you daydream about? Or when you're in trouble or when you're kind of unhappy, where do you escape to in your thoughts? Or let me put it another way. What is so important to you that if you would lose it, you really wouldn't, you know, life would be meaningless? You see, David looks at God and in verse 5 says, you're better than life. And I'm saying to you that everybody, they don't call it worship, they don't call it adoration, you call it fantasizing sometimes, you call it daydreaming. But everybody's looking at something and saying, if I don't have this, my life's nothing. Everybody's doing that about something. Everybody, now let me put it another way. When David says, I'm looking at this and I'm adoring this and my soul is feasted on it. See verse 5? Everybody does that with something. What's your palate? It's your taste buds. Now look, let's just say I have this wonderful piece of chocolate, unbelievable chocolate, super expensive chocolate, incredible chocolate, and I put it on the top of my head. I'll know it's there, that's about it. Or if I put it on the palm of my hand, that's a little more sensitive than the top of my head. And now I'll know it's sort of goopy. I mean, if I put it on the top of my head, I don't even know it's goopy. It's kind of goopy. But when I put it on my tongue, suddenly it electrifies my whole body. Why? Because the tongue is the only place that I can really get hold of its richness, of its sweetness, right? Other parts of my body, I can just sort of sense it in general. Now think about this for a second. Let's just say you believe God loves you. You also believe your boyfriend or your girlfriend or your spouse loves you. You also feel that you're in your career, your peers respect you. You also feel that your parents respect you. But now here's what I want to ask. Let's just assume that you know all four of those things. I mean, a lot of you don't, but let's imagine you do. Which one is on the palate of your soul? Which one is the center of your adoration apparatus? Which one are you drawing sweetness out of, the sweetness of your life? Which one are you really looking to for warmth and life and worth and significance? Because you see, something's on the palate of your soul. Something is what you're adoring. Something is the center of your personality. Something your soul is feasting on. Something you're saying to, if I don't have this, who cares about life? What is it? See, what basically makes you tick, the root of your personality is what you adore, is what you worship. That's the heart of your identity. Who I am. I am, he says, because he knows now. Now, there's another way to put this. Let me give you two examples. I'm sorry if any of these are painful. Honestly, I'm not thinking of anybody in particular. But like, for example, if you're dating somebody and you get real close and you're getting real serious and you break up, that's tough. That's very hard. I mean, there's weeping and there will be weeping for a long time. That hurts anybody. But there's always a certain percentage. Is that right? There's a certain percentage that just can't get over it. You feel kind of devastated forever. The time passes, the time passes, and you can't get past it. And you know, and you can't ever look at yourself the same. And you feel, I was rejected or something. And what's wrong with me? And you can't get past it. Now, there's all sorts of things you can do about this. But I'll tell you what the main problem is. But first, I'll give you a second illustration. But you know, your parents always wanted you to do X. And now you're not doing it. You're doing Y. And you can just tell. You know, your parents are nice to you, maybe. But there's a remoteness. And there's a distance. And you can't get over the fact that I have... And I've got people. Certainly you've got people. You may be one of them. But you certainly have friends who just can't get over that. They've disappointed their parents. Their parents have It's because their parents' opinion is on the palate of their soul, regardless of what they believe about God. Or because your boyfriend or your girlfriend's opinion and love of you was on the palate of your soul, not the love of God. There's plenty of people who say, well, I believe God loves me, but this person has rejected me, and therefore my life is over. What does that mean? If you want to, you can think about it in psychological terms, and that's all right. That's certainly one way to come at it. But what I'm trying to say is ultimately, the ultimate reason is when the love of God doesn't console you, doesn't change you, doesn't make you, doesn't empower you, so that the love of somebody else, or the respect of somebody else, or success in some other field, is more important than that. It's a worship issue. It's a worship issue. You've been sucking on the sweetness of something besides the grace and love of God. You've been turning it over on the palate of your heart. You've been fantasizing about it, which is the same thing as adoration. You've been thinking about it. You've been spinning out scenarios. You've done it to yourself. And there is only one way out. The reason that you're devastated is because you need to put God on the palate of your heart. That's what David did. And it changed him. And he was able to face stuff that most anybody else, anybody else, would be absolutely broken by. That's the power of adoration. That's why it has the power. It does. Okay, now secondly, that's the first point. The first point is we're taught here the power of it. And you know, you only understand the power of adoration if you understand the setting. And therefore, if you read the title. But now secondly, inside the prayer itself, we learn the parts of it. See, maybe there's somebody here saying, Wow, well, what do you mean by adoration? How do you do that? Well, now I want you to know that you're already doing it. But you're doing it with something. And yet it's so automatic that if you're going to do it with God, you're going to have to think it out kind of deliberately. It's going to be hard to do it with God. You might be doing it with your career. You might be doing it with romance. Or you might be doing it with a relationship or a condition. You're doing it with something. But when it comes to God, we're so unused to it, it's going to take some work. Fortunately for us, David gives us a wonderful breakdown of what he does in order to finally get to the place where his soul is feasted. There's four parts, I guess you could say. Four parts or four constituent pieces to praise. And here's what they are. I'll just mention them four and then I'll mention all four and then we'll go through them. Recollection, valuation, expression, and satisfaction. Recollection. And we see them move right through from verses two to five. Recollection, valuation, expression, and satisfaction. And if you want to move, not just for a lot of us, I mean, this is for all of us. You don't just need to believe in God. You need to adore and experience God. And how are we going to do that, these four? First of all, recollection. Now, recollection is an old word and I like it, so I'm going to bring it out. It's a word that's been used for centuries. And what it means is to enumerate the glories of God. And when you see that in verse two and three, he said, I've seen your power. I've seen your glory. I've seen your love. In other words, he's not just saying you're great, he's breaking it down. The best example of this is in that wonderful Shakespearean sonnet where the lover says, how do I love thee? Let me count the ways. Now, you see, it just, you know, imagine two lovers talking. And one lover says, let's say the guy says to the woman, the man says to the woman, I love you. I love you. And what does she say? Why? She would like it broken down. I mean, it's great to say I love you, but wouldn't it be better if I found out why? And he said, oh, because you're great. You're just so great. And I was, what does she say? How am I great? I mean, you know, I mean, what do you mean? In what ways? Now, look, that's good, by the way. If he does say that to you, do ask those questions. That's perfectly good. It's good to get inarticulate men to think it out anyway. But if he finally says, like the sonnet writer, I got 35. 35, 35 ways that you're great, 35 things I love about you. And if he starts to go through them, his heart and your heart will expand and expand and expand. Because, see, the first way you really begin to adore is you get into the details. You break out the specific aspects and the specific attributes. You don't just say you're great. You break it down. You go through it. You enumerate the glories. It's a mental discipline. That's the first thing you do in praising God. ways. You don't just say He's loving. You say, but His love is gracious love and tough love and wise love. Okay, how is it wise? It's wise in this way and that way. You break it out. Okay, that's the first thing. Recollection. Enumerate the glories. Then secondly, valuation. Now, where do you get that? Well, it's interesting. In verse 3, He says, He had seen the glory and He's seen the power and He's seen your love and it's better than life. Now, when He uses the word better, He's moving from enumerating the glories to appraising and valuing the glories, to treasuring the glories. See, He's not just saying you're this, this, and this, and this, but what He's going on is He's starting to say, but now if this is true, why do I need this? If you're strong, why am I afraid? If you're loving, why am I guilty? See, if you're merciful, why do I feel bad about myself? What He's doing is He's moving away from just enumerating the attributes and He's starting to think, okay, what's the value of these things? I have these things in God, but think, if this is true, what does that mean? See, the old word for worship, the English word worship, originally came from the word worth-ship. And what is worth-ship? It's seeing what God is worth and then giving Him what He's worth. What does it mean to treasure? Mary treasured up these words in her heart. Job 23, verse 12, I treasure your words more than my daily bread. What does it mean to treasure? It means to think, what does this mean? What is the value of this? That's why over and over in the Psalms, it doesn't just say, the Lord is the stronghold of my life. And then it says, of whom shall I be afraid? See, the adoration doesn't just say you're strong. It says, if you're strong, well, then why am I scared? If you're wise, then why am I mad at what you're doing in my life? If you're merciful, then why do I feel guilty? You're valuing. I mean, it's a little bit along the lines of, you know, imagine you had something, imagine you had a vase that you got from your grandmother and it's just, you know, it's in your daughter's room and it's always falling off. She likes it. And somebody walks in and says, you realize this thing is worth $3 million? You're going to move it. It's not going to be in your daughter's room anymore. You're going to treat it differently. Why? Because somebody appraised it. And the second thing you do in praise is to appraise. The second thing you do in praise is to evaluate, is to value it, is to say, if this is true, how should I be living? What does this do to me? What does this mean about who I am? What does this mean about my feelings? Am I living in accord with the value of what I've got? And that's the second part of praise. You've got to think it out. Now, third part, we move from recollection, which is enumerating the glories, valuation, which is treasuring the glories, and then thirdly, expression, which is articulating or declaring the glories. Notice, he doesn't just have this interior stance. Look, verse four, it says, in your name, I will lift up my hands. And verse five, with singing lips, my mouth will praise you. I lift up my hands and my lips will praise you. Now, here's what's going on. Lifting up hands was praying, but probably praying in public. This was the way it was done. In the temple, in the tabernacle, in the synagogue, people would stand and raise hands together to offer up petitions. And singing praise, of course, is music. Now, this is something extremely important. I'm going to just dwell on it for a moment, but it's very important. Something I learned by reading a very famous passage in C.S. Lewis's book, Reflection on the Psalms. Lewis, when he was a new Christian, had a little problem with the fact that God was always saying, praise me. And Lewis says, you know, it embarrassed him as a young Christian. Why was God always asking for compliments? I mean, if you've ever met somebody who's always saying, well, enough about you. Don't you think I'm great? You know, that's the last time you're ever going to have an evening with that person. And so here's God who's constantly saying, you know, forget about you. What do you think of me? And Lewis says, this is ridiculous. And then there's this great passage in his book, Reflection on the Psalms, where he understood one day what was going on. He says, the most obvious fact about praise had escaped me. I thought of praise as compliments and as approval. I had never noticed something that all enjoyment spontaneously overflows into praise. The world rings with praise. Lovers praising their mistresses. Readers praising their favorite poet. Walkers praising the countryside. But here's what my mistake was. We delight to praise what we enjoy because the praise doesn't just express but completes the enjoyment. I'll say that again. We delight to praise what we enjoy because the enjoyment. It is its appointed consummation. It is not out of compliments that lovers keep telling each other how beautiful they are. The delight is incomplete till it's expressed. First, fully to enjoy is to glorify, and so in commanding us to glorify him, God is simply inviting us to enjoy him. I got to say that a couple more times. I know you're going to say, wait, wait, that sounded significant, but what was that again? I mean, when you start to enjoy something, Lewis is saying, why do you have to go grab somebody else? Listen to this piece of music. Why can't you just enjoy it? What if you're walking and you find this incredible, beautiful mountain valley? You desperately want to bring so-and-so there and so-and-so, and you say, look at this, and you start to talk about it, and you want to praise it to somebody else. Why do you need to do that? Why does it feel almost like you're going to burst? And here's why. See, Lewis says, when you begin to enjoy something, you don't praise it just to express the joy. You praise it to complete the joy. The joy is not complete until you've praised it. Unless you can express the joy well, unless you can put it into words, you can't really experience it. Another way to put it, you can't get at the joy until you get out the joy. When you treasure something, it creates a joy that you can't get at until you get out, until you express it. And this is the reason why. Why do you listen to a sermon? I'll tell you why I listen to sermons. I listen to them all the time. I only one out of ten things at the minute, a good preacher, only one out of ten things a good preacher tells me I haven't heard before. I mean, I always want to learn something from a sermon, but only one out of ten. What are the other, why am I listening to the other nine? Because the preacher is expressing something that I already know, but I can't express as well as the preacher can. And when I hear it expressed, I could enjoy it. Why do you come and sing? Listen, you can go home. Why don't you go home and sing the doxology? Just go home and sing it. It won't quite have the same experience. It won't be quite as joyful, will it, as with the brass, as with everybody else around. Now, you know, if you sing for the Met, you sound better by yourself than with the rest of us. But for 99% of the rest of the world, we sound far better together than we do all by ourselves. That's the reason why it is silly to think that you can enjoy God all by yourself. It's so modern. It's so Western. It's so American to say, well, you know, I want to have my own little kind of private spiritual experience. I don't need church. Now, listen, most of us don't need an awful lot of the churches that are there. There's plenty of bad churches. There's plenty of lousy worship. But what this is saying is, you cannot enjoy God simply by getting kind of good feelings inside. You've got to express it. You've got to hear it being expressed. You've got to sing it. You've got to pray it. You've got to read it. You've got to recite it. You've got to express the joy in order to have the joy of God. And the reason God is saying, praise me, praise me well, praise me with good music, praise me with good art, praise me with great words, praise me together. He's not saying praise me because I need the compliment, because I'm needy, because I'm... No, because he says, I want you to have the consummate joy that will only come if you praise me. So the third thing you've got to do is you've got to express it. Now, lastly, you move from recollection to valuation to expression. And finally, if you do those three things well, you'll finally get to verse five, satisfaction. And in satisfaction, it says, my soul will be satisfied as with the richest of food. My soul will be satisfied. Then your palate, you begin to taste. And if you want to know the difference between praise and adoration and every other kind of prayer, when you're confessing your sins, you're asking for what? Forgiveness. When you're petitioning for the needs of the world, what are you asking for? Power, change, healing. Okay? When you're asking thy kingdom come, what are you asking for? Social justice. But when you praise God, what are you asking for? You're not asking God for anything but God. That's the reason why Jonathan Edwards says religious people don't understand praise. Because religious people find God useful, but Christians find God beautiful for who he is in himself. Religious people are going to God to say, okay, what do I have to do in order to get the things I really want? The things that really are sweet. The things that will really make my life right. But Christians have come to understand through an experience of grace that it's God himself. It's God's holiness. It's God's love. It's God's wisdom. It's God's power. It's God's might. It's God himself that you want. I thirst after God. Who's he thirsting after? What's he hungry for? God himself. And if you do the first three things, which are kind of under your control, you can recollect. You can evaluate. You can do that. You can even express. feasted on him, that's the work of the Holy Spirit. In a sense, the first three are sort of like building an altar, and the last one is like the work of the Holy Spirit, fire coming down on the altar. Now, fire doesn't come out of heaven just into any old thing. On the other hand, the altar isn't something that you can ignite by yourself. There's a combination of the first three and this four that together brings you into that place where you can actually experience him. Now, lastly, I said these were the power of adoration, and here's the parts of adoration. But listen, let me admit something to you. Praise is so incredibly hard. It'd be very easy for you to take your little notes that you took on my sermon here, you know, as inadequate as it is to express this great, great truth. Or maybe you get the tape and you write your notes down and say, I'm going to start praising God. I'm going to start spending more time in praise. And you start to think about his attributes. You think about his power and his love and his glory, and you go through it all. And you know, you may not get very, you may find it's still very hard, very abstract, very, very mechanical. And you say, I'm not feasting. I'm doing everything I'm supposed to do. I'm not feasting. Well, you know, it is pretty hard. You know why? Look at the Lord's Prayer itself. Jesus does not say, when you pray. He says, when you pray, pray, hallowed be thy name. He doesn't say, when you pray, say, help me confess. Let me confess my sins. He doesn't say, to pray, let me petition. But he does say, hallowed be thy name. Now, because of the archaic language, it's not that easy to see. But Jesus does not actually tell you to praise God. He actually asks you to ask God to help you praise him. When you say, hallowed be thy name, that means, let it be that we praise you. Let us praise you. Now, he doesn't say, help us to confess our sins. That's actually fairly simple. He doesn't say, help us to petition, because that's fairly simple. But in other words, Jesus considered the praise of God so hard that in the Sermon on the Mount, pardon me, well, it's in the Sermon on the Mount, in the Lord's Prayer, the Lord's Prayer actually asks God's help to praise him. It's very hard. Here's where I think the key is. David really finds the key in verse 3. He says, the thing that really takes him over the top, he's looking at the power, he's looking at the glory, but what is the thing he decides is better than life? What is the thing that he really puts on the palate of his soul? Your love. Well, here's one of those places, and don't get upset with this translation, because if I ever criticize the NIV translation, people then sometimes afterwards, they write me and say, oh, that's awful. What translation should I use? There's no perfect translation. It's a very hard word to translate. In the old translations, it's called steadfast, love. In some other translations, it's called loving kindness. It is a unique word. It's the word chesed. I can't say it right. It's more guttural than that. And it's a word that really means his loyal love. It means his strong love. It means his unmovable love. It means his unconditional love. It actually means the love that he gives to us regardless of what the danger is. That's literally what it means. Love that's willing to put itself into danger. Love that will stay there no matter what. Love that will be unmovable no matter what it faces. And David says, that thing, the thing that the thing that I know that God is willing, God has promised to love me no matter what, that's the thing that really gets adoration going. And when he talks about this, now think here, when he talks about this, what's he thinking of? Well, he knows that there's all kinds of fascinating but very, very kind of obscure promises. In Genesis 15, Abraham says, how do I know you're going to bless me? How do I know you're going to really love me? How do I know you're not going to just get tired of me? And God says, cut some animals up. And he cuts the animals up. Abraham cuts animals in half and he puts the pieces out. And then suddenly God comes down in the form of a smoking pot, a burning torch, and he passes between the pieces and he says, I promise to bless you. And Abraham was incredibly amazed. And so was David and everybody who wrote, who read it. And here's why. Because in that day, for you to walk through dead animals and make an oath was to say, I promise to do what I am saying now, even if it means being cut into pieces in order to do it. And here's God coming down and saying, I'm going to bless you even if I have to die. Now, why would God say such a thing? is more astounded by that than anything else. But I'll tell you something. If the steadfast love of the Lord is the thing that really got David's adoration going, do you realize how much better of an understanding we've got than he does? All he knew was that God promised that kind of love. But we know how he fulfilled that promise, don't we? We know how steadfast God's love is. We know what it was willing to take for us. Put it this way. There was another king who was driven out into the wilderness, but not for his own sins, for ours. And there was another king who looked to God and said, I'm going to rejoice in you in spite of everything that's coming down on top of me. But instead of God being kind to that king, God poured out all the wrath of eternal justice on him. It's Jesus. And on the cross, you see steadfast love in a way that they cannot be revealed anywhere else. And it's when we see our true David driven into the wilderness, not for his sins, but for our sins, holding on to God and being completely obedient to him and rejoicing in him, even though God is pouring out all that wrath on him and him being obedient for our sake, that will melt your heart. That will get adoration. Don't you see if you just adore him in general, it's going to be mechanical. But if you try to find, and you will, his power and his glory and his grace and his mercy and his wisdom on the cross, then you'll begin to really experience adoration. Then it'll really take off. Then your soul will be feasted. Then the recollection and the valuation and the expression will take off. There was a woman, pretty famous woman, actually. She was French, Jewish during World War II. She was an intellectual and she was part of the French resistance. Her name was Simone Weil. And one of the interesting things about Simone Weil was that she had horrible, horrible migraine headaches. And she began because she liked the poetry of George Herbert, the great English poet of the 17th century. Because she liked the poetry of George Herbert, she took to meditating on his poems when she was having her migraines. Now, as many of you know, George Herbert was a Christian a brilliant Christian poet. And she was meditating. As she was meditating on these poems, she began to start to get a sense of the truth of what he was saying. And one day, and she writes about this in her book, Waiting on God, which is an interesting book to read. Waiting on God, Simone Weil. She writes that one day she was meditating on his poem called Love Three. It's just called Love Three in his book of Poetry called The Temple. And some of you may know about that poem. It's a place where Jesus Christ is called Love, and he invites the weary soul in to eat. And the soul keeps saying, no, no, no, I can't. I'm unworthy. And when she got to the very, very end, where the poem goes like this, the soul says, let my shame go where it doth deserve. No, I bore the blame, Love said, so I will serve. You must sit down, says Love, and taste my meat. So I did sit and eat. And as she meditated on the idea of Love bearing the blame, in other words, as she meditated on the steadfast love of God, this is what she says. She says, suddenly, I had an encounter so overwhelming that I felt Christ came down and took possession of me. In this sudden possession of me by Christ, neither my senses nor my imagination took part, but it was like the sight of a friend's face. What she was saying is, I didn't have a vision with my physical eyes, and I wasn't imagining this. She says, the love of God became real to the palette of my heart. Why? I began to adore. I saw him. I beheld his power and glory. He became a reality to me. This is a French-Jewish intellectual in World War II. Meditating on what? The steadfast love of the Lord. Take hold. Take hold of him. Behold him. Adore him. Take time to do it. Do you do this for 15 minutes a day? I tell you, you're doing it with other objects for hours. You're never going to have your life changed unless you get good at this. Adore him. Take time to adore him. Oh, Lord, it's not going to be perfect until we get to heaven, but you know that old great hymn? The hill of Zion yields a thousand sacred sweets before we reach the heavenly fields and walk the golden streets. Before we get there, there's still thousands of sacred sweets waiting. Change your life. we thank you for giving us the promise. The promise that if we hunger and thirst after you, you will show us your power and glory in the sanctuary and change our lives. And then we will be able to hold our heads up just like David did. Show us how that can be true. Show us, for the rest of this service, help us to adore you. We've got times of prayer. We've got times of singing. We've got times of praise. Help us to see you in your power and glory, and especially in your steadfast love. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
