TITLE: I Thirst
SCRIPTURE: John 19:28-37
TOPICS: Sin Atonement Redemption
SERIES: St. John’s Passion
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/i-thirst/

============================================================

The scripture reading this evening comes from the book of John, chapter 19, verses 28 through 37. Later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the scripture would be fulfilled, Jesus said, I am thirsty. A jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, and put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to Jesus' lips. When he had received the drink, Jesus said, It is finished. With that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. Now it was the day of the preparation, and the next day was to be a special Sabbath. Because the Jews did not want the bodies left on the crosses during the Sabbath, they asked Pilate to have the legs broken and the bodies taken down. The soldiers, therefore, came and broke the legs of the first man, who had been crucified with Jesus, and then those of the other. But when they came to Jesus and found that he was already dead, they did not break his legs. Instead, one of the soldiers pierced Jesus' side with a spear, bringing a sudden flow of blood and water. The man who sought has given testimony, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, and he testifies, so that you may also believe. These things happened so that the scripture would be fulfilled. Not one of his bones will be broken. And, as another scripture says, they will look on the one they have pierced. This is God's word. One of the weeks up to Easter, we participate with most of the Christians in the world who are looking at the meaning of Jesus' death and his sufferings. And we've been looking at the Gospel of John and his account of the last days and hours of Jesus' life. And tonight we come to the passage that actually describes the death of Jesus. And just like Moses, in front of the burning bush, took his shoes off because it was holy ground, I feel that somehow, before this passage, we need to do something equivalent in our hearts. We need to come before this passage with a sense of its amazing holiness. And maybe the best way to do that is to be simple. And, you know, Jesus won our salvation with very few words, so there's not much use, perhaps, in me describing our salvation in a lot of words. So let me just simply suggest to you that there's three things we see in this account of his death. The secret of his strength, the nature of his offer, and how we can appropriate it personally and practically. The secret of his strength, the nature of his offer, and how we can appropriate it personally and practically. First, the secret of his strength. Now, I could have actually made this point any of these last few weeks as we've been looking at the Gospel of John, but notice it says, Now, you know how often this has come up? That Jesus does things because the Scripture will be fulfilled. What does that tell us? A lot. You know, we have a tendency to, with a semi-conscious assumption, we have a tendency to underappreciate the strength with which Jesus faced what he faced. He faced opposition. He faced suffering, of course, at the very end. He was never understood. Nobody understood him. Even his best friends never even understood him. He was always utterly alone, assaulted by the devil, assaulted by the religious leaders at the very end, assaulted by the soldiers. How did he get the strength to face the things he faced? And there's an unconscious assumption, or semi-conscious assumption on our part, that doesn't even ask that question. You know why? We tend to say, Well, he was the Son of God. You know, he was the Son of God from heaven. He was this divine being. I mean, I guess that's how he faced it. But that's missing something pretty important. Philippians 2 says, Jesus Christ, when he became a human being, emptied himself of his glory. When he assumed a human nature and became truly human, he emptied himself. He voluntarily cut himself off from his divine prerogatives. He didn't use his resources. And in Acts chapter 10, verse 38, this little offhanded comment by Peter as he's preaching. Peter says this, God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit, and he went about doing good and healing all who are under the power of the devil, because God was with him. I remember some years ago reading that and realizing the implications of this. What this is telling us is the reason Jesus was able to do the things he did was because of his reliance on this. that aren't available to us. He had no access to resources that weren't available to us. He did everything because he relied on the Spirit and the Father, just like we can. He didn't use his own resources. He accessed the Spirit and the Father, and that's how he got the strength to face these incredible things he faced. Well, how did he access the strength of the Spirit and the Father? And I believe that at least, I'm sure there's more than one way to look at this, but at least one of the main ways is through his knowledge and his use of the Scripture. Every place Jesus faces something, he handles it with the Bible. When the devil assaults him, every time he says, it is written. When the Pharisees assault him, he says, you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God. When Peter takes his sword out in order to, you know, defend Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane, Jesus says, put that away. Of course, I could call on angels to get out of this. But then, oh, Peter, how would the Scripture be fulfilled? He's always thinking of the Bible. On the way to Mount Calvary, he's carrying his cross. This is in Luke 23, I think, Luke chapter 23. And there's these women weeping, and he turns to them, and he says, daughters of Jerusalem, why do you weep? And he quotes Hosea to them. And on the cross, on the cross, when he's in the greatest of agony, he quotes Psalm 22, verse 1. My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And it tells us right here, he's constantly, even now, at the very end of his life, thinking about the Scripture. Now, you know what this means? Look, when you're in the extremity, when you're in pain, when you're in incredible danger, you act instinctively. You know, you have, there's two yous, you know. There's the instinctive, visceral you, the real you, the true you, the naked you. And then there's the you that you want to project after reflection. So, for example, you know, there's people watching you, and you know, well, say, now, how should I respond? So, for example, somebody criticizes you. The true you wants to strangle them, but then you see there's people around you. And the reflected you does something there. See, the true you wants to strangle them. The reflected you says, that's a very interesting point. But when you're at extremity, like Jesus is here, there is no projected self. There's only the visceral instinct of you. And how is it possible that Jesus Christ is taking all this with courage, with poise, with submission, with comfort? He's, oh, he was the son of God. Yet he had the same things, the same resources we had. He also had the same frailty we had. How is he doing it? When you prick Jesus Christ, when you stab Jesus Christ, he literally bled Scripture. He knew the Scripture so well. He thought about the Scripture so pervasively. It so saturated and permeated his whole being and his imagination and his feelings and his will and his knowledge that it shaped him instinctively. That he was, the Scripture shaped every part of him. It was who he was. And that's how he was able, not to have, he didn't have to sit and say, well, now how should I act? His nobility, his courage, his peace, his faith, all that happened because he was just saturated with the Scripture. Now, you know, I have people constantly saying to me, well, you know, I have problems with the Bible. You can't take the Bible literally here. You know, I just went to a number of college campuses, some of you might know, over the last few days. And I had questions and answer times on all these campuses about Christianity. And that came up all the time. Well, how can you, you know, believe when the Bible says this? And aren't there legends in the Bible? And aren't there things you can't take literally? And aren't there regressive things in the Bible that really offend me now? And what I always want to ask people is this. I want to say, do you believe Jesus is the Son of God? Do you believe Jesus was the Lord of heaven, come to earth? Do you believe he was raised from the dead? Figure that out, would you? You decide whether he was the Son of God. You decide whether he was the Lord from heaven. You decide whether he was bodily raised from the dead. Because if he is, there's absolutely no way. There's no way to follow Christ, to admit that he's the Son of God, without accepting the authority of the Bible. Because Jesus Christ submitted to the Scripture. He loved the Scripture. He knew the Scripture. He bowed to the authority of it at every point. And if he is the Son of God, so are you going to have to. And anybody who says, well, I believe in Jesus, I love Jesus, but I have trouble with this part of the Bible, then you don't believe in Jesus, you don't love Jesus, you don't know who he is. You've created a figment of your imagination. You've created a figment of your imagination, nation. of the scripture or you can't follow him. And you know, if you love the son of God, you have to love the scripture because he loved the scripture. It's what he was made of. On the other hand, if he wasn't the son of God and he wasn't raised from the dead, then who cares whether you can take the Bible literally be offended all you want. I mean, why are you struggling with it? You see this, the authority and the authority of the scripture rises and falls with the person of Jesus Christ. If he is who he said he is, and if he needed the scripture to face everything in life, how much more do you need it? That's the secret of his strength. But then secondly, we have the one, the nature of his offer. What is it that he offers us? Now, when he says, I thirst at first sight, you might say, of course, he's being crucified. He's being crucified under the near Eastern sun. And one of the things that people died of when they were crucified was they died of dehydration and thirst. And that's a horrible death. People who know something about it, medical authorities will tell you, if you know what it's like to have a burn, you know, burns are awfully, awfully painful. If you've been burned by steam or contact with a stove or something like that, you know how incredibly painful burns are, not just when they happen, but for a long time after that. They say that the diet of dehydration is basically like to have that burning inside. You feel like you're burning up on the inside. You feel like you swallowed a furnace. It's absolutely horrible. And so if you're a crucified, of course, you'd feel like that. So you say, well, of course he'd say I'm thirsty. He's being crucified. No, wait. On second thought, it's weird. On second thought, it's significant. Because you know, Jesus up to now has not complained about any physical pain at all. When they blindfolded him and they beat him in the face and said, you're a prophet, prophesy, who hit you? He opened not his mouth. And when they scourged him, and a scourge is a whip, yeah, but a whip with all these thongs on it and everyone had attached to it a bone, a piece of bone or metal, so that when you whip somebody, when you do that 39 lashes, you were literally ripping his back to ribbons, just tearing his back into ribbons. So it just looked like a piece of raw meat when it was done. And he didn't say a thing. He opened not his mouth. I mean, over and over the gospel writers say he submitted. When they put thorns on his brow and when they pounded iron spikes through his feet and hands, he didn't complain. He accepted it. He knew that this was what he was to do. He had that kind of courage. He had that kind of fortitude. He accepted it. He submitted to it. Why then, if he doesn't cry out, ow, when he's being scourged or when he's being nailed, would he suddenly say, I'm thirsty? And the answer is because something more than physical thirst is going on here. Jim Boyce, who used to be the pastor of 10th Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia, tells us interesting, gives us an interesting illustration, that if you go to the Schuylkill Expressway or go to the Schuylkill River, the expressway goes down this side and on the other side is the River Drive. It's not called Kelly Drive and you have Boathouse Row. It's very lovely. And if you go opposite 15 Kelly Drive, one of the houses, boathouses, there is a statue of a Puritan, nine feet tall, bronze, big Puritan, flowing robe and a Bible. And he says, what you can't see unless you really look carefully is there's actually a little underground stream that comes out into the river at that point, into the Schuylkill River. And if you walk back up the hill, Sedgley Hill, behind the statue, you'll find a spring from which the water comes. And the spring years ago was made, a viaduct, a little viaduct was made by a city engineer for the spring for it to come out. And inscribed on the stone viaduct by, I guess, the engineer, are these words, whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again. And it's the first half of the famous statement where Jesus Christ says to the woman at the well, well, you see this water you're drawing? Whoever drinks of this well water will thirst again. But I, he says, I have a water that if you drink of it, you will never thirst again. Indeed, the water I will give will become a spring of water welling up within you to eternal life. Now, what in the world is he talking about? spiritual emptiness that comes when God's not at the center of your life. See, it's one thing to believe in God. It's another thing to have him be the central reality of your life. So Psalm 42, the psalmist says, as the deer pants for streams of water. So my soul pants for you, oh my God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When can I go and meet with God? What the psalmist is saying is it's not belief in God that my soul needs as much as the body needs water. It's not just belief in God that my soul needs. Otherwise, I literally die of thirst. The spiritual agony is as bad as the physical agony of dying of dehydration. It's not belief in God. It's meeting God. It's knowing God. It's experience of God. Or another way to put it is God is the central reality of my life. So you can believe in God and yet professional success be the real central reality, the meat and the drink of the soul. Or friendship or your family or sex and romance or influence or money. That can be the real meat and drink of the soul. The central reality of the soul. But here's what Jesus is saying. If you put the bucket of your heart down into anything more than the love of God, more than the glory of God, more than the beauty and comfort of God, you will thirst again. You will thirst eternally. So remember, we mentioned this. When Jesus is talking to the woman at the well, the woman says she's drawing water. Remember? John 4. And Jesus says, hey, anyone who drinks that water will thirst again. But I have the water that if you drink it, you'll never thirst again. Indeed, the water I will give you will well up within you as a river of eternal life. And so she says, you've got water that if I drink it, I'll never thirst again. I won't have to come and draw water anymore. Tell me about this. Show it to me. Really? Give me that water. And what does Jesus say? Immediately in response, he says, go get your husband. We'll talk about it. She says, well, I don't have a husband. And he says, I know. Well, you've had five husbands, and the man you're living with right now is not your husband. And when you read this, your first response is, whoa, she's talking about spiritual stuff, Jesus. She wants the water of living water. And he changed the subject and brings up her broken, messed up love life. What's the matter with him? Why did he change the subject, and why is he being so harsh? And the answer is, he's not changing the subject, and he's being incredibly tender. Because, you see, she says, I want this living water. He says, okay, let's talk about your messed up love life. The reason you want closure, the reason you want a man to have you in his arms and tell you he loves you, the reason you want that so badly is because you're really thirsting for God. And the reason your life is going so poorly is because anyone who looks to anything more than God for that love, for that significance, for that meaning, for that hope, will thirst again. And anyone who continues to do it and continues to look at it instead to God will thirst eternally. He's being tender. He's convicting her. He's not just confronting her. And you know what he's saying? You don't need an abstract belief in God. She actually did believe in God, you know, in an abstract way. You need God imbibed. You need God as a living reality in your center. You need the love of God so that you don't look to love of men, he's saying to her, to give you what only the love of God can give you. You need the love and glory of God imbibed, welling up inside of you, washing over you. You need to know it or you will thirst eternally. Well, now, how can he offer that? Especially in light of what the psalmist said and what we saw a couple of weeks ago. The psalmist says, what I really need is not just belief in God, abstract knowledge of God. I need to meet God, meet him. And yet, you remember what happened in John 18, the first part of John 18, when the people came to arrest Jesus? And all Jesus did was get up and say, it is I. Remember what happened to them? They all fell down. They couldn't stay on their feet in front of him. That one bit for one second. And we trace that idea back to the Bible. And what the Bible says is, look, if you think it will be pleasant to meet God, if you think it will be pleasant to meet God. know who the real God is. That shows that you've kind of concocted a man with a big old beard, or you've got some idea of a force of love in the universe. But when anyone ever gets near the real God, this is about three weeks ago, when we talked about this, when anyone gets near the real God who is perfectly good and absolutely just, and you immediately become profoundly aware of the fact that you don't even live up to your own standards, let alone God's standards. How can you meet a God like that? How can you know a God like that? How can you stand before a God like that? Maybe that's who we need in the center of our soul. How can we get that? And now we know why Jesus is saying, I thirst. He's not talking about the physical, particularly. It's a picture of what he's really going through. Jesus Christ is experiencing the ultimate thirst. Jesus Christ is experiencing the everlasting burnings. Yeah. The prophet Nahum puts it like this. Who can stand before God's wrath? Do you not know his fury is poured out like fire? Who can dwell with the everlasting burnings? Jesus Christ was getting what the whole human race deserved for all of its evil. Jesus Christ was getting what everybody deserved for all of their sins. It was like 10 million sons beating down on him because he was experiencing the divine burnings, the everlasting burnings, the divine justice. You know what he's doing? He is thirsting so we can have the living water. He's having the ultimate thirst. He's dying of spiritual thirst. He's experiencing the agony of an eternity without God. He's being separated from God, the fountain of living water, so we can have the fountain of living waters. He's paying for our sins. And here's what he's saying. I lost the favor and love of my father. I was separated from the favor of love of my father and received the everlasting burnings, which you deserve so that you can have his nearness and you can have his love, which is what I deserve. I thirsted eternally so you could have a river of life welling up within you, his favor, his love. You can know it unto eternal life. Now, what does that actually mean practically? And let me just, let me close briefly. And it's silly in a way to use this amazing statement, these last words of Jesus as a third point. You could easily preach a sermon. You could preach a whole series of sermons on this last point. But the last thing Jesus says is as he breathes his last, he says, it is finished. And anybody who's ever, if you've ever heard a sermon on this or been or studied this or heard teaching on this, the teacher will always tell you, and they're absolutely right, that Jesus is saying one word here. It's the word tetelestai. And it's a word that means totally paid. It's a word that you would put, you would write across a bill. If you had a bill and it said you owed and you had paid it and you totally paid it, totally redeemed it, as it were, you would say tetelestai. It's paid, it's accomplished. Now, you know what Jesus is saying? One of the great paradoxes, one of the wonderful paradoxes of history. Here is Jesus Christ and by the world's standards, and in fact, by all standards. He is absolutely helpless. He is totally defenseless. He can't even, he can't even scratch his nose. He is utterly powerless. He is utterly dependent. He is utterly impotent. He is utterly out of control. And as he dies in this incredible helpless state, you know what his last words are? His words are, I did it. I've done it. I've triumphed. I've accomplished it. Well, what has he accomplished? First Peter 3, 18. Christ died for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous to bring us to God. And here's what he's saying. I have traversed every inch. There's an infinite chasm between you and God. An infinite distance. And I have traversed every inch. I have paid it all. I have accomplished it all. There's nothing more for you to do. Now, contrast this with the last word of Buddha. The last words of Buddha were evidently, strive without ceasing. Now, if you know anything about the eight-pulled path, and there's a lot of admirable stuff in Buddhism I've always admired. You know, there's the self-denial and the recognition that self-centeredness is what's wrong with us. It's fascinating. But the eight-fold path to enlightenment, the eight-fold path to salvation, is incredibly hard, unbelievably demanding. reason why Buddha, the last words he said is, if you want salvation, you must never stop striving without ceasing. That's the last words of Buddha. And the last words of Jesus Christ were exactly the opposite. He says, I've done all the striving. Don't you dare. I've done everything to bring you salvation. See, religion is you give God a performance and then God blesses you. But the gospel is God blesses you in Jesus Christ. And then you do your best to love and serve the one who's already given you the welcome and already given you the blessing and already given you the acceptance. It's already there. And Jesus says, it is finished. You know, if I was to make you, in fact, I did this once many years ago, worked very hard. It's the only woodwork I ever did. I worked very, very hard at kind of refinishing an old chest of drawers. And we, I, we put about, Kathy and I put about 3,000 coats of stuff on it and we sanded it every time over and over and over again. I was really proud of it. And if, when I gave it to the person who we were giving it to, if that person had said, picked up, you know, a piece of sandpaper or picked up an, a chisel or a screw, an awl or something like that and said, well, let me just put one or two more strokes on it here. I would have said, wait a minute, it's finished. Which is to say, which is to say to add to it, we'll subtract from it. Any effort on your part to make it better will make it worse. Any effort at all. And when Jesus Christ says it is finished, what he's really saying to you is it's finished. You can't receive my salvation and act as if you can add to it. And let me give you two, just to close here, just two kinds of people who add to it. And it's an awful lot of people in this room, I'm sure, no matter what room I'm talking to. Some of you are what I call, some of you beat yourself and other people are always trying to prove themselves. There's self beaters and self provers. You know what a self beater is? Every time somebody criticizes you, you're devastated and you beat yourself up. Every time you do something wrong or you make a mistake, you beat yourself up. In fact, you did something wrong five years ago and you can't get past it. You just always feel bad about it. You beat yourself up. You know what Jesus is saying? I was beaten up for you. Are you telling me that wasn't good enough? I was scourged. I paid for your sins. Why are you still trying to pay for them? I atone for your sins. Why are you trying to atone? It is finished. To try to add anything to what I'm doing is going to subtract from it. How dare you hate yourself? How dare you loathe yourself if you're a Christian? Don't you know what I've done for you? And then, of course, there's another kind of person, not so much the self beaters, the self provers. And you usually feel better about yourself and you're very proud that I live in New York City. I'm cool. I went to the best schools. I've made it to the top of my profession and I'm on my way up and I'm making good money and I'm doing this and I'm doing that. And that's going to drive you into the ground because you won't always do well. I tell you that. And you see, you want to be a workaholic? Then what you're really saying to Jesus Christ, what he did is not finished. To feel significant, to feel secure, I got to make that money. I've got to have that. I've got to have that fame. I've got to do this. Oh, I'm so glad that Jesus paid for my sins, but now I'm out here. What are you doing? It is finished. You're beating yourself up, working yourself into the ground. It's finished. You're not taking seriously what Jesus has done. You know, the gospel is you're a sinner saved by grace. You're more evil than you ever dared believe. And you're more loved than you ever dared hope. And the people who are trying to prove themselves, you never will. You're more evil than you ever dared believe. And the people who are always beating themselves up, God loves you enough that he's done all this. And God affirms the people, the self beaters up. He humbles the self provers down. And until you see it is finished and you stop acting as if Jesus' death was something that kind of made a contribution to your salvation, but you have to finish it. Don't you know your self-hatred? Don't you know your worry? Don't you know your anxiety? Don't you know your overwork? It's all because you don't know that it's finished. You're not rejoicing enough in what he's done. You're not really taking seriously what he's done. That's how you appropriate. And that's how you personally, you know, make personal what Jesus Christ has done. Or as the hymn says, lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in him and him alone, gloriously complete. It's finished. Let's pray. Father, please help us we've seen the secret of his strength. We've seen the offer of absolute satisfaction, soul satisfaction. And we've seen the glorious finished work of Jesus Christ. all this seriously, we'd be very different people. So now, help us to take it seriously because your son paid such a price to give these things to us. Such a price. And now we ask that you would help us to receive it. Help us to take, in a sense, our shoes off because we're standing before holy ground. And help us to receive what you've given us. How ungrateful if we don't. How ungrateful if we stay worried, driven, anxious, self-loathing, guilty. How dare we do that? We thank you that these offers stand. And we also thank you that you love us even when we don't actually take seriously the finished work of Jesus. And even though it takes us years and years and years to practice it, you're there for us. Because the work is finished and you're still accepting and loving us in Jesus. We receive that. We thank you for that. And we ask that you would accomplish all these things in our lives. For we ask it through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
