TITLE: If I Perish, I Perish
SCRIPTURE: Esther 4:5-17
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Esther and the Hiddenness of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/if-i-perish-i-perish/

============================================================

Today's reading is taken from the book of Esther, chapter 4, verses 5 through 17. Then Esther summoned Hathach, one of the king's eunuchs assigned to attend her, and ordered him to find out what was troubling Mordecai and why. So Hathach went out to Mordecai in the open square of the city in front of the king's gate. Mordecai told him everything that had happened to him, including the exact amount of money Haman had promised to pay into the royal treasury for the destruction of the Jews. He also gave him a copy of the text of the Edict for their annihilation, which had been published in Susa, to show Esther and explain it to her, and he told him to urge her to go into the king's presence to beg for mercy and plead with him for her people. Hathach went back and reported to Esther what Mordecai had said. Then she instructed him to say to Mordecai, all the king's officials and people of royal provinces know that for any man or woman who approaches the king in the inner court without being summoned, the king has but one law, that he be put to death. The only exception to this is for the king to extend the gold scepter to him and spare his life. But 30 days have passed since I called to go to the king. When Esther's words were reported to Mordecai, he sent back this answer. Do not think that because you are in the king's house, you alone of all the Jews will escape. For if you remain silent at this time, relief and deliverance for the Jews will arrive from another place, but you and your father's family will perish. And who knows but that you have come to royal position for such a time as this. Then Esther sent this reply to Mordecai, go, gather together all the Jews who are in Susa and fast for me. Do not eat or drink for three days, day or night. I and my maids will fast as you do. When this is done, I will go to the king even though it is against the law. And if I perish, I perish. So Mordecai went away and carried out all of Esther's instructions. This is God's word. Last week we started looking at this story, the story of Esther. And in chapters 1 and 2, we saw that the Jews were living in dispersion in the Persian Empire. And we also saw last week that the king of the Persian Empire, Xerxes, had deposed his queen because she was too bold and she stood up to his tyranny. And he looked for another and he found Esther. It was a beautiful young Jewish girl. And she was pleasing to him. He slept with her and she was pleasing to him. She hid her Jewish identity. She was far more compliant than Vashti, the former queen. And as a result, Xerxes made her his queen. And we saw last week that almost all readers of this story are pretty offended by the early part of the book of Esther. Feminist liberal interpreters are offended by her subservience. They're very happy about the first queen who stood up to him, but not Esther. And traditional religious people are offended by the fact that unlike Daniel, who stood up in the exile, stood up in the pagan court and said, I am a Jew and lived as a Jew, she kept it quiet. She sleeps with a man who she's not married to yet. She breaks all the Mosaic laws. And therefore, through apparently compromises, she rises up into this elite space. And she becomes the queen of the Persian Empire. And she attains the palace, which is the very center of power. Now that's a pretty fascinating story so far, is it not? We looked at it last week. And that means the book poses a fascinating question to us, too. And that question is this. In such morally, culturally, spiritually ambiguous situations as this. Does God still work with us? Can God still work with us? Will God still work with us? And the answer to the book is yes. Well, how? That's why we're reading. And this text we just read is the next chapter in the story. And we'll learn from it if we notice three things. The importance of being in the palace. The high danger of being in the palace. And how to live, as Esther eventually lived, there with greatness. The importance of being in the palace. The high danger of being in the palace. And how you can eventually, like Esther eventually did, learn to live there with greatness. First, the importance. It's the first paragraph of this. square of the city in front of the king's gate. Now, the gate was not the gate to the city, but the gate to the palace. Susa was the capital city of Persia. But inside Susa, on the western part of the city, there was a hill. And up on that hill, 120 feet above everything else, was built the palace and the palace complex. It was actually a city inside a city. In chapter one, it's actually called the Acropolis, which literally means the high polis, the high city. And if you lived there, that was the palace where the residence of the king was and all the government officials. It was a complex. And Mordecai is at the gate to that, the citadel, the high city, the palace. And to be in there was to be literally at the pinnacle of the culture. That was the center of power. It was from there that the laws and the ideas that shaped all of life flowed. And Esther had reached that place. And that's why Mordecai is getting her attention by being in the sackcloth and being in mourning and getting her attention and saying in verse 8 and also down in verse 14, you're there. You're in the center of power. Now what has happened is, and we will look at the individual next week who's brought this about, what has happened by this point is powerful forces have been arrayed inside the Persian empire to destroy the Jews. The powerful forces had gotten the king to make a decree. And that decree was, A, that the Jews were a danger to the empire. B, therefore, on a set date, and that date had been set, neighbors of Jewish people could destroy them, kill them, and plunder, take all their wealth. That date had been set. That decree had gone out to annihilate them. And Mordecai comes to Esther and says, because of where you are, you have got to use what you've got. You've got to use your place in the palace, your royal position. You've got to use your cultural and social capital to bring about a more just social order. You've got to do something. Now here's the first thing we learn. First thing we learn, not only in the book of Esther, but also in the book of Daniel, and also in Joseph's story, which is the last part of the book of Genesis, that God uses for his work in the world, not just people inside believing communities, not just preachers and missionaries, but also people out in the secular, public, cultural institutions, out in secular space. He uses for his work both people inside and outside, both lay and clergy, both people doing, you know, ministry work and people doing so-called secular work. He uses them all. If you get to the end of the book of Revelation and you really see what God's goal is for the world, you'll understand. Because at the end of the book of Revelation, you don't see just individuals leaving earth to go to heaven. God's goal is not simply individual salvation, that we're all converted and we all go to heaven. The goal of God, you see at the end of Revelation, is that his life comes down into this world and cleanses and perfects. This material world creates a material world of perfection so that all of what's wrong with the world today, all of it is healed. One of the things, maybe the most foundational thing, is that our relationship with God is broken. And how do you heal that? You heal it with what I'm doing. You heal with preaching of the word. You heal it by saying, here's what God has said and come to him and so on. That's my job, okay? But also the world needs to be healed because our relationships with each other are broken. That's why there's racism. That's why there's war. That's why there's violence. That's why there's oppression. But also our relationship with nature is broken. That's why there's disease. That's why there's hunger. That's why there's death. And when you look at the end of the book of Revelation, when you look at the end of history, you'll see that God's goal for us is not just that our relationship with him is healed individually, but that the world is healed. The whole world. And that takes not just preachers and missionaries, but everybody. It takes gardeners. It takes farmers. It takes bankers. It takes artists. It takes everyone. Dick Lucas, a British minister, preached a sermon some years ago on Joseph, the story of Joseph. And what he says here fits just as well with the story of Esther. It makes the same point. Listen carefully. If you were to go to a book table and see a biography with the title The Man God Uses or The Woman God Uses, you would immediately think it was a story of a missionary or a minute. spiritual work, would you not? A pastor or an evangelist or someone who leads Bible studies at least. But in fact, what you have here in the story of Joseph and the story of Daniel and the story of Esther is a highly successful secular leader. He's not a preacher, he's not a missionary, he's not leading a Bible study group. In the long term, says Dick, I think that being a preacher, missionary, or leading a Bible study group in many ways is easier. This is a preacher talking. There's a certain spiritual glamour in doing it. And what we do each day is easier to discern what we should be doing. It's more black and white, not so gray. So it is often hard to get Christians to see that God is willing not just to greatly use men and women in ministry, but in law, in medicine, in business, and the arts. This is the great shortfall today. And at this spot in the Bible, we have a perfect example of that. This is the spot in biblical history where the Jews had gone into exile. Jerusalem had been destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar and they were taken into exile. But at this point in biblical history, they're on their way back. They've been given permission to go back. And so they're trying to go back and they're trying to recreate their lives. They're trying to rebuild their lives, rebuild their nation, rebuild the city of Jerusalem. Ray Bakke, Christian writer Ray Bakke, at one point says, It's fascinating to see that God shows the diversity of people he uses by giving us not one, not two, but three different books that show us how he did that. How did he restore the nation? How did he restore Jerusalem? How did he do it? First of all, you have the book of Ezra. And the book of Ezra is about a minister, as it were, a teacher of the word, because the Jews needed to be reacquainted with the word of God and what the Bible said and therefore so that their lives could be shaped by what God said, number one. But number two, you also have the book of Nehemiah. And Nehemiah was a layperson. Nehemiah was an urban planner and urban developer. Nehemiah was a layperson who used his management skills to literally rebuild the wall of Jerusalem and therefore to reinstate stability so that economic and civic life could begin to flourish again. But lastly, you have Esther. And Esther's not in a congregation and she's not even out on the streets. She's up in the courts. She's working for justice in a more just social order. And unless all three of those things had happened, nothing would have happened. You've got male and female. You've got lay and clergy. You have people working for spiritual maturity and economic flourishing and a just social order. Everybody. God's using them all. Application. This is the first point. Do you see how important it is for believers to be everywhere? And what I need to, let me just put it like this. If you are in New York City, if you're living in New York City, if you're working in New York City, you're in the palace. Oh, not me, you say. No, you don't understand. I'm not at the apex. Well, no, you may not actually be at the very, very top of the palace. But look, some years ago, I remember a Hispanic minister preaching a sermon on the book of Esther to a bunch of us other pastors. It was a pastor's conference. And most of us were pastors of congregations like this filled with professional people. And he looked at us and he said, you've got to tell your people that even though they don't know it, they're in the palace. And they're in there feathering their own nests and working on their own career and using the cultural and intellectual and relational and financial capital they have basically to feather their own nests and get their own careers to move ahead. But those of us outside the palace, we need you. You've got to tell your people that they are not supposed to be using what they've got for themselves. They've got to take their royal position for such a time as this. There's people outside the palace and we need you. We need your connections. You should be helping us. Please tell your people to help us. And I remember thinking, oh, my gosh, all my young people at this church at Redeemer, they come here for three or four or five years and they just want to have fun and they want to have connections and they want to get stuff on their resume and they want to build up their career. And then they go back to where they're from and live like kings. Because, you know, if you make it in the art world here, you go back to wherever and then you're the king of the art world there. And the same thing with law and the same thing with everything else. You're using the city. You're not serving the city. You're in the palace. And see, what that Hispanic pastor was saying to tell me, to tell you, and it's been several years. I haven't gotten to Esther until now and so I haven't forgotten what he said. You know, I put it on my to-do list. I have an incredibly long to-do list. What he's saying is, You're not serving the city. You're not serving the city. You're not serving the city. You're serving the city. You're serving the city. You're serving the city. You what he said. You know, I put it on my to-do list. I have an incredibly long to-do list. What he's saying is, you shouldn't be here just to use the city, but to serve the city. You've come to your royal position for such a time as this. I know some of you feel like Esther, and that is, a lot of you feel like, I'm just here by the skin of my teeth, and I could be thrown at any time. But, so what? You still get the call. And I know some of you say, I've gotten into the position I've gotten, and I've kind of compromised. I haven't spoken out where I should have spoken out. I've done some shady things. And yeah, I've got some clout now, but, you know, I don't know. You know, I don't feel like my conscience is perfectly clear. You think hers was? It's never too late. God comes and says, realize where you are. Realize the importance of being in the palace. And if you haven't done it before now, I'll start using you now, if you're willing to hear the call. So first of all, you see the importance of being in the palace, number one. Number two, however, in the next paragraph down, we see the high danger of being in the palace. What is that high danger? Well, here it is. Notice Esther's first response. She instructed him to say to Mordecai, all the king's officials and the people of the royal provinces know that for any man or woman who approaches the king in the inner court without being summoned to the king, there is but one law, that he be put to death. The only exception to this is for the king to extend the golden scepter to him and spare his life. But 30 days have passed since I was called to go to the king. Now, you know what she's saying. Here's what she's saying. First of all, she says, you know that it is a punishable offense, a capital punishable offense, possibly, to go to the king unbidden. And, read between the lines, I got here because the last queen was too bold. You're asking me to throw away everything. You're asking me to throw away everything. How can you do that? See, that's what's... And when she says, I haven't gone to the king for 30 days, he doesn't sleep alone at night. And if he hasn't called for the queen in 30 days, then possibly, she says, that might be a sign that I'm out of favor and if I go unbidden, I'm not going to get the scepter. So she says to Mordecai, you don't know what you're asking of me. I could lose everything. And Mordecai sends back and says, of course I know what I'm asking of you. And if you look at what Mordecai says, and it's the high point in a way of the book, book, both rhetorically, you know, narratively and theologically, actually. And he speaks two things to us. Now, here's what he actually... Let's go right down into the situation. You know what he says? He says, if you don't risk losing the palace, you will lose everything. See, you see what he says here? He says, do not think that because you are in the king's house, you alone of all the Jews will escape. For if you remain silent this time, relief and deliverance for the Jews will arise from some other place, but you and your father's family will perish. Now, here's what he's saying. He says, if you risk everything, you know, if you risk losing the palace, you might lose everything. But if you don't risk losing the palace, you will lose everything. That's quite an argument, isn't it? He says, because you'll be sniffed out. What he's really saying, if all the Jews are killed, you'll be sniffed out and you'll be killed too. And if the Jews aren't killed, then you'll be sniffed out and you'll be a traitor. It's really quite an argument. And it seems a little bit, how do I say it, a little brutal. But then he says, he goes positive and he says, and who knows that you were not brought into your royal position for such a time as this? Now, if we stand back and just generalize a little, you know, we're not in the identical situation at all. Most of us, I don't think. But if you stand back and generalize just a little bit, there's two remarkable principles that have broad application and they're very powerful. And here's the first thing. The first thing Mordecai says is, the same thing that Hispanic pastor has said to you, and that is, unless you use the clout you've got, the credentials you've got, the connections you've got, the money you've got, you don't think it's much because you're in denial, but you've got a lot. And unless you, instead of seeing that as just a way for you to further your career and feather your own nest, but as a way of service to the people outside the palace, service to the rest of the world, working on the, healing the ills of the rest of the world, unless you see it that way, then the palace is already a prison. It's already devoured you and you're dead already. You better be willing to risk it because if you're not willing to risk it, it's destroyed you. It's devoured you already. What does that mean? Well, here's what it means. In Luke chapter 16, there's the famous parable of Lazarus and the rich man. You know, the rich man goes to hell, Lazarus goes to heaven. You may know something about the story, but the main thing to mention is this, that commentators have all noticed... except here. Lazarus gets a proper name, but the rich man doesn't, why not? And the answer is it's a literary device to get something across. The rich man is his name. He's a rich man or he's nothing. It's so possible to root your identity in your position in the palace, to root your significance and security in the fact that you've got money. I can wear these kinds of clothes. I can go these kinds of places. I get this kind of deference. I've got this kind of clout. That's who I am. Your net worth is your self-worth. And when that happens, it's eaten you. There's no you left if you would lose your riches. The riches have taken you over. You've been co-opted. Your power is taking you over. Your resume is taking you over. Your career is taking you over. Because that's how you know you're okay. To live in the palace is to get your identity from your performance. See, blue-collar people don't have the same problem. It's us professional types, the people living in the palace. We believe if I have this kind of resume, if I have this kind of money, if I have this kind of clout, if I have these things, then I know I'm somebody. It's eaten you. There's no you. There's no you left to use it. That's the reason why there's ethical shading because you don't want to do anything. You know, I really shouldn't do that. I should say something about that. I probably shouldn't do that. But I don't want to harm my getting up the ladder. Or when it comes to giving, you may give a little here and a little bit there, but 10, 20% of your income every year, radical giving, really helping the people outside the palace. You don't want to do that because that jeopardizes your place. And the reason why you're unwilling, this is what Mordecai is saying, if you're unwilling to risk your place in the palace, it's taking you over, it's eating you, you're the tail, and it's the dog. And it's wagging you. I used this illustration some time ago, but it actually illustrates this point. And one of the problems, good illustrations, this really happened, illustrate more than one point. It illustrates this point better than any other point I've ever used, if you've heard it before. Some years ago, I met a woman after service, and she told me she was exploring Christianity. She didn't believe in Christianity, but she really found a lot of interesting things happening here. And I said, well, who brought you here, or how did you find Redeemer? And this was the story she told me. She said, not too long ago, I made a mistake, a pretty big mistake in my job, and it should have cost me my job. And it should have cost me my career. But my boss took the hit for me. My boss went in and took complete responsibility for what I did. And to a great degree, it was true that he should have taken responsibility. But the fact is that there was no way that he had to say that at all. He could have come out smelling like a rose. But he went in there, and he took the hit for me. And as a result, he didn't lose his job, though there was a possibility. And yet, he lost a lot of his clout. He lost a lot of his ability to maneuver. He lost, his situation was more fragile. And I was amazed. And I went in to see him. And I sat down, and I said, I've been working for a while in this business, and I have often seen my supervisors take credit for what I have done. I have never seen a supervisor take blame for something I've done. I've seen supervisors parasitically get their career ahead on the basis of what I've done. But I've never seen anybody actually almost destroy their career because of something I've done. Why were you willing to take the blame? And he was very modest, and he was trying to say, yeah, yeah, yeah. I thought, well, don't, just forget it. You know, sort of male sort of stuff. And, yeah, she wasn't a male. She was a female, so she wanted to know. And she finally says, I want to know what makes you different. And he said, okay, I'll just tell you this once. I'm a Christian, and Jesus Christ took the blame for me. And that's why I have both the desire and the ability sometimes to take the blame for others. And she says, where do you go to church? And that's how she got here. Now, what was she sensing? Here's what she was sensing. This guy had a capital that made it possible for him to, he had an identity that wasn't rooted in the palace, and, therefore, the palace hadn't devoured him. He could use the palace. It was just a tool. It wasn't him. It was something, there was a him to him that made it possible for him to use this sort of thing. And it didn't devour him. It didn't drive him. It wasn't his whole identity. He had an identity rooted in something else. He had a sense of value rooted in something else. And that's the reason why he could say, I'm going to tell the truth. if I perish, I perish. Can you do that? Have you got that? So you see, the first point that Mordecai makes is, if you can't throw away the palace, or at least risk throwing away the palace, or at least risk your place in the palace to do good for other people, it has devoured you. It has eaten you. Well, then how do you get an identity rooted in something besides the palace? And the answer is, even Mordecai, even back here, the answer is hint to that, grace. Because the last thing he says is, who knows, but you have come to the royal position for such a time as this. Now that word come, it's a Hebrew, it's in Hebrew, of course, and the verb, the form is, it's a hifl verb form, which means it's passive, and therefore it would be a little better translated, who knows if you were not brought to the royal position because of this. Now here's what he's saying, you didn't get here except by grace. Your beauty wasn't something you earned, it was given to you. And this door of opportunity wasn't something you produced. Now see, Esther could have said, just like we would say, if somebody says, your position is strictly a matter of grace, you say, wait a minute, you don't know how hard I worked to get into that school, and how hard I worked in that school, and how hard I get to work. You worked with talents that you did not earn. They're just given to you. And you went through doors of opportunity that you did not produce, they just opened for you. And therefore everything you have is a matter of grace. Now that's pretty general, and yet Esther began to respond to it. It's awfully general, and we'll get more specific in one second, but Esther began to respond to it. Because the Esther we know from chapter 1 and 2 begins to go away. Sweet little Esther, pretty little Esther, who never rocks the boat and who never ruffles any feathers, starts to give orders. Isn't that interesting? And starts to say, okay, you do this and this and this, I'm going to do this and this and this and this, and if I perish, I perish. Now, we can't end the sermon here, and I'll tell you why. Some of you, there's a danger that some of you might actually be inspired by Esther's example to start to try to do what she's done. Some of you are saying, I'm not going to look at my position and my intellectual and my social and my skill and my financial capital the same way. I'm not going to look at it as just a means for me to move myself ahead in life. I'm going to see it as a way of serving people, and I'm going to become more risky, and I'm going to become more interested in justice, and I'm going to get more involved. Some of you may say, another way to get inspired by Esther is you may say, I've really been too quiet about my beliefs. I'm afraid to let anybody know that I believe, so I'm going to start speaking up. I'm going to let people know that I believe. Now, here's the danger with this. Number one, it won't last. If you get inspired by an example, Esther, I want to be like Esther. And, you know, the Hispanic pastor, you know, was a great and very convicting sermon. Be like Esther. Tell your people to be like Esther, and I'm trying to do it. But the basic motivation is guilt. Guilt over selfishness. You know, guilt over elitism. Guilt. And I want you to know it'll wear off. It won't take long because the alternative to living the way you live is pretty hard. Or the other thing that might happen is you get inspired, you get all in a lather about this, and then you, you know, it wears off because the guilt doesn't last. It doesn't really change you. It's just negative. The other thing is you can overreact. And I can't tell you how many times I've seen people who have sort of been secret about their faith out in the marketplace. And they begin to realize, I need to get, I need to get more, uh, overt. I need to tell people. And they overreact. And they start to get obnoxious. And they start to tell people about their faith in Jesus everywhere. And you know what that is? They haven't really left the palace because now they're still getting their identity from their performance because they're going to say, I'm going to be an outspoken, principled person. I'm not going to be like all these other closeted Christians. I'm going to tell people about it. And you know have an identity rooted in the palace, in your performance. And now you're this outspoken, principled person. You haven't really changed. You're just a Pharisee. And you're very self-righteously being more overt and, you know, maybe put a big Bible on your office desk. I mean, that would help too. See, either it's going to work off or it's going to become a pharisaical if you just look at Esther as an example. Because an example, even a great example, can only crush you. standard. When you see, especially as you see what she's willing to do the rest of the book, it'll crush you, but there's another way. Let me tell you how you can change. What if you didn't just see Esther as an example, but as a signpost, as a pointer? Keep this in mind. We were all created by God. And God gave us everything we have, and he sustains our lives every second. He keeps our heart pumping every second, and therefore we owe him everything. But we don't live that way. We don't live as if we owe him everything. We live as if everything we have is ours, to use as we see fit, and to further our own interests and our own happiness. And so we are violating our relationship to God. By everybody's standards, we're violating our relationship to God. And this is the reason why all the religions of the world, they disagree on the details, but they all agree with something. And that is, there's a gap or a chasm between us and the divine. There's a gap or a chasm between us and the divine. Some religions say we need mediation, you see. Some say, well, we've got to get across that bridge through sacrifices or rituals or transformations of consciousness or ethical practice. I mean, everybody's got, we have to mediate this gap. We need a mediation between us and God somehow. Everybody's different about what it is. But here's what the Bible says about that. Esther saved her people by two things, identification and mediation. She identified with her people. She didn't take the safe way. Her people were condemned. So she identified with them and came under that condemnation and risked her life and said, if I perish, I'll perish. But because she identified, she could mediate. And she could go before the throne of power in a way that no one else could. And she went before the throne of power. And because she received favor there, that favor was imputed to her people. She saved her people through identification and mediation. Does that remind you of anybody? Jesus Christ lived in the ultimate palace. He was the son of God. And he had the ultimate beauty. And he had the ultimate glory. And he left it. And no one had to wheedle and cajole him to do it. Nobody had to make arguments. Nobody had to put a little pressure on him. Philippians 2 said he had equality with the father. But he didn't hold on to it. But he emptied himself. And he came down. And he identified with us. And he took on our condemnation. But he didn't do this at the risk of his life. He did this at the cost of his life. He didn't say, if I perish, I'll perish. He said, when I perish, I'll perish. And he went to the cross. And there he died. He was crushed. And he made atonement for our sins. So that now the Bible says, he stands before the throne of the universe. And the favor he has procured is ours. We believe in him. It's ours. It's the same thing. But here's what amazes me. If you see Esther as an example and say, be like Esther, it'll crush you. You'll never live up to it. But if you see Jesus as your savior, not as an example doing something for others, but as a savior doing it for you. And you know you're that valuable to him. And you know that your future is that secure. That changes your identity. It changes. There's your security. There's your value. There's your real worth. And suddenly, all the other things in your life become just stuff. It's not you anymore. You're free. You can use it. You can risk it. You can spend it. You can lose it. And here's what's amazing. Esther was able to do what Esther did just on the basis of the much more vague right revelation that God is a God of grace. And she did what she did just knowing what she knows. But boy, we know so much more. She didn't know that God was actually going to come to earth himself and do exactly what she's doing, only on an infinitely greater scale, infinitely greater cost to him, infinitely greater benefits to us. So what's our excuse? If she did what she did, knowing what she knows, and we know so much more, and we know so much more about our value to him and so much more about his grace and so much more about our future, what is our excuse? We haven't got one application for things. If you now, seeing what Jesus Christ has done for you, if you see him losing the ultimate palace for you, then and only then will you be able to, from your place in the palace, really start to heal the world. Only then will you have the freedom. If you see and read these words through Jesus, I perish, I perish, you'll see. calling you to identify with the poor and the oppressed of the world. This is a call for us, as believers, seeing what Jesus has done, to identify with the people outside the palace, the poor and the oppressed of the world. That's what Jesus did. Here is a very interesting sermon on this subject by Robert Murray McShane, a Scottish minister speaking to Christians living in Scottish cities in 1838. He says, I fear there are some Christians among you to whom Christ will not be able to say on the last day, well done, good and faithful servants, referring to Matthew 25. Your haughty dwelling rises amidst thousands that have scarce a fire to warm themselves at and have but little clothing to keep out the biting frost and yet you don't darken their door. You heave a sigh, perhaps at a distance, but you do not visit them. My friends, I'm concerned for the poor, but I'm actually more concerned for you. I don't know what Christ will say to you in the great day. You follow Christ, you say, but you don't care for his poor. I fear there are many hearing me who now know well that they may not even be Christians at all because they don't love to give. To give largely and generously, not begrudging at all, requires a brand new heart. An old heart would rather part with its lifeblood than its money. Now, dear Christians, some of you pray to be made all over in the image of Christ. If so, you must be like him in the way he poured himself out. Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor. Objection. My money is my own. Answer. Christ might have said, My blood is my own. My life is my own. Then where will you be? Objection. The poor are undeserving. Answer. Christ might have said, Look at these wicked rebels. Shall I day that my life for them? No, I will give to the good angels. But no, he left the ninety-nine and came after the lost. He gave his blood for the undeserving. Objection. The poor may abuse what I give them. Answer. Christ might have said the same with far greater truth. Christ knew that thousands would trample his blood under their feet, that most would despise it, and that many would make it an excuse for sinning more. And yet he gave it. My dear Christians, if you want to be like Christ, give much, give often, give freely to the poor, the thankless, and the undeserving. Christ is glorious and happy, and so will you be. It's not your money I want. It's your happiness. Remember his own words. It is more happy to give than to receive. I perish, I perish is the language of identifying with the poor. Number one. Number two. I perish, I perish is the language of exciting mission. Wherever you are right now, some of you actually have been brought into a high position. This is New York, and you never know who's here. But all of you are in a position right now, you've got certain gifts, and you've got certain abilities, and even you've got certain experiences of hardness and suffering that make you uniquely ready to help certain people in the world that no one else can help. Ephesians 2, 8, and 9 says, we are God's workmanship, created for good works that God has prepared beforehand for us to walk in. And the word workmanship is the word poema from which we get our word poem. And what that means is you are his artwork. You have been crafted with your gifts and talents and your positions and your strengths and even your weaknesses and your blessings and even your sufferings. There's certain people that only you can help. There's certain things that I've called you to do. You've got a mission, whoever you are, if you understand that you are a child of his. You have been brought into the position you're in right now for such a time as this. Ask God what it is. So it's the language of care for the poor. It's the language of mission. Thirdly, it's the language of unconditional obedience. If I perish, I perish means I'm going to follow God. I don't care. Not well, I'm going to try God out, and if it really kind of helps me. No, unconditional. My life was changed years ago when I was just a kid, and I was a new Christian. I was at a college conference, and a woman Bible teacher got up and said, if the distance between the earth and the sun, 92 million miles, was the thickness of a sheet of paper, the distance then between the earth and the nearest star would be a stack of paper 70 feet high. Just the nearest star. And the distance across just our little galaxy would be a stack of paper 120 miles high. Just our little galaxy. And the universe is so filled with galaxies that our galaxy is like a dust speck amongst dust specks. And the Bible says Jesus Christ holds all that together. Ephesians, pardon me, Hebrews 1, 2. Jesus Christ holds all that together with a word of his power. And she says, with his pinky. She says, is this the kind of person you ask into your life just to be your personal assistant? Is this the kind of person you say, well, I'll try you out for a while to see whether or not obedience to you kind of makes me a happier person? Take your hands off your life. Put them in his hands. Your life in his hands. And one more thing. And one more thing. on the book of Esther, says there are 14 times in the book of Esther that Esther is not just called Esther, but Queen Esther. And 13 of those 14 times happen after she says, if I perish, I perish. She becomes a person of greatness, not by trying to become a person of greatness, and you will become a person of greatness, not by trying to become a person of greatness, that's how people will live in the palace, but by serving the one who said, for your sake, Father, thy will be done. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for reminding us of what you've given us and reminding us of what you've spent for us and freeing us to use what you've given us, spending it promiscuously for those around us. But we only will know this if we understand the gospel, the gospel that we're saved by grace, not by our performance. Father, most of us right here live right at the heart of this palace city, the high city, the complex, the Acropolis, and we get our identity out of our performance, and we are in fetters. And we pray that you'd save us and you would free us. For some of us, it means giving our lives to you for the very first time and knowing Christ as Savior for the first time. For an awful lot of the rest of us, we've known that, and yet we're still to a great degree in fetters. Please bring the gospel into our hearts so we can be like your son, Jesus Christ, who said he came not to be served but to serve and to give his life for many. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
