TITLE: Imitating the Incarnation
SCRIPTURE: Philippians 2:3-11
TOPICS: God the Father
SERIES: Philippians
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/imitating-the-incarnation/

============================================================

The teaching this morning is based on the passage which is printed in your bulletins. I'm going to read it now. It's Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 to 11. Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 to 11. Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 to 11. Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 to 11. The glory of God the Father. And this is God's word. If the Bible was a mountain range, this would be one of the two or three highest peaks. There's an awful lot of treasure in here. It kind of overwhelms me as I read it, even just now. Too much to say. You say, well, that's always true for you. Yeah, I know. Ministers, it's a danger of being a minister. I'm always saying, this is the greatest passage. This is the greatest truth. I know. But this is. What do I do about that? I don't know. Why would you even believe me? Word inflation. Anyway, we live in a time of talk shows. Revelations of people's inner lives, inner secrets, inmost thoughts. This is the ultimate revelation because we not only have in this passage maybe the most complete picture of all of who Jesus is and what he did. This is the most complete passage. It's all here. He was God. He was also God-man. He was God. He was incarnated as a human being. Beyond that, he became a servant and went to death, the death of the cross. Therefore, God has highly exalted him. It tells us all about who Jesus is, all about what Jesus has done. But here's what's especially important. This text not only tells us about him, but it tells us his mind. You know, verse 5 says, have the same attitude. Your attitude should be the same as that of Christ Jesus. Boy, does that blow apart the real freight. That's a bad translation. It says, have the same mind in you that was in Christ Jesus. Literally, it's the word mind. This passage is not only about the fact that Jesus was God, about the fact that Jesus became human, about the fact that Jesus became a servant, emptied himself, made himself nothing. It tells us also about what Jesus thought about those things. It gives us his inmost motives, revelation, his inmost thoughts. It tells us why he did the things that he did. It shows us his inmost motives. Now, when talk shows do it, they only show you the inmost mind of somebody else just for itself, just for the sake of doing it, for the pure salaciousness of it. But, you know, but when God does it, when the Bible does it, when the Bible would, for the Bible to take the curtain away and to show you this kind of revelation, the inmost thoughts of Jesus Christ, the mind of Christ, it only will do that in order to transmogrify your mind. It'll only do that to electrify your mind, to melt your heart, and to change your life. In other words, verse 5 does not say, here's the mind of Christ. It says, let this mind be in you too. God would never be so willing to share his inmost thoughts with you, just so you could say, I saw it. He does it in order to change you. He does it in order to change the way in which you look at everything and think about everything and act toward the world. Let me show you the three things that Philippians 2 tells us about Jesus. Basically, it says, he was God. Secondly, it says, he became human. Thirdly, it said, being human, he humbled himself and became a servant even to the death of a cross. Those three things and what he thought about them. But it's not enough just to say, oh, that's interesting. We also have to say, how does that change? Like, oh, that's interesting. Thank you. way in which we act? How does it change our mind? There's so much here. Let's go. Number one, first of all, this passage tells us Jesus is God. In fact, let me spend a little time on this. There is no passage in the Bible that more powerfully, dramatically, intensely, puts the fact that Jesus is God, God himself. It does it in three ways. Let me show you. First of all, in verse 6, it says, being in very nature God. Now, let me descend to particulars. That is a very good translation. The Greek word here, it says, Paul uses the Greek word morphe, morphe, M-O-R-P-H-E, morphe. He was in the very morphe of God. Now, the trouble with this word is almost always, when we take that Greek word morphe into English, you know, we do have the word some places in our English words, like metamorphosis or morphology and so on, it usually is translated by the word form. Morphe is usually translated into the English word form. There's a problem with that, though, because the English word form has to do with outside appearances. That's not what the Greek word means. We had a Greek word for that. There's a Greek word schema, which means the outward fashion, the appearance. The word morphe actually means the essence of something. It means those qualities which make something what it is. And that's the reason why the translation here, the New International Version translation that we use each week, gets it better. This is a much stronger statement. This is the strongest possible statement about the deity and the divinity of Jesus Christ. It is much stronger than if Paul came right out and said, Jesus is God. Somebody says, well, that would have been a little more clear. Oh, no, it wouldn't have been, because when you say Jesus is God, you can mean an awful lot of things. Shirley MacLaine says that about herself, and she says that about you, too. And there's a whole lot of things you can read into that. This is much different. Paul is saying Jesus Christ has the unique and very identical qualities that make God, God. Jesus Christ is the very substance of God. Jesus Christ is the very characteristics of God. Jesus Christ is the very being of God. This is incredibly strong. And if you think, is it really that strong a statement? Being in very nature, God. The second way this passage shows us the magnitude of this claim is the second part of the verse. It says, who being in very nature, God, did not consider equality with God something to be grasped. Now, you know what that word means? It means to be kept. Again, this is a little bit, it doesn't say, it's a little misleading, it doesn't say he did not count equality with God a thing to go after. By grasped he means held on to. This verse means here that Jesus was equal with God and he decided not to hold on to it. That gets us into our next point. The point is here, though, this is saying in as strong a way as possible, Jesus Christ was not just a demigod, you know, it's not like the Father gave his substance to a string of lesser gods. Jesus Christ was as much God as God. Jesus Christ was God, as much God as the Father. He was equal with the Father. The same in substance and being. Now, there's one more way in which this passage gets this point across, and I'll take a moment to say it. People have a tendency, one of the ways in which the average person today gets out from under this, the weight of this, the claim that Jesus is not just a prophet, not just a founder of a religion, not just a great teacher, but God himself. People say, well, you know, that's probably not how Christianity started. That's probably not how it started. Probably Jesus in the beginning was a teacher of peace and love. And his followers understood that too. But, you know, as time went on, and as the stories about Jesus became more distant geographically from the original site, as the stories developed, they got more generationally distant. In other words, as the years went by, the stories got embellished, the legends got embellished, and more and more people began to talk about Jesus as if he was divine, and eventually God himself. It had happened over a long period of time. The original Jesus did not claim to be God, and his original followers didn't make him claim to be God, and the original hearers didn't ever hear him say he was God. All those thousands of people that listened to him teach, they never heard him say that. He never said that. That developed much later. Here's the problem with that opinion, with that theory. Scholars now believe that this passage, look, from verses 6 down to almost... by Paul, but that Paul's quoting this. Now, we know this from about verses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. It is either a poem or a confession or a hymn. It's lexical links, it's parallelism, it has the rhythm, it has the features of Greek poetry. And either Paul had written it previously or else somebody else had written it previously, but this was a hymn or a confession that Paul was quoting and that he knew his hearers would know about. He's quoting it. Now, actually, whether or not he wrote it doesn't make any difference. Here's the point, though. Paul wrote his letters within 20 years of the death of Jesus Christ. And if he is quoting here, which he obviously is, and all scholars, conservative or not, believe this, almost all scholars, that he is quoting an earlier hymn, a confession that the church used. This means that from the very earliest days of the Christian church, the very earliest followers not only worshipped Jesus as God, but said Jesus was aware of his divinity. Jesus taught his divinity. Now, you have to see that this is a claim that would have been certainly contradicted by the hearers. If Jesus had never claimed to be God, and within one or two years, all around the Mediterranean, all the churches were saying, yes, Jesus claimed to be God, it would have never gotten off the ground. The whole movement wouldn't have gotten off the ground. This essentially proves only one thing, that Jesus did make these claims. And I'll tell you something. Of all the people on the face of the earth, the last group of people whose worldview would allow them to believe that a human being could be the transcendent creator of the universe were the Jews. The Greeks, the Romans, people in the East, they had different views of God. Their views of God were more a matter of God being part of nature, and so they could understand this idea of somebody being God. The Jews could not. The Jews understood God as being the transcendent creator, infinitely transcendent above the creation. They were the last people in the world to believe that a human being could be God. And if there was a man who made these claims and got thousands of Jews to believe him, imagine the quality of his life. Imagine his moral character. See, imagine the scrutiny he would have been under. Imagine the miraculous power he must have had. Imagine the personal presence. Imagine the sublimity of his teaching and of his preaching and his wisdom. Imagine, he must have been somebody. Don't you see what this passage is teaching us? Jesus Christ claimed to be God. Jesus Christ was of such power in his moral bearing, in such power in his abilities, that he was able to substantiate that claim with the people who lived with him. And those people said, he is not a demigod, he is God. He is not under the Father, he is equal with the Father. He is not a created, but he is the uncreated creator. He is God himself. Now, before we move on, we have to ask ourselves something. How should this affect our mind? See, that's the whole idea. You have to let your mind be impacted by these things. And this is what I would suggest to you for a moment. And here's a couple ways in which the fact that Jesus is God should have an impact on your mind. First of all, if Jesus is God, a lot of you have got to start to get more optimistic about your own future. If this is Jesus Christ that's come into your life and who says, I love you and I will never forsake you, and if he's committed to you, why are you so pessimistic about ever changing this habit? Why are you so pessimistic about ever having any kind of joy in life? You see, Jesus was a loving teacher. He was the teacher of love. He was the one little children got up on his lap. He was the one, you know, who comes and says to you, Come unto me, all ye who are burdened and heavy laden, I will give you rest. He is this loving one. But who is he? Is he just a well-meaning person? Who is this one who says, I am committed to you? This is God. This is the one who's come into your life. You read Romans 8, where Paul says, I'm not afraid of anything. Look at his unsinkable buoyancy. He's not afraid of anything. He has the highest hopes for himself and the people he loves. There's one place where he says he's not afraid of death, nor life, nor angels, nor demonic principalities, nor powers, nor things. any other creature. There's another place in the same chapter. He says, I'm not afraid of suffering, or hardship, or persecution, or nakedness, or peril, or sword. Why? If God is for us, who can be against us? Now, if you are not as unsinkable as Paul, if you are not as buoyant as Paul, if you look at yourself and say, I'll never change, if you look at yourself and say, these great things are never going to happen in my life, and yet you're a Christian, and yet you say you've received Christ as Savior, if he's God, and you're not unsinkable, and buoyant like Paul in Romans 8, you're not thinking. There's something wrong with your mind. That's what he's saying. There's something wrong with your mind. Here, let me show you something else. If he's God, that also means that's joyful news, but if he's God, that's also sobering news. And here, let me speak to maybe a different slice of our congregation, or our audience here this morning. If Jesus is God, and if he claimed to be God, as this little hymn pretty much proves that he did, you realize that the only possible way to respond to him is extremely. Recently, I've been thinking about what were the books or the things that I read when I first became a Christian over 25 years ago, and what were the most seminal things. And I know one of the most seminal and influential things I ever read was one chapter in a little book by John Stott called Basic Christianity. And in that, he said, if you read the Bible, some of you have heard echoes of this ever since, you know, in my preaching for years, because they've always been there. He says, if you read the Bible, you'll see that nobody who ever met Jesus Christ ever had a moderate reaction to him. There's only three reactions to Jesus. They either wanted to, they hated him and they wanted to kill him, they tried to kill him, or they were afraid of him and they tried to run away, or they absolutely were smitten with him and they tried to give their whole lives to him. But nobody ever had a moderate reaction to him. Now, the average person in America likes Jesus. You can't like Jesus. Don't you see? If he claimed to be God, then if he's not God, he's a megalomaniac, you shouldn't respect him a bit. But if he is God, everything about your life needs to revolve around him. Don't you see? There isn't anything else. How can you like Jesus? Nobody ever has liked Jesus who knew who he was and knew who he claimed to be. Don't you see? See, if Jesus is God, that's great news. It's also sobering news. But here's one more thing. If Jesus is God, see, your mind's got to be changed by this. If Jesus is God, this gives us a whole new dynamic for loving people. You know what this is teaching us about? This is teaching us about the Trinity. The Trinity. You sing it, by the way, you sang it very well this morning. You know, we sing it in the doxology. Let all things their creator bless and worship him in humbleness. Hallelujah, hallelujah. Praise, praise the Father, praise the Son. And praise the Spirit, three in one. You sing it, well, some of you sing it every week. You have no idea what that means. What the heck is that? You sing it well, though. And I can't get into that too much right now, but this is teaching that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are equally God. They're three in one. One God, three in one. Three persons equally God. You say, well, I don't understand that. Could you explain it to me? No, not tonight, not today. But here's what I will tell you. Augustine, in his great work on the Trinity, makes an incredible point. He says, you know, if you're a non-Trinitarian, many people believe in God, but they're non-Trinitarians. They say, well, there's only one God, one person. Jesus was a nice man, or Jesus was a kind of created being, but there's only one person, one God. But Augustine says, if you are a non-Trinitarian in your view of God, you have got a defective God. You have a God who never loved anybody until he created the world. God existed from all eternity, but until he created at least angels, or until he created other human beings, other persons, he had never had a relationship. And, Augustine says, therefore, not only do you have an imperfect God, but you have a God who created to meet a love need. He created in order to have love. Augustine says, that's not true of the God of the Bible. The God of the Bible is... The God of the Bible is... always had love and relationship, beginninglessly. And therefore, when he created the world, and he created other persons and angels and human beings, he created not to get love, he created to give love. He created not that use us to meet his needs, he created just to let us take in the richness and the spillover of the love he had within himself, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. You know what that means? This is pretty interesting. The greatest temptation is to move out toward other people. We say we're being creative, we say we're serving. God the Father created us not to use us, not to get love, not to meet his needs, but to give. Jesus Christ came to earth and to serve us, not to meet his needs for love, but to give us love. It is extremely seductive and absolutely a very, very strong temptation to move out into other people's lives more to meet your needs than to meet theirs. You get involved, you serve, you listen, you counsel, you help, you love, you say, but you're using them, you're not loving them, if you go out to more meet your own needs than their needs. Now, you're a human being, you're not God, you're not the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit, and therefore, of course, there's a fulfillment, of course there's a meeting of needs as you meet needs. But when you have more, when you're more meeting needs of yourself, when you move out to meet needs, and others really to meet your own needs, more to meet your needs than theirs, is you have got an imbalance here. You are not, you do not have the same mind as Christ. And here's some of the ways you can tell. Do you find when those people who you're trying to love and meet their needs, do you find, what if they don't respond? What if they're not grateful? What if they don't act the way you want them to act? Are you the kind of person who is continually getting hurt feelings? Are you the kind of person continually feeling snubbed? Are you the kind of person that needs to control the people that you're with? To get them to do and act just the way you want them to? You know what you've got there? You have moved out into their lives more to meet your needs than to meet their needs. And there's going to be nothing but destructiveness in that relationship. And in the end, they're going to feel very empty, and you're going to feel empty too, and you're going to blame each other. And you're right. Both of you. What can you do? Ah, have the same mind in you that was in Christ Jesus. Jesus Christ was in the Trinity before moving out. So do you have to do. So do you have to be. A Christian is somebody who goes into the Trinity before you move out. We know, I know, we're human beings, and therefore there is a fulfillment of needs as you meet needs. But you primarily have got to say, is this loving Heavenly Father my Heavenly Father? Does He love me in Christ? Does He accept me? Is there now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus? Do I really belong to Him? That has got to be settled. And the bottom line of your worth and your significance in your life has got to be settled before you move out. You've got to do what Jesus Christ did, or you're going to find yourself going out not to give love, but to get it. Okay, the second major thing you see here is not only that Jesus is God, and if He's God, that should change our mind, but secondly, He became the God-man. He's not just divine, He's human. In verse 6, it tells us, and verse 7, it tells us something. Now, again, I'm being careful about the grammar because this is one of the key verses in the formation of a biblical Christology in the whole Bible, a biblical view of Christ. In verse 6 and 7, look carefully. It says, Who being in very nature God did not account equality with God something to be kept, but made himself nothing, taking on the very nature of a servant being made in human likeness. It's another word, morphe. In other words, He took on a human nature. But, you have to be careful because verse 6, the word being in very nature God stays in the imperfect. And, therefore, the grammar does not say, Having been God, He instead became human, but it says, Being God, He also became human. He didn't stop being God, but He became human as well. He became God-man. He became both at once. Now, What does it mean believe that matter and the physical are evil, who could understand the possibility that Jesus was God, and instead he became human. He stopped being God to become human. The one thing that most philosophies could not stomach is the idea of God continuing to be God and still being human at the same time. Why? Here's the practical difference. Let me just give you two practical impacts that this should have on our minds, the fact that God became human. First of all, our God is a God. In fact, I'll go so far as to say our God is a God, is the only God in the world religions to whom matter matters. In the West, the Greco-Roman religions thought matter was impure and kind of polluted. God could never become human. In the East, Eastern religions don't see matter as being impure, but they see it as being unimportant. They see it as an illusion. So they could say, oh, of course, the idea of God becoming human is fine, at least temporarily. I mean, it's all an illusion anyway. But neither the West, neither the Greco-Roman religions, nor the Eastern religions, nor, of course, Judaism or Islam would say what Christianity has said. God inhabited a body permanently. God took into himself the physical. It says in Colossians 2.9, in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. Nobody has ever had, no other religions ever had the audacity to say that. And that changes everything for us. You know why? Here's what I want to press on you. We are the only religion that knows that God does not think of the physical as more important than the spiritual, or the spiritual is more important than the physical. And that changes the way in which we deal with things. Look at the Bible itself. The first picture you have of God in the Bible is God with his hands in the mud creating the world. God's not afraid to get his hands dirty. He's involved with matter. The last picture you have of God in the Bible is God cleaning up the natural universe of the toxic waste of evil and sin and rehabbing a beautiful new urban home for himself. And in the very center of the Bible, you've got the two main things. They're about the physical. At Christmas, God became human, took on a physical. And at Easter, God redeemed a body. See, God created both the soul and the body. He redeemed both the soul and the body. And that means that they're both important to him. And not only that, Jesus Christ came and has kept body and soul apart. The whole purpose of Jesus Christ is to do what it took to let body and soul live in integrity. Now, what does this mean? It means, first of all, in the gospel, you can keep these together, but outside of the gospel, they're not together. If you don't understand Christianity, you can either be religious or irreligious. You can be religious, meaning you're trying to earn your salvation by being a good person. Or you can be irreligious, in which you say, I have to live my own life the way I want to live my own life. And get this, if you're religious, the physical will make you uncomfortable. You'll feel like, well, I need to get away from that. I need to be spiritual. And I don't know how many times I've seen people who, when they got very religious, got kind of anti-physical. They only worry about the spiritual now. They don't worry about their body. They don't worry about other people's bodies. They feel like, well, why should we help people who are hungry? Why should we rehab houses? Why should we work on trying to make the city a safer place to live? After all, that's physical stuff. That's all going to burn up. I'm concerned about the spiritual. Religious people are almost uncomfortable with the physical. Or they think it's unimportant. Irreligious people, you see, worship the physical because that's all they have. Your body says have sex, you do it. Why? I mean, because all there is to life is having a nice body and having physical comforts and having the pleasures of life. Apart from the gospel, you can't keep body and soul together. Either the physical will become your idol and it will drive you, or the physical will become something you're afraid of, or you consider unimportant, or you're... Only in Jesus Christ. We alone, as Christians, can say, at the same time, we can talk about salvation of the soul and cleaning up a neighborhood so it's safe and people have a place, a warm place to live and food to eat. Why? We can do it with integrity. That's what Jesus is about. He came in order to let body and soul live and integrity. And that's your future, too. When you see Jesus Christ, you see... disembodied intelligence, you know, kind of hovering around in heaven. Don't you know that? You're going to eat and drink. You're going to hug and be hugged. We're going to hug each other in heaven. We're not just going to have Vulcan mind melts. We're going to sing in heaven. There's going to be music. There's going to be food in heaven. There's going to be bodies in heaven. There's going to be the physical, but it's going to be spiritual. They're going to dwell together in integrity. Only Christians can be just as concerned about the poor and social concern as they are about evangelism and saving somebody's soul. Everybody else, without the gospel, those things break apart. You're only concerned about one or only concerned about the other. Not Christians. Not Christians who understand that being God, he also became human. I'll tell you something else it tells us. Because he's human, he understands you. Because he's human, he knows what you're going through. You can go to him. Have you been betrayed? He's been betrayed. Have you been lonely? He's been lonely. Are you facing death? He's faced death. He died. Have you died? No. He had a prayer turned down. He has been here. He knows what it's like. He knows all about our troubles. If you don't go to him as a wonderful counselor, if you don't take your burdens off with him, if you're not able to see it's just as important for us to be fighting as Christians against disease and poverty as against unbelief and heresy, if you can't keep those together, you need to have a mind change. Let this mind be also in you, which is in Christ Jesus. Now, lastly, I've got to say one last thing. Jesus did not just become human. He was God, but he didn't just become human. He became a servant. And notice, it's very careful to point out that Jesus could have come as a human being and become a kind of powerful human being. He could have come as a king, but it says he made himself nothing, taking the nature of a servant. And being found as a human being, he humbled himself and became obedient to death, even to death on a cross. Therefore, God hath highly exalted him. Now, I want you to see how that is utterly different than our career. Take a minute. Let me show you how that is utterly different than our career. Can I tell you, if you know your own history, let me tell you about you and me. Here's our history. Though we were not equal with God, we counted equality with God something to be grasped. See, that's totally the opposite of him. Though he was equal, he let go of equality with God. He became a servant. He took a lower position. Though we were not equal with God, we do grasp after equality with God. And you say, when do I do that? Friend, any time you've ever said, I know what the Bible says, but I've got to do what makes me happy. You have been grasping equality with God. Though you're not equal with God, you hold on to it. Though he was equal with God, he let go of it. And we keep going. It says, and he made himself nothing and took the role of a servant. But you and I desperately want to become something. We want to be somebody. And we want to be kings. Therefore, because he did that, God hath highly exalted him and given him the name above every name. Here's the irony. We try desperately to be somebody. We try desperately to be our own God and our own king. And therefore, God lets us fall to the bottom and we don't even know who we are. This tells us that Jesus found his name by losing it. Jesus got up by going down. Jesus got his identity through service. Jesus became somebody because he served something bigger than himself. Believe it or not. He became, he came and lived the life we should have lived and died the death we should have died. He came and took and showed us what it means to be a human being. Now, what does that mean for us? It means this. The way to become saved is you've got to go down. If you say, I'm trying very hard to be a good person. I've started coming to Redeemer. I'm starting to read the Bible and I'm hoping that if I really turn over a new leaf, God will accept me. That's trying to go up. That's saying, I've got a righteousness of my own. You've got to say, I have no righteousness of my own. That's to go down. And then what happens is, only when you say, therefore, I have no control over my life, Lord, save me for Jesus' sake. I make you my Savior and Lord. The minute you go down, we're told he adopts us, he gives us his name, he accepts us, he brings us into his family. We get the name which is above every name. If you want to go up, if you say, I've got to do what I've got to do. I've got to find out what makes me happy. I've got to find out who I am. If you go up, you won't even know who you are. If you go down, you will find out who you are. You'll get the name which is above every name. And one last thing, the Christian friends. We're told here that Jesus Christ became a servant. The Bible actually tells us that he emptied himself, right here, of his prerogatives and his power and his glory. He didn't stop being God. But he became completely dependent on God, we're told. He became a servant only. Now somebody says, wait a minute, how could he have emptied himself? Look at the feeding of the 5,000. Look at the walking on the water. Look at how he preached and taught. And they said, never man spake as he spake. I mean, Jesus Christ, how could he have emptied himself and done all these great things? We're told in Acts chapter 10, 38, God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and he did great deeds because God was with him. He shows us what we can do. Do you know that all of his wisdom came from the Father? Remember that place where he's asked, when are you coming back? And he says, I don't know, God hasn't told me. All that wisdom was because he was dependent on the Father. He wasn't doing it in his own wisdom. He was being the perfect human being. He was being a servant. All of his power, all of his healing, all of his miracles, all of his greatness. There was not one thing he did that you and I couldn't do if we were as dependent on the Father as he was. And that's an indictment. You know, we've got to be careful here. I don't know all that means. I do know this, Christian brothers and sisters, this means we've got to give up our small ambitions. I don't know where humility even comes into this exactly. All I know is by Jesus Christ giving up his power and glory, he had far more power on earth than any of us who refused to. Don't you see? It's by giving up his prerogatives, by saying, I'm going to be a servant, that he had this incredible power. Six years ago, when Kathy and I came to New York, we just wanted to survive. We just hoped we could get some little church that would just not fold in three or four years. And you know, you want to be humble, and it's good to be humble, but I'll tell you something, I never want to dishonor God's power with such low expectations ever again. And how many of you, and how am I continuing to do that by saying, well, I'm nobody. Of course you're nobody. But Jesus, by making him nobody, himself nobody, got a power to do things, and he actually comes and says to us, you can do greater things than I. Remember where he says that? There is nothing that he's done that we couldn't do because he did it through his servanthood. He's God. Let that change your mind. He's human. Let that change your mind. He became the servant. Let that change your mind. Go down to come up to be saved. Go down to come up to become a powerful servant. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you gave us so much in the passage. I pray that you would help us to... I'm sure that everybody here, because there were so many little vignettes in this sermon, there's so many different points, so many tangents, and yet I know that all of us had one, probably, that stuck out more than others. I pray that you would take these sermons and preach them to our hearts by your Holy Spirit. Move away from my mouth and from my notes. And Holy Spirit, I pray that you would now take the very sermons that you want us all to hear and just screw them down into our hearts until they catch fire until we have the same mind as that which also is in Christ Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
