TITLE: Indestructible Truth
SCRIPTURE: Isaiah 52:13-53:12
TOPICS: The Fall Doctrine Sin
SERIES: What’s Really Wrong with the World
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/indestructible-truth/

============================================================

I was reading Ezekiel recently, and Ezekiel was with the exiles, and he was in a far-off land, and a lot of his fellow Jews were saying, how can we worship God in a strange land? And he got this vision. You ever read it? It's very, very strange, but the most important thing about Ezekiel's vision is he sees God high and lifted up, and he sees him on his throne. But there's something different about Ezekiel's vision than Isaiah's vision or anybody else's vision of the throne of God. If you look to the bottom of the throne, he found that God's throne had wheels. It was a mobile God. And it was God's way of saying, I can make you a home that you and I can dwell in absolutely anywhere, absolutely anywhere. So welcome home. And let me read to you Isaiah 52, 13, verses, from 13 down to the end of chapter 53. 52, 13 to 53. See, my servant will act wisely. He will be raised and lifted up and highly exalted. Just as there were many who were appalled at him, his appearance was so disfigured beyond that of any man, and his form marred beyond human likeness, so will he sprinkle many nations, and kings will shut their mouths because of him. For what they were not told, they will see, and what they have not heard, they will understand. Who has believed our message, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? He grew up before him like a tender shoot, and like a root out of dry ground. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows, and familiar with suffering. Like one from whom men hide their faces, he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he took up our infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we considered him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities, the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed. We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to his own way, and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he did not open his mouth. He was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is silent, so he did not open his mouth. By oppression and judgment he was taken away, and who can speak of his descendants? For he was cut off from the land of the living. For the transgression of my people he was stricken. He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth. Yet it was the Lord's will to crush him, and cause him to suffer. And though the Lord makes his life a guilt offering, he will see his offspring, and prolong his days, and the will of the Lord will prosper in his hand. After the suffering of his soul, he will see the light of life, and be satisfied. By his knowledge, my righteous servant will justify many, and he will bear their iniquities. Therefore I will give him a portion among the great, and he will divide the spoils with the strong, because he poured out his life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors. For he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. This is God's word. It's a little bit of a guess that there's new people here tonight that haven't been part of any series, that this is actually part of a series, and we've been actually talking about what's wrong with us. I mean, the human race. Kathy and I just watched a video of a movie, I think it came out last year, it was just called Paradise Road. The true story of a prison of war camp in Sumatra, World War II, and all of those true stories, whether it's the book Shantung Compound by Langdon Gilkey, or the accounts of the death camps by Viktor Frankl, or this movie, they're gripping, of course, but there's a whole lot more than that. What happened in the Holocaust, what happened in World War II, what happened on the battlefield, what happened in the prison camp was this, the optimistic views of human nature that were very, very prevalent for about 100 years before that in the West. The optimistic views, the views that said basically evil is a matter of a bad family nurturing or a bad lack of education. false consciousness, all those kinds of optimistic approaches were devastated. They were devastated. Because when you're in the midst of one of those experiences, when they were in the midst of World War II, two questions keep coming up. What's wrong with us that we're capable of this? And what are we going to do about it? What's wrong with us and how can we address it? And what's interesting about this chapter, it's very easy to forget who this was written to. There's a lot of disagreement among scholars about the book of Isaiah, but one thing everybody's in agreement about is Isaiah chapter 40 through 55 was written for a nation that was facing exile. It was written to the Israelites who were about to face all the stuff we're talking about. Captivity, atrocities, prison. And it was written to them to answer those same two questions. What's wrong with the human race? And what are we going to do about it? And this is the answer, maybe the best answer, maybe the most famous answer in the Bible to the question about human evil. Here's the answer. God's sending somebody. The servant of the Lord. And what we learn in, when we take a look at the text, is we learn who he is, why he came, and what he did. This is pretty much everything, right? Who he is, why he came, what he did. Let's take a look. First of all, who he is. Now, there's a little, there's a lot in this passage. And when we get to the top, you see it pretty, right off the bat, it says, See, my servant will act wisely. He'll be raised and lifted up and highly exalted. Now, actually, that's the same terminology that described the one that Isaiah saw in the temple back in Isaiah 6. When it says, I went to the temple and I saw the Lord high and lifted up. Same words. It's got to do with the transcendence, the transcendent majesty of God. It's got to do with the purity, the perfection. It's amazing that these same terms would be, you know, attached to this person. But the real amazing thing is verse 1. And you don't notice it right off the bat. And there's a number of ways to translate it. Let me just tell you what he's saying. Verse 1, Who has believed our message, and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? Now, let me give you a little bit of a paraphrase of this. What he's saying is, Who has believed our message? That this is the arm of the Lord. It's going to take revelation, Isaiah is saying. Nobody's going to believe that this one, this servant, is the arm of the Lord. Nobody's going to believe it. And here's why. The arm of the Lord is not just a kind of nice metaphor that Isaiah came up with on the spot. But the arm of the Lord is a specific, has a very specific, very definite meaning in the Hebrew Bible, and also especially in the book of Isaiah. The arm of the Lord is the Lord himself come into history to do something concrete. The arm of the Lord is what moved the Red Sea, part of the Red Sea. See, the arm of the Lord is not God's strength in general. Of course, arm, if it was the eye of the Lord, we'd be talking about the knowledge of God. But the arm of the Lord is the power of God. But not just any kind of power. It's not just general strength. It's God's power in history. And no wonder Isaiah says, Look, I know people aren't going to believe it. Nobody's going to believe that this is the arm of the Lord revealed. This is the arm of the Lord. This person is the omnipotent God come into history. Now, before we move on, we've got to move on. Let me just say what's neat about this passage, it's got to do with essentials. In fact, the more I look at this, who he is, why he came, you know, what he came to do. This really gets to kind of essential definitions. This whole passage, for example, you know, Aristotle brought us the distinction between what he called the essence and the accidents. The essentials and the accidentals. So, for example, what if you'd never seen clay, you'd never seen steel before in your life. And I put in front of you a ball of clay and a steel eye beam. And I said, okay, what's the difference between clay and steel? And you looked and said, I got it. Clay is round. Steel is long. And you'd say, it's hard to laugh in here, isn't it? But try. Okay. You know, you can laugh under curly cues. You don't just need graffiti. Okay. Now, that's better. You'd say, you've missed the essence. Those are accidentals. It's an, it's a. You're a laressive. clay can take numbers of shapes but the shape isn't is an essential shape is not essential it's the you know it's softness hardness chemical composition all that kind of thing now what's the essence of christianity well you say christianity uh leads people to love one another yeah yeah but uh hey there's a lot of people who aren't christians that are very loving well christianity leads you it gives you strength gives you peace makes you good yeah but those are accidental i don't mean they're accidents i'm using in the aristotelian terms they're they're not they're not the essential they're not they overlap with lots of other groups of people what's essential the armness of christianity what do i mean all right here's what i mean jesus christ is not here called the mouth of god the mouth of the lord he's called the arm of the lord that doesn't mean he didn't come to teach he's a teacher but he didn't primarily come to tell you what to do he came primarily to do and that's the essential difference between christianity and every other religion jesus christ did not essentially come every other founder comes and says jesus did not every other religion comes and says i'm going to show you how to connect to god do this jesus christ says i'm going to connect you to god i've done this or put it another way i mean just a number of ways to put it it means for example the gospel is news not advice you see the other founders come with advice and they say hey uh here's how you can change your life but news is this is what's happened that changes your life now if i want some of you may have heard me say this before but let me let me put it to another way that i think brings it home the stories of christianity don't work unless they're true whereas the stories of other religions work anyway see for example what's the purpose of buddhism what's buddhism about it's about enlightenment it's a wonderful faith it's got lots of great stuff to teach us it's about enlightenment and it's about an attitude toward life an attitude toward suffering and an attitude toward not grasping and and uh you know uh working against the craving ego so all the stories about buddha does it matter if they're true or not no it doesn't here's why i mean they might be they may not be but the point is they're inspiring and they're exemplary they tell me how to find enlightenment they tell me how to live and they work whether they're true or not okay muhammad you know many no disrespect anybody but uh take a look at the uh the stories of muhammad what is is islam about well the word islam means submission obedience not so much enlightenment obedience to allah so all the stories about muhammad work in this whether they're true or not they show me how to submit they show me what to do right so they work let's look at the stories of christianity okay let's look at the uh christmas story born in a manger okay what's the moral of that story have natural childbirth what's what's the moral homelessness is fine what's the moral let me let me listen there is no moral the story is this the arm of the lord the ideal has broken into history it's become real finally and this has happened and this changes everything uh well in fact let me let's get more to the point let's take a look at the story in front of us the cross there's a christian story jesus died on the cross for our sins now what's the moral of that story if that story is not true think about this for a second and say oh well it doesn't matter if it's true it's just it's inspirational oh really let's think about this for a minute what's the moral of the story don't protect yourself you're the victim of what does it say oppression when oppression comes to you you just give in you just let them walk all over you you don't open your mouth you don't protest just let injustice roll over you is that is that the moral of the story that's perverse you know there's another way to put it okay i'll put it to you like this let's just say you and i have gone to the top of the empire state building and we're looking out there and all of a sudden you come up to me and say tim i just want you to know how much i love you i want you to know how much i care for you and i'm going to show you how much i love you and you get up on the ledge and you say watch and you throw yourself off and down you go to your dad and do i look over the ledge and i say look how that person loved me now do i no i would say what's wrong with that person if I, because I'm stupid or because I'm a fool or something, what if I get to the edge myself and I'm about to fall off and you come over and you push me to safety, but in the process you fall? Now listen, the crucifixion is something has happened in history that changes everything. The servant has come to take your punishment. Changes everything. If it's not true, it's not just unimportant, it's bad. It's not just that the story doesn't work if it's not true. It actually works badly. It's perverse. It's pernicious. Unless the stories of Christianity are true, unless Jesus Christ is the arm and not just the mouth. See? Christianity is really bad for you. Very, very bad. Terrible. It's one or the other. He is the arm of the Lord. Okay? That's who came. It's God himself acting in history. Second, that's who he came, but why did he come? Now, again, we're getting into essences because the reason he came is, look, verses four through six, there's a whole slew of great vocabulary words, a whole survey of almost every kind of way to describe human evil, sin. Look, you've got infirmities. See? Transgressions. Iniquities. By the way, some of you, of all the words, by the way, that's almost my favorite one because you know what? The Hebrew word translated iniquity, it's a shame. It doesn't come across in English at all. It means bent. Bent. Okay? Bent means it doesn't work, but if you try to unbend it, it'll just make it worse. It'll break. But in the midst of all of these interesting words, there's one that kind of gets at the essence of what's wrong with us. So this is the answer to the question. What's wrong with us? Here it is. Verse six, very famous, but overlooked. All we like sheep have gone astray. Each of us has turned to his own way. Now you say, my word, this is the central place where God is telling us the secrets of what's wrong with us, of human evil. This is a definition of evil. This is a definition of sin. Own way? My word, you say. I mean, why not murder or robbery or something like that? I mean, every little kid wants their own way. Ah, I'm glad you said that. Look, a friend of mine who's, he's a lifetime bachelor. He's a preacher and I listen to his sermons and, but he's, since he's a lifetime bachelor, when he actually comes across children, he's always struck by them in a way that I don't anymore because I, you know, being a parent, I'm sort of surrounded by them. But one day he was at a retreat and he was walking with a whole family, a family of five and he were walking along and they were on their way to a pony corral and the parents were saying to Charles, there was Charles and Sarah and Sally. And the parents said, now Charles, you rode the pony all morning. It's Sarah and Sally's turn. So it's their turn. And he said, oh, he nodded his head. They rounded the turn. They got near the corral and as soon as they got near the corral, Charles darted off ahead of everybody, ran into the corral, ran up to the staff person who was in charge of it and said, me first. And my friend, you know, you know, is this profound? What kind of illustration is this? But he, he's, he was amazed by it. Yeah, amazed. But then he suddenly thought about it. He says, well, wait a minute. What if this is the undeletable heart of every microchip in the soul of every human being can never be put out? What if this is essential? Oh, there's many, many, many accidental. I mean, there's many forms of it. But what if this is something we can never delete? He says, if me first, basically, is what's wrong. What are death camps? What is war? What is every single crime? What is every crime? Come on, what, not the accident, what's the essence of every crime? Me first. That's it. I mean, remember years ago, Burger King had a song, remember? It had a little ditty. It said, have it your way. According to verse six, it's the essence of sin. Frank Sinatra sang, I did it my way. According to verse six, it's the essence of sin. But now look, it's not just very helpful, very helpful showing us basically my way, me first, how that that shows what our relationships with is with each other. But essentially, it shows us our relationship with God. Because it's this is it doesn't say we're all like snakes gone to our own way. Snakes know their way. Sheep need a shepherd. And when sheep want to go their own way, what they're saying is, I want to be my own shepherd. And we're saying is, I want to be my shepherd. Yeah, that is what our thing is saying is, I want to be my shepherd. Because it's two birds, there's going to be that they're in you to the people. That's what our God has to say. And what we're saying is, I want to be need a shepherd and when sheep want to go their own way what they're saying is i want to be my own shepherd and when a human being goes its own way what we're saying is i want to be my own maker you know we're not totally sure whether psalm 100 booted off of uh psalm isaiah 53 or whether isaiah 53 boots off of psalm 100 but i'll tell you listen psalm 100 says know that the lord is god it is he who has made us and not we ourselves for we are his people the sheep of his pasture now it's very simple listen this is one of the reasons why it's not a good idea to think so much of sin in terms of breaking rules if you say sin is breaking rules god's rules and that's partly that's one perspective but if if you start there here's the problem let's just say you just cheated on the test you cheated on a test well that's nothing like robbery so you think of sin and you know you can actually say well it's just a very small sin you just you know it seems so insignificant and therefore you're thinking of sin sort of like a pile of ceramic you know pots and they're all in the pile and you throw a baseball into the pile and you break one whoops you go on over take it away who's going to know the difference i mean the the pile is intact basically but sin is much more like throwing a baseball through a window either the window is intact or it's shattered and here's the point either god is god in your life either he calls the shots you might say either you let him be god it's another way to put it or else you're god in your life let me put it three ways first of all either your will is law and his will is advice or see his will is law and your will is advice let me put it another way if you say i'll obey when it makes sense to me if it fits in with my opinion of what is uh you know good for me if it fits my feelings if you say i'll obey if what you're saying is my will my wisdom and my goals sit in judgment on god's if you say i'll obey no matter what i'll obey if it kills me i'll obey if i'm the last person on the earth that does i'll obey no matter what it costs me i'll obey whether i understand it or not i'll obey whether it's practical or not i'll obey whether it's relevant or not then and only then are you saying god's wisdom god's will and god's goals sit in judgment on mine now it's one or the other there's no in between it's not like you break a couple of rules and but you know basically the piles intact it's a principle of god's godness who's the shepherd who's the sheep who's the lord who's the servant whose will is law and whose will is advice it's one or the other there's nothing in the middle nothing at all and uh this is the what's what's so interesting it says if you decide you're going to be the call the shots in your own life this isn't so much hey this is not so much for example cheating on a test this is essentially living for your own happiness living for your own comfort living for your own glory just making your decisions without reference to god just ignoring god is that you've broken the glass you've bent your soul nothing's going to work if you read through here and i don't have time to do it your emotions won't work it tells you that your intellect won't work you esteemed him not we thought he was zero that's literally what it means your emotions don't work when you look at him you don't desire him i mean nothing will work now one more before we go on to the last point that's why he came he came because there's some undeletable seemingly insignificant thing on the internal microchip of every human heart which is i want to be god i want to be my own god me first which is the cause of all the misery that's why he came but here one one little thing you know think about this for a second christians are often accused of having their head in the sand intellectually and by the way it's true however it's awfully easy when more than easy the average person when it comes to their relationship with god definitely has his or her head in the sand here's why i want to put it here's how i want to put it according to this if god's your maker if god made you if you're if you've been created by god you owe him everything absolutely everything you owe it to have him be the one who calls all shots right otherwise you're bent otherwise it's it's terrible it's wrong it's it's unjust it's unfair it's stupid it's foolish and you're going to die as certainly as those shaped sheep that think they can be shepherds will die so if see if god made you then you have to go all the way with him totally it's got to be number one if he did not make you then it's warranted created by anybody, of course you belong to yourself, but then your life's meaningless. I mean, if you're not created, you're an accident. You came without purpose into the world. No matter what you do, everything's going to rot, everything's going to burn up, so nothing you do makes any difference. And if your origin is insignificant and your destiny is insignificant, have the intellectual guts to admit your life is insignificant and this is all you've got. If you've been made, you have to give everything to him. If you haven't given everything to him, then your life is utterly meaningless and that's it. You're either bent or you're meaningless. It's one or the other. And almost nobody thinks like that because almost nobody will, everybody I know that says, look, I have to decide what's right or wrong for me. They won't say, well, that means my life is utterly meaningless or I am bending myself against the very God who made me. You don't do that. What do you say? Well, you just go along with what everybody else is saying. You're not thinking it out at all. Your head's in the sand. Now, your unconscious knows something about it. Whoops. Something here. Am I still on? Yeah. I think I kicked something. Pardon me. Your unconscious, your semi-conscious knows. It's why Kierkegaard calls it the sickness unto death. Sartre calls it nausea. Deep down inside, you know this. Either there's a God and I know him absolutely everything or I don't. I can be my own maker and there's no meaning to anything. One or the other. Almost nobody thinks that out. You don't want to think it out. But I'm respectfully asking you to think it out. Now, lastly, see, who he is, why he came, what he did. Now, what we have here is one more essence. You know, the essence of who he is, armed with the Lord. The essence of sin. Ah, what is the essence of sin? Didn't really define it, did I? The essence of sin is us substituting ourselves for God. Putting ourselves into places where only God deserves to be in your own life. Well, then, what's the essence of salvation? And the answer is right here in verse 4, 5, and 6. It's God substituting himself for us. This is the meaning of life, substitution. Look, first of all, in verse 4, it says, pardon me, verse 5, he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities. Now, in Hebrew, it doesn't say for. It just wouldn't work in English to put out exactly what it says. In Hebrew, it says he was pierced from our transgressions, he was crushed from our iniquities. And that's a Hebrew way of saying he was crushed as a result of. See? It's what it's actually saying, he was pierced as a result. Wait, wait, wait. Our transgression consequence goes to him. See, our iniquity consequence goes to him. And then, look down here at verse 11. Whoops, sorry, look over here at verse 11. It says, by his knowledge, my righteous servant will justify many. My righteous servant will justify many. You know what the word justification means? You think about it. In English, it works. What if you make a statement and I don't like it or I'm upset by it or I don't? So I come to you and I say, you made a statement. Justify that statement. And you say, well, let me explain. And you make some explanations. And I say, oh, fine. Okay, good. You justified. That's fine. What did you just do? Did you change the statement? No. You didn't change it a bit. You didn't change a word. You didn't change a letter. But what you did do, you changed my attitude toward it. You changed my relationship to it. When it says that our transgressions have gone, have a cause, and the cause of the transgressions have gone to him, it's also saying he has lived a perfect life. And the cause, the consequence of that perfect life will come to us. Just as God, here, the essence of being a Christian. What's the essence of being a Christian? Trying hard to live like Jesus? No, that's a consequence. In fact, in most of our cases, it's an accident. What's the essence? When Jesus, you know, 2 Corinthians 5.21 is absolutely summarizing all of Isaiah 53. Here's how it goes. God made him sin who knew no sin that we might become the righteousness of God in him. Well, what's that mean? What does it mean to say Jesus Christ became sin? Does that mean he became sinful? No. Does that mean he became wicked and nasty and awful? No. What does it mean? It means he was treated by God as if he'd done every bloody thing that humanity had ever done. in him i know what most of you think you say i want to become a christian i'm going to have to clean up my act well yes you are but that's not the essence what make what makes you a christian is that the moment you believe in him and you say father for jesus sake because of what he did in history except me that moment according to this it means every god gives you credit for absolutely everything that jesus ever did one of the things that comes out in here now you say how could that be let me show you one of the things that comes out in here is the voluntariness of jesus death well the voluntariness of his death comes out when it says he took up our infirmities very active word he picked them off of us in a sense and put them on himself or all these places where it said he opened out his mouth he opened out his mouth he opened out his mouth what is all that he's voluntary he voluntarily died well you say plenty of people voluntarily died no they haven't nobody voluntarily died like jesus we say there's people who've given their lives for others there's people who've committed suicide no no no wait a minute wait a minute uh they volunteer no what they did was they took they chose when to die they didn't choose to die you can't choose to die you're going to die they choose how to die they didn't choose to die even when you say i choose to die and you commit suicide you're still listen you're still a victim of death you haven't chosen to die you were going to die you could never have stopped it you could never have held it off jesus is the only person who ever died who wasn't a victim of death jesus is the only person who ever died voluntarily the only person who didn't have to die ever have to die jesus was beautiful and he voluntarily became ugly jesus was was unlimited and he voluntarily became limited jesus was eternal and he voluntarily died it was an act of supreme authority yeah that's the reason why one one guy says jesus christ alone his death was like this it's almost as if jesus christ took his body in one hand and his soul in one hand and tore himself apart he says i lay my life down according on my own accord now what does that mean well it means something for your heart and something for your understanding and then we're going to end here's the thing it means for your heart the heart what held jesus to the cross think about it what held him to the cross you mean there's a lot of people who've died for other people and it's and you know those that they it moves you something deep in our soul tells us substitution is the meaning of life whenever you get near it in a story you know the movie version the screenplay of last of the mohicans you remember where the women are about to be killed and and in comes you know um you know daniel day lewis la longa caribine you know uh nathaniel poe at least in the story and uh he comes and he says to the memory says the indian chief me for her you see me for them me for them kill me instead of them but he doesn't know french you see and he doesn't he doesn't or doesn't know the uh uh the language so he has to do it through an interpreter remember who the interpreter is duncan duncan the spurned suitor of one of the women and duncan starts speaking but duncan says me for them and they string duncan up remember and they kill him so they can flee and you you watch that something moves you this is the meaning of life this is something something amazing or you know tale of two cities charles dickens fascinating place sydney carton is in love with the woman but she marries charles darnay but charles darnay is soon uh in prison and he's going to be executed he's going to go to the guillotine and sydney carton who looks quite a bit like charles darnay comes in to see charles darnay and says i'm switching with you what and he basically knocks the man out and he puts on the you see he puts on the condemned man's clothes the condemned man is given the free man's clothes and sydney carton dies and by the way near the very end sydney carton who's playing like he's charles darnay he's in line he's ready to go to the guillotine and there's a woman there's a young girl who's there and says hey you know me i used to be with you back in here and back in there and she looks up and she realizes it's not charles darnay and her face goes white and she says are you dying for him and he says yeah and she says hold my hand somebody like you i think i'll be able to face anything with somebody like you moving than that. It's the opposite of sin. And the opposite of sin is me first. Salvation is you first. The essence of sin is, see, your life for mine. The essence of salvation is my life for yours. And when Jesus Christ was dying on the cross, what was holding him there? His love for you, nothing else, nothing else at all. And that means no matter what you do, you couldn't possibly break his love for you. Think about it. What did it take? It took God's wrath. It took punishment. It took all this stuff. And now some days you're sitting around and you're saying, I've been so inconsistent. I've been so stupid. I've been so foolish. I've done all this. I've done that. I wonder whether Jesus is going to give up on me. Your inconsistency, your foolishness is going to break poor Jesus' little love when this wouldn't break it? This love for you took everything hell could give and he didn't give up. He was absolutely voluntary. He gave himself for you. That's something your heart's got to know. It's a strong love. You couldn't possibly wear it out. You couldn't possibly wear through it. But then here's the last thing is for your understanding. This is not only something you need to know for your heart, but you need to know this for your understanding. Jesus Christ essentially fulfilled the law of God twice when he came to earth because he didn't just die to fulfill the law. He lived an incredible life in that he voluntarily gave himself for someone else. He actually did love his neighbor, you see, completely. Another way to put it is this. I don't know how much it costs because I have, some of you know, there's the law of the stoplight in New York City. I think, you know, and there's two ways to satisfy the law of the stoplight. One is stop. The other is pay $75, I think. Either way, you satisfy the law of the stoplight. How do you satisfy the law of God? Love your God with all your heart, soul, strength, and love your neighbor as yourself, or pay the penalty. And Jesus Christ, as he was paying the penalty, was loving God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind, and his neighbor as himself. So he fulfilled the law of God twice, you see, he took our sins. That leaves his record for us, his perfect record for us. Listen, put it this way. What does this mean to you? It means the meaning of your life is the cross in two ways. Unless the cross makes sense to you, life won't make sense. Unless you begin to see, first of all, that through the cross, you're not going to have to worry anymore so much about your comfort because the great disease has been taken away from you forever. You don't have to worry that much about your looks because the great beauty has been put on you forever. You don't have to worry that much about your reputation because the only one who matters loves you. What does that mean? It means as you go out into the world, the stuff that used to bother you just doesn't. Suffering will happen. You'll get sick. But the great disease, you see, has been cured. You'll get abused. But you see, the great reputation is yours. And so what happens is that you move on through the cross, not only gives you enough emotional wealth to handle the problems of life, but then secondly, it gives you the wisdom to see, look, this is the way Jesus came. This is the weakness of the arm of the Lord. So often, the best things that happen in life are because of through weakness and suffering and trouble and difficulty. Until the cross is the joy of your life, life won't make sense to you. Until the cross makes sense, life won't make sense. And then, not only is it true that the cross will make sense of your life, the cross then becomes the pattern for your life. Here's what's so wonderful. You feel so rich, if you understand the cross, that you start to live like Jesus. You basically say, not your life for mine, my life for you. You spend yourself. You know what's interesting about this? Suffering and oppression, he is oppressed. He is the victim of injustice. He is cut off from the land of the living. He is the recipient of a violent death. And most of us in this room are never going to experience any of that kind of injustice. Oh, what's so great about this is this. If you don't believe in God, injustice and suffering is a horrible problem. You know why? It's a tremendous mystery. It's a mystery why you're upset. Because, you see, if there is no God, then the strong eating the weak is utterly natural. Totally natural. And what warrant have you got for insisting it should be some other way? This is the way it is. in God. But if you do believe in God, then it becomes a terrible problem, because why doesn't he stop it? But of all the gods that we have in all the different religions that are at least presented to us, there's only one God who's been involved. See, when any other God says, I've got good reasons, you know, it sounds pretty hollow. But when you have a God who actually was the victim of injustice, you better trust him. And you better start living your life for other people who have been through the same thing. My life for yours. This is the essence of being a Christian. Let's pray. Father, we thank you for this great survey. In some ways, it's a great way to start a service, a community, a worshiping community in a new place. We see the essence of what the gospel is, the essence of what sin is, and the essence of salvation, and the essence of how we are to live now. We thank you that we have the only God who is the victim of injustice, not the perpetrator. A God who then makes us so rich that we can spend ourselves for other victims. A God who has become weak so that we can see the way in which weakness is strength. Father, we pray that you would help us to understand these things and work them into our lives, not just as individuals, but as a worshiping community here in this place. We thank you, Lord. And we ask that during the rest of the service, as we pray to you, as we offer these things to you, you might shape us and mold our hearts more into the image of what we have just seen, and that of the great servant, Jesus Christ, the righteous one. In his name we pray, amen.
