TITLE: Intentionality and Creativity
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Public Faith Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/intentionality-and-creativity-2/

============================================================

We've been talking about the fact that there's basically two parts to being a public Christian. In other words, if you're not going to privatize your faith, if you're actually going to be public, identify yourself as a Christian, share your faith, there's basically two keys to it. The one is, let's call it, being relational. The other is being knowledgeable. See, being relational meaning you reach out with humility, with vulnerability, love, wisdom in your relationships. Knowledgeability means, of course, if you start talking to people about faith, you're going to have to know something about the Bible, something about Christian faith. But if you take a look at these two things, being relational and being knowledgeable, and I know, by the way, this is going to be scary for some of you to hear Presbyterians say what I'm about to say. Of this two, the relational is more important than the knowledgeable. There, I said it. And you might say, what do you mean? Truth doesn't matter? I'm not saying that. Please, just get off that Twitter thing you're about to do. Here's what I want you to see. I've seen plenty of people who are relationally strong. Christians who are very open-hearted, very loving, very kind in their relationships. They're relationally strong, but knowledge-wise, about the Bible and theology, you know, maybe on the weak side. They still can bear a lot of fruit. But I've seen a lot of people who are strong in Bible and theology and terribly weak on the relational side, and they bear no fruit in anybody's life. Think of it. The relational is the most important. So we've been actually saying that, though we've been giving you content. You do have to know something, and yet nobody knows everything. Nobody's going to be able to answer all the questions of your friend. You have to find other people to help you or books or something. So we were saying the relational is so important. But having said that, you say, okay, well, then you just, there's really not much more to say of a practical nature, is there? You just get out there and love people. And that's all there is to it. Well, I'm here to say that, actually, you can be strategic. You can be intentional and creative in the way in which you build those authentic relationships. And I want to show you, I'm going to give you as many practical ways to do that as I possibly can. I'm going to try to depict it using a slide that should be up there. Now, tell me if it's coming up. It should be a, there it is, building, okay? Actually, there's actually seven floors there because the street level we're going to talk about is the lobby. And there's first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth floor. Very New York. A building with, you know, as having lived in New York for almost 30 years, I would never want to go into a building with less than seven floors. I mean, any building with less than seven floors just has no ambition. So we wanted to give you a, we wanted to show you authentic relationships, intentional and creative relationships as a New York City small skyscraper. So let me, let me, like I said, depict the way in which you would intentionally move along in a relationship with somebody. Be very careful, please. I really do not mean that in some wooden way, when I describe these various stages, that somehow you've got to move a person through them. And you can't, you know, I can't go to stage three if I haven't had my friends through stage two. I don't mean anything like that, but you'll see them basically just a way of understanding, depicting and helping you remember it. So now what I would call lobby level or street level is this is the level of individual conversations, just one-on-ones, individual conversations. And we've been talking about this, but let me just say there's, there's a, there are at least eight or nine ways that you can engage a friend. We're not talking about friendship evangelism. We're talking about friendship, engage a friend, and still with a view of hoping at some point you'll get a chance to share who you are as a, as a Christian in a way that actually engages them. And many people say, well, I don't know how to share the gospel. I say, well, let me give you eight or nine ways to engage your friend in this way without sharing the gospel. Okay. At the, at the, at the, you might say the bottom, bottom, bottom, bottom, bottom level, this, just let them know you're at a church. That's a, that's something in individual conversations, just maybe casually point out that you, you do go to church, that you are a Christian. Just let them know it happens. That's all. Okay. Can you handle that one? That's, that's, that's the bottom. But now let me get, let's a little more intense. Now we're still at street level. Listen to them and get them off the superficial level to where they're actually talking about how they live life. If you're going to try to become a friend. level where you're just chit-chatting about things or complaining about things or, you know, the common things. It's very easy, by the way, in New York to get up a pretty good conversation because we're all suffering the same things. The subway, for example. I mean, it's very, very easy to just talk about the subway with other people who are waiting on the platform. Where is it? But eventually you're trying to get below that. And what you're after is this. And you're not doing any Christian input. You're not talking about your own faith at this point. But here's what you want to do. You want to find out, well, what do they trust for security? What do they hope in for their significance? How do they deal with problems and especially how do they deal with failures? And what you're really trying to do is just get them to talk about themselves and maybe some of the struggles they have or at least some of the struggles they have had. You're just simply listening, just listening and caring and looking for what do they trust in, what do they hope in, how do they face things. Because eventually, frankly, any kind of discussion of your faith in the gospel will have to be at that level where you say, this is how Christianity affects what I trust and what I hope in, how I face things. So that's basically what you're trying to do at that point is you're just trying to get them to talk beyond the superficial. Again, if I were you, even if the person seems to be open to Christian input, I would be reticent. I would try to listen to them. Here's a third, this is still the street level, here's a third behavior you might say you could do, is you can eventually talk about some problem you've had and at least mention your own faith being a help. If you say, boy, you know, I had a sibling who did that to me, it wasn't easy to forgive. I mean, it really was, my faith was a huge help at that point, but it's still been pretty hard and yet I think I've, you know, made progress. I mean, in other words, even just to point out, not just that, you know, the first behavior I mentioned, friendship behavior is actually just letting them know you're a Christian. The second is actually listening to them about what they really trust and hope in and face. And the third is where you actually talk about how you deal with some of your issues. Not necessarily going into great detail, but at least letting them know about the fact that your faith is a practical thing. It's not just a nominal thing. It's not just part of your ethnic identity. It's actually something that works. A fourth behavior would be at some point you could just ask them what they actually think about faith or God or religion and not respond by trying to correct them in any way. Or maybe not even unless they push you. In fact, even if they push you, listen to them. First time you ever talk to them about God and religion, what they think, it's much more important to listen to them. Not even a way in, well, I think this. Unless they press you. And even then, you know, don't do it unless it really gets awkward. Fifth, okay. At some point you can talk about, I think, your own journey. You know, why you believe what you believe. Just maybe some turning points and say, you know, I never used to go to church, but I really had a real turning point about three or four years ago. And I started going to church and it really means a lot to me. That's a simple testimony. Number six, at a certain point, finally you can get to that place where you say, you know, what do you think about faith in God, faith in Christ? And that's where you begin to get their questions and objections. I know that we may have given you the impression that the very first time you talk to somebody about your faith, you're going to get into all those questions. And there is a danger of that. That's the reason why you really need to try to talk about faith in the context of an actual friendship. We don't mean by public faith that you just let it be known around the office that you're a Christian in some kind of fairly, I mean, if you just sort of let it be known to people who you really don't know very well. They're your colleagues, but you don't really know them. Then they're much more likely to, in a sense, sort of lob a grenade in and say, oh, yeah, really, you're a Christian. Well, what do you think about this? Because if the person, if you have avoided Christian talk and you've become friends with them and you've shown care and you've listened to them, see, when they finally get to the questions, it'll be very different. And yet, you still need to do all the stuff we've been talking about, which is to say, don't quickly answer the questions, but rather find out what's behind them. Find out where they're coming from, what experience they had. Ask the why question. You know, why would somebody ask something like this? Ask the what question. Seven. Yeah. Eventually, you can actually say, let's read a book together or let's give them a Christian book or give them something to listen to or a YouTube video or a podcast to listen to or even actually read a book with them, read a Christian book with them. That's pretty advanced. And eight. that? Street level, it's all individual, it's all one-on-one, and there's lots and lots and lots you can do to develop a relationship, and I'm not saying you're, and just make them open to the possibility of talking about faith. But at a certain point, you can take them up into the building. What's the, what's the building? Well, okay, let's take a look at the very first floor. The first floor, I'm going to, is still, even though it's not one-on-one anymore, it's still a, it's still informal in this sense. I call that the hospitality floor. Okay, now you say, wait a minute, it's like, yeah, it's, here's the hospitality floor. Hospitality floor is when you actually invite them into your home with other people, or, or take them out with other people. It's where you're getting them, hospitality is extremely important. I have no idea what there is about the human race, but food is important for intimacy. When you have food, you, you relax, and you feel like, okay, I'm, I'm, you know, this is, this is more, you, you know, you let your hair down in some ways. You, you just open up a little bit more, and hospitality is really, really, really important. Actually, my wife, Kathy, is really pretty good at this, something that she's done, for example, just this week, I thought, here's a good example of it. We live in a floor, we live in a, the same building we've lived in for 28 years, almost 29 years. It's a rental building. No one owns, so there's a lot more turnover. So every so often, she does a, she does a move like she just did three days ago. She took, she made a bunch, she made a bunch of little sacks with, sort of gift sacks with, with candy in it, and then she also put a, a note in it, and the note said, we're your neighbors, we're in 5P, and if you ever want a cup of flour or a cup of tea, please feel free to knock on our door. And then she put it on every doorknob in, on the hall. And she'll do stuff like that every so often, and, and then, of course, especially at, uh, holiday times and periods like that, we, we actually go out and have a kind of open house and ask the people over, and, eh, a quarter of them come, a fifth of them come, and some of the people, actually, we've been able to sort of draw into real relationships. It's, that's hospitality. And at that level, that's level one, okay? Let's go to, now, two, three, four, and five, it, it entails your churches often, not always, but it's more creative, as I said, and it takes a little bit more cooperation. And at this point, I'm looking at our congregational, uh, leaders, leaders, because, uh, two, three, four, and five require, um, in some cases, some real intentionality on the part of, of the, the, the, the congregations to help the Christians who are out there seeking to be authentic in their relationships and intentional and creative in those authentic relationships. Now, let me just tell you what I call these floors. Uh, floor two, three, and four, I call Christianity, Christianity at work floor. Three is Christianity in dialogue floor. Four is Christianity, uh, presented floor. And five is Christianity in process floor. Now, here's what I mean by that. Christianity at work. Christianity at work are events in which the purpose of the event is not to talk about Christianity, but Christianity is seen in a positive light. The purpose of the event is something that actually Christianity lies behind, and it makes Christianity look good. So, a quick example would be a service project. You bring your friend to do a service project, something that Hope for New York does, or there are millions of other service projects that are happening in the city that have Christian organizations behind them. So, the friend comes and meets other Christians and actually sees, in many cases, that Christianity is the inspiration for this doing justice and mercy in the city. Service projects are perfect examples. That's not the only one. Another one is art. Whenever you are able to expose your friend to artistic work, when the artist is a Christian, and so the reason they're there is to see the art, and yet they are able to see the Christian inspiration, very, very helpful. And I can give you, I'll give you five quick, for example, whenever Fujimura, when he lived here in town, was always, as a Christian Japanese artist, he was showing his new works in town, always bring a non-Christian friend to it, because he gets up, it's impressive stuff, and then artists are allowed to say almost anything. They're able to say, this is what inspired my work, and everybody goes, yeah. One time, Redeemer had, we have done open forums in the past. We had John Patitucci, who is an extraordinary, he's a Christian, extraordinarily well-thought-of jazz bassist. Used to be, I don't know if he still is, a university professor at City College. And so what we did is we had a John Coltrane night, and he and a group that he... Faith influenced his music. Again, like I said, you know, artists, they can say whatever they want. They have a license to, well, I don't know what I'm saying. He was able to get up there and just talk, and of course, so many people who are fans of his came and they listened. And we must have had 300 or 400 young jazz, non-Christian jazz musicians there just to hear them. You know, so, and by the way, I'm going to give you a real quick example. Some of you in the downtown remember this, that the Shakespeare Improv Company is led by a Christian. And so we actually had an afternoon in which we did, Shakespeare Improv actually means it's an improv troupe that takes a name and then makes up an extremely funny Shakespearean play right on the spot. And then after it was done, the only member of the troupe that is a believer, the leader of it, that's the reason why they're able to do this, comes out and talks about how Christianity affects the way in which he does acting and comedy and even his understanding of humor. So you're able to do that. But let me give you another level. The other thing would be affinity groups. So whenever Center of Faith and Work has done something like, I remember one time there was a seminar they did, is there life after work, competition in the use of power? You can bring friends to that, knowing that you're actually going to hear a pretty interesting presentation on how do you deal with the pressures at work, but there's going to be a Christian perspective in there. You see, Christianity at work, meaning it's not a gospel presentation, but it's actually a presentation of something that will put Christianity in a good light. Floor three, that's what I call the dialogue floor. Now, on a dialogue floor, that means you have a level playing field. Christianity is talking about itself in some way or another. A Christian speaker, Christianity is being presented, but not, again, doesn't have a high moral ground that there's other people there equally empowered in the event to talk back. Now, I'll give you a couple of quick examples of this. Actually, a book, this doesn't have to be a big event, a book club. A couple of Christians, a few non-Christians, and you read Flannery O'Connor stories, or you read Dostoevsky, or you read Tolkien, or you read something like that, and you know Christianity is going to come up, but there's no one Christian who's just sort of pouring out the message. Rather, you're talking to each other. It's equal. The Veritas Forum has, in the last few years, gone to this new model in which you don't have a Christian speaker up and just saying, here's the gospel, and then they take Q&A. That's actually floor number four. But they've gone down to floor number three, where actually you always have a Christian, perhaps in a non-Christian, or maybe a couple other non-Christian speakers. They're all equally up there. They're talking and dialoguing about a particular subject. I love those Veritas Forums, because if you're a Christian speaker and you come away not looking absolutely stupid, you've totally won. That's all you have to do. Just don't look stupid. Because everybody thinks that the Christians are stupid. But actually, there are just many, many examples of that. I'll just give you one other example. I was, years ago, involved in a meeting between a mosque and a church that met every other month once in a mosque, then the next month in the church, then back to the mosque. And every time, we would have a Christian speaker and a Muslim speaker giving the Christian and the Muslim view of a particular subject. So it might mean forgiveness or whatever. And it was not a debate. It was just a way we called them Meetings for Better Understanding. The fact was, the Muslims were actually evangelizing us, and we were evangelizing them. And I won't tell you how it came out, but it was extremely fruitful. But you see, in all those situations, what you've got is Christianity, like I said, Christianity in dialogue. Floor four is Christianity presented. This is the more traditional, where you have a Christian speaker, and you bring your friend. The speaker is giving a Christian message, taking questions and answers. That's our question in Christianity. Whenever we've done that in the past, we will do it in the future. By the way, the RZIM speakers are, this is their bread and butter. This is the sort of thing they do. And I do think there has to be those kinds of presentations. Floor three. When you get up to floor three, four, five, yeah. When you get up to floor five, you actually are Christianity in process. And that's where you actually invite your friend into, if they're in this place, into a group that is meeting regularly to process Christianity. It could be an alpha course. It could be what we call our Question Christianity group. It's some kind of... other non-Christians and a Christian or two, just to read books and discuss and to digest in the process. Extremely important. Now, you know what the top floor is? That's where you bring them into. I call it the worship floor. Now, this might be a little misleading. If you bring a non-Christian into an open community group, a Christian Bible study prayer group, or if you bring them into a church service in which the preaching and the worship is geared not only to edify Christians but also to include, not confuse, and to draw in non-Christians, that's the sixth floor. And that's not easy to pull off, either in the community group or the worship. The worship, and after all, there's absolutely no way that I can now explain exactly how you set that up. That's a whole other, you might say, seminar. But the church leaders, those of you who are here, it is your job, I believe, to produce congregations in which your people, who are being challenged here to have these intentional, creative relationships, that they can be supported by the sorts of things that we see in that little skyscraper, level one, two, three, four, five, and six. Now, let me just transition to a kind of ending commission. And I'd like to read you a text. When I thought about doing this, I was asked to kind of give you a little biblical exhortation and commission to go out. And I thought, well, one of the things I could do would be to go to the end of Matthew, this thing called the Great Commission. It was a little too much for me. It was too overwhelming. I couldn't do it in five minutes. They only gave me five minutes. Can you believe that? And I thought about a lot of others. But here's one that you might not have thought of as a little exhortation. This is where Joseph, after his father Jacob dies, and his brothers come back and they say to him, look, we sold you into slavery and all that. Now that our father is dead, please don't kill us or enslave us. And he weeps, you know. And he says to them in Genesis 50, but Joseph said to them, don't be afraid. Am I in the place of God? You intended to harm me, but God intended it for good, to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of many lives. Look, here's two thoughts. Joseph says, you intended for evil, God intended it for good. At one level, this is one of the high points of the Bible, where Joseph has finally understood something. And that is, in every evil occurrence, every bad thing that happens, the people who are doing it are doing evil. They are responsible for it. And yet, God is so powerful that he has only got it as part of the plan of history if that evil is going to undo itself eventually. That is to say, God never allows any evil to happen unless the evil, because of his sovereignty, will accomplish the opposite of what it was out to do. In the end, every bad thing, Joseph says, God is going to use to bring more goodness and more glory and more greatness into the world than would have been there otherwise, which is the uttermost defeat of evil. God is working all things together for good to those who love him and are called according to his purpose. That is, of course, Romans 8.28, but it is actually, this is the Old Testament version of that. But notice, he does not stop there. He does not just say, you men are for evil, God men are for good. Now, what he is talking about is, if they had not sold him into slavery, which was a terrible, terrible thing, he suffered, his father suffered, they suffered, it was terrible. They were guilty for doing it. But if he hadn't been sold into slavery, he would have stayed a spoiled brat. He would never have become the man of character. He wouldn't have risen up to rule Egypt. He wouldn't have been able to basically save thousands, hundreds of thousands of people from starvation with brilliant governing and administration. And he never would have been able to bring his own family to repentance. So he said, you men are for evil, God men are for good. But then he says, to the saving of many lives. And here's what Joseph is saying. He's not just saying that the bad things that happened to me turned out for good. He's saying the bad things that happened to me made me useful. The bad things that happened to me gave me a whole set of people that I could help through whom God could save because of the bad things in my life. Bad things have happened to you, haven't they? You've got wounds. Jesus' wounds happened to the saving of many lives. saving at least of some. There are some hands that only you can hold. There are some bedsides that only you can really sit at. There are some problems that only you will understand. Not just because of your gender and your race and your age. You know, in some ways, every one of us is like a snowflake. Every one is like a thumbprint. We're unique. And there are some people out there that can only be helped by you. But one of the reasons why you are unique is not just your race and your gender and your talents, but it's also the things you've suffered, the troubles, the bad things. Do you know that your bad things have been brought into your life for many other reasons, but at least one of them is for the saving of many lives. Jesus Christ's wounds turned out for your good and your salvation. Now, use the bad things that have happened to you and say, there's people out there that God wants me to help. There's good things that only I can do because of not only the good things in my life, but even the bad things. There's stuff out there for you to do. There's people out there for you to reach. Go find them. Go look for them. Let's pray. Father, thank you for the fact, thank you for the amazing statement that when other people mean it for evil, you mean it for good. But even the more amazing statement that even the bad things in our lives equip us to touch certain people and understand certain people and reach certain people that no one else can. And, Father, only if we begin to get out of our self-absorption will we find those people and reach those people through your help. So, Father, help us because we spent this time together here this weekend to do that. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen. Thank you, Tim. Well, friends, before we close, the last thing we want to talk to you about is what will your next steps be? We're so grateful for you going on this two-day journey with us and getting to process and hear from these wonderful speakers, go through these great workshops and process together. But we hope that you won't let all of this just stay in this weekend. We hope that we'll all take what we learned both into our prayer lives, our personal lives, our relationships, into our community groups. Let's take what we learned and take it out of this room. So, we encourage you to do that and think now who is one or two people that you can share what you learned with. You can share about the people you want to pray for and that they can encourage and hold you accountable to that. Is it someone in your community group, is it someone in your community group, is it a friend that you already have? Think about that person now so that you might be encouraged to take what you've learned and carry it out into the rest of your life. Other follow-up points that we want you to consider is that there is a public faith online path. If you like what you learned tonight, we have put together resources for you to learn even more, again, with your friends or on your own. If you just go to redeemer.com backslash online paths to go find a public faith path to hear more sermons, read more articles, to help you keep pressing in to how we might share our faith together. And the next is, if you look on your table, you see this great postcard for the third and final conference of the formation year, formed to work for the glory of God this April 13th through 14th. This is New York City where work is king. We live in a city that is driven by ambition, but desperate for rest. And the gospel asks, to what end? The gospel is what gives us a unique vision that our work is actually for the glory of God. It's not that we expect too much from our work, but we actually expect too little. Join us for this two-day conference in April. We're going to have more amazing speakers. Again, Tim Keller will be back with us, Kathleen Leary Alsdorf, David Kim, Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, the founder of the Central Park Conservatory, as well as over 20 glimpses, helping us see God's work at work in the city around us, 20 all over the city. And you can learn more at cfwconference.com. And we hope you'll join us there in April. And also, we know that these talks were so rich and there was so much to learn. You might want to listen to it again or just rehear their wonderful British accents and whatever you might want to do. And you can do that soon because all of the talks will be available online at gospelinlife.com. So you can check that out. And then finally, I just want to say a couple special thank yous. There have been so many people that have made this conference possible. We have over 25 volunteers, so many people working at the sound booth, so many people just making the postcard, making your name tags, the different church stuff. But I just wanted to particularly thank yous. City to City who helped put so much of this together. Thank you both so much. Thank you. And can we also just say a special thank you to all the presenters and our wonderful guests, our British friends? Can we just say a wonderful thank you one more time? Yes. You almost, almost make us want to make America great again. Almost. So thank you so much for being here. Thank you guys all so much for coming. I'm going to just close this one more time in prayer. And then you're free to leave and thank you for coming. Dear God, again, we thank you, Lord, that this is your gracious calling on our lives. We love you and thank you that you call us to greater things than we can ask or imagine, Father, things that are beyond our wildest dreams because you are that big of a God and we want to see you glorified in the hearts and lives of everyone we know and love. So, Lord, we thank you that you know that the one who has called us is faithful and he will do it. So we thank you, Father. Thanks for each person that's here and is watching online. We pray this all in Jesus' name. Amen.
