TITLE: Meditation – An Introduction
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Spirituality (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/introduction/

============================================================

What I want to do at the ministry community meetings, these monthly meetings for the year, there's going to be ten of them, right? Yeah, we have ten, starting with this one. I've done many other things in the past, but they've tended to be institutionally oriented. They've tended to be oriented to our core values or the changes that we're going to go through or getting you ready for this or that campaign and so on. What I want to do this year is do something rather different. It's part of your dividend from my not preaching that second sermon every week. And what I would like to do is I'd like to do a series of teachings, which eventually I hope some of which will find their way into a small group curriculum, on probably the fastest way to tell you what we're going to talk about all year is prayer. I want to talk to you about prayer all year. But that's not what I said at the top of this little handout. I call it Gospel Spirituality. And I'm going to just give you an introduction to it tonight, but every single time I'm going to give you something practical to take away. As the year goes on, what you're really going to get, I think, I think, is a course in how to use the Psalms to very deeply enrich your fellowship and your walk and your experience of God. That's what I want to talk to you about this year. And I'll get to the Psalms more near the end of this particular talk. But if you look here, where it says introduction, I probably, you know, you probably don't need to know what I'm about to tell you, and that is that there's an enormous hunger for experience. And years ago in our culture, and years ago, 30, 40 years ago, nobody would have believed what we're seeing now. Nobody would have believed the spiritual interests. Nobody would have believed all the new religions popping up. I'll tell you, nobody would believe that the most experientially oriented branches of Christianity, for example, well, not for example, I mean the Pentecostal, the Pentecostal Christianity, which is the most experientially oriented version of Christianity, is the, without a doubt, the fastest growing branch of Christianity in the world. It's probably the fastest growing faith in the world. Nobody would have believed a few years ago that this hunger for experience would be here. But here it is. However, it's happening after almost 100 years in the Western world of real skepticism toward mystical experience, tremendous skepticism. C.S. Lewis' third book in his trilogy of his fiction, his science fiction trilogy, That Hideous Strength, is the third book. And that book is about a number of things. But one of the things that I don't think even people who've read it know, it's really Lewis' prediction that people, after 100 years of saying there is no supernatural, their mystical experience is just a psychological state, religious experience is really a form of hysteria, after 100 years of saying that, that the human race was going to discover experience again, but it will have lost the ability to make any distinctions because years ago, because in the Western world, there was a lot more discernment, ability to understand spiritual experience, draw distinctions, make, measure, and test the falsity or the goodness of spiritual experience, but no longer. See, in the book, he wrote this book in the 1940s. If any of you read the book, you know this. There's a group of scientists that think that they've had this incredible breakthrough. They've discovered microbes. And they say microbes are little, tiny, simple, living beings way, way, way down the scale of advancement. You know, they're very primitive compared to us. Macrobes are beings as far above us in the scale of being as we are above the microbes. That's why they call them macrobes. Macrobes do not have bodies. Macrobes speak to you, and they tell you things. Now, you know what the microbes are, end up being. The scientists are extremely excited about this, and they're talking with the microbes, and they've made this great breakthrough. What are microbes? Anybody remember? Anybody know? They're demons. They're demons. What makes you think you know? Yeah. Right. Well, I'll tell you something. In the year 1800, any schoolboy or schoolgirl could tell you, if you're walking along and out of the invisible thin air, a deep... you what to do, you should run. I mean, people knew there was a difference between demons and angels. They knew about all this. And what Lewis is really trying to say is that when the human race does get back into spiritual experience, and it will, and boy, in the 1940s, nobody would have believed it. It says, watch out, they have no ability to make discernment. They don't have any ability to do discernment. And that's exactly what we need, especially amongst Protestants. Catholics actually have a whole area that I'm starting to discover, a whole area of inquiry called spiritual theology. Protestants don't even have a name for it. Spiritual theology is that area of Christian experience. When you read Catholic books on spiritual, when you read Protestant books on prayer, they'll talk about forms of prayer. Now, there's adoration, there's confession, there's thanksgiving, and so on. That's great. When you read books on spiritual theology in the Catholic tradition, I'll give you a little background about this in a minute, they don't just talk about forms of prayer, they talk about stages of prayer, they talk about levels of prayer, they talk about depths of prayer, or heights, basically. And that, what I'm going to argue for is this, that we need a spirituality that's just like Jesus Christ, filled with grace and truth. That means, on the one hand, it's not afraid of talking about spirituality. In fact, I'm going to give you a little format of stages or depths of prayer, maybe I should say heights of prayer, based not only on what the Catholics will say from years of experience, but also on what the best Protestant spiritual writers have said, and even, frankly, on my own personal experience. Protestants never even talk about this sort of thing, because Protestants are filled with truth. Protestants want to be rational. Protestants want to think. Protestants want doctrine, but they're scared of experience, by and large. They're afraid of it, almost. Except then there's the Christians, and what I'm thinking about, both the Pentecostals and the Catholic mystics, who just love experience, but they really aren't as good, as I'll try to show you, at thinking it out biblically, and even shaping their experience with the Bible. I would like to say that the gospel essentially will engender, if it's understood properly and approached properly, both deep experience and yet experience that's regulated and shaped by truth. Now, to give you an example of what I'm talking about, I'm just going to jump right to these, this little list. And if you don't mind, I think, partly because I, well, because I maybe was trying to put too much in, I would like you to leave out for a minute, the jury will disregard the purgative, illuminative, and unitive lines. And just look at this, five levels of prayer, five stages, five levels going higher up and deeper into God. Vocal prayer, meditation, effective prayer, contemplation, glory prayer. What I'm about to give you is, not only does this fit pretty much with the great Catholic mystics, St. Teresa of Avila, John of the Cross, Ignatius Loyola, Francis de Sales, but it also jives very much with the great Protestant spiritual teachers, and mainly the leaders of revivals. You know, Protestants really don't like to talk about this sort of thing, but during times of revivals, people like Jonathan Edwards and John Owen and people like that who really experienced the revivals, very often they actually did finally start talking about spiritual experience. I'll show you why it's a little dangerous, why Protestants have always been scared of this. But let me talk to you about actually five levels of experience of God toward, from where we are up toward intimacy, you know, five degrees of movement into the presence of God. These are terms that unfortunately, depending on the writer, the terms change. In fact, that was one of the things that was so hard for me originally to understand, because people very often used a term different ways in different books. But let me talk to you about it. Vocal prayer, meditation, effective prayer, contemplation, glory prayer. Now, vocal prayer is what most people just consider prayer. And vocal prayer does not mean vocalized prayer. What it means is, it's referring to expressing in words without, basically what comes to mind, without the disciplines of the deeper levels, or the higher levels, I should say, okay? It's both higher and deeper. But vocal prayer means powerful. Because, however, when is your знает it tends to affect that structure. And vocal of the deeper levels, or the higher levels, I should say, okay? It's both higher and deeper, but vocal prayer means thanking God, praising God, confessing your sins, but basically you do what just comes to your mind. You may say it out loud, you may write it down, or you may think it in your head, but it's vocalized, it's verbalized, alright? And for most people, this is as far as they ever get, and they don't do this very often. But that's what vocal prayer is, it's just simply saying what comes to your mind. The next level, meditation, is, there is almost universal, and there is, universal consensus, that meditation is deeper in this sense. Meditation, I'll just read you some things I put down. Meditation is not thinking versus verbal, that's the trouble with the word vocal prayer, but I use it because everybody uses it. Meditation is exercising the understanding and imagination toward God with a tremendous amount of attention. Meditation is thinking out. Meditation is spinning out. Meditation is saying, let me think of five ways that this would change me if I took it seriously. Meditation is, let me think of all the ways in which this shows me the greatness of Jesus Christ. Meditation is taking your imagination and your reason, both your analysis, you see, and your intuition, your imagination, and you're taking it, and you're really trying to think it out. All the implications, but meditation is thinking in the presence of God. You make yourself aware that God's there, and you may actually talk to Him while you're doing this, but basically you're concentrating not so much on Him, but you're concentrating on the truth. You're concentrating on the Scripture, you're concentrating on the thing that you're meditating on. You're trying to get, you're trying to penetrate to the meaning, and you may talk to Him, you should actually talk to Him when you're meditating. But by and large, it's an intellectual exercise. And all the mystics say, this is absolutely necessary if you're going to get deeper. You penetrate. That's meditation. Now, as the year goes by, I'm going to give you a lot more than I've ever given you on meditation, and ways of doing it, and, I mean, you know, everybody's got one. Luther had one, Loyola had one, DeSales had one, all kinds of people had them, and you have to look at them and either develop some of your own or borrow from them and so on, but it's very important. Meditation is not Bible study or prayer so much. It's this odd combination of the two. Some of you may have heard me say that that's been probably the biggest breakthrough in my own spiritual life when I realized that I wasn't meditating. I would study the Bible, and then I would just simply sit down, I would say, okay, there's my stuff, and I'd say, yes, this teaches me this about the Incarnation, it teaches me this about how I should be doing this with other Christians, this tells me this, I should be doing this with my non-Christian neighbors, great. Then I would move to prayer, I'd pray to go down my prayer list, I would maybe even pray about what I read in the Bible, and that was it. Meditation is taking the stuff that you've just learned and thinking it out and thinking out the implications and penetrating more deeply into it and saying, how would this really affect me? How would this really change me? What does this really tell me about God? It's thinking out the ramification, the implications, it's a whole lot more of a concentration of the intellect on the truth. Thirdly, now, affective prayer. Now, the word affect has to do, I'm using it because not only the Catholics used it, but of course Jonathan Edwards used it. And the affections are not just simply, it's not just what you find affectionate. That's, in today, the word affectionate almost means, you know, an old shoe, I like my cat sitting on my lap, I love a cup of tea in front of a fire. You know, that's what you think of. But the word affections means your deepest desires. And in affective prayer, you're moving from the concentration of the mind to concentrating the will. In affective prayer, you start to repent, and you start to submit. But let me, and it's very deliberate, and you're still under control. This is still something you can do. Again, we'll talk about this in the future as well. You don't have to understand all this tonight. I can't imagine how you can, but I'm just trying to pique your interest here. In affective prayer, I didn't realize until I started studying the Psalms what this is. Effective prayer is also done in the presence of God. You're still talking to God, but you're actually preaching to yourself. Now, if you want perfect, there are many examples of this in the Bible. Do you know how many places, especially in the Psalms, if you look at it, you're thinking of it as a prayer, but it's sort of a prayer, but it's not a prayer. It's where the psalmist is talking to his soul. Do you know how many places that happens? In fact, let me give you the quintessential version of effective prayer. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all... You're looking at God and you're saying, Oh my word, you are so much greater than I ever take you seriously. I don't take you seriously. And you look at your heart and you say, This is the only one. I should not be blessing anyone but Him. And then, I'm forgetting His benefits. I'm forgetting the greatness. I forget you. Now, what are you doing at that point? You're starting to make resolutions. You're starting to make offerings. You're repenting. You're giving Him your sins. You're giving Him your attention. You're giving Him. You're making promises. You're making covenants. But you're not just doing it in a cold way. You're working on your heart and you're saying, Look at this, look at this. Effective prayer is where you actually start to take your will. And you say, Why can't I submit to a great God like this? Meditation will almost always, not always, Meditation may not lead to contemplation, but it almost always leads to effective prayer. Unless you are sick. Unless you are just being deserted for some reason by the Holy Spirit. Because of your sin or something. I don't know. But almost always, meditation will lead to enough heat to do that. In effective prayer, you're making covenants. You're making promises. And you're preaching to yourself. And you're sort of dealing with your own soul. Now, that's the perfect example. Now, next is, some of this is going to sound a little weird to you. Vocal prayer, meditation, and effective prayer, you are completely in the driver's seat. You can tell after meditation that you've gone in deeper when you get to your effective prayer. You can tell there's more passion. And you can tell that, Another way to think of effective prayer, effective prayer is, in a sense, you taking your fingers off of the things in your life that are too important to you. Effective prayer is deliberately saying, This is too important to me. I will not bless this anymore. This is too important to me. I will not base my life on this anymore. That's where you're repenting, and then you're resolving, and you're making these offerings. In contemplation, which is also called the prayer of simplicity, at this point, something begins to happen. And if it happens, you're into contemplation. You really can't do this on cue. You really don't have control of this. I think you actually can only do the first two seconds of it. Contemplation is the gaze of the soul toward God. After you've done your meditation, that means you've really concentrated the mind. You've done your affective prayer, which means you've really concentrated the will. Then you turn just to look at Him, and adore Him. And if the Holy Spirit wants to do it, you'll very often find, my contemplation is the descent of the mind into the heart. That the things that you've been thinking about, you're tasting. The things that you've been telling yourself suddenly become real to you. And that's why it's called a prayer of simplicity, because you don't feel the mind-heart dualism like we almost always do. In the prayer of simplicity, you feel a sense in which, instead of just saying, I know He's great, and I'm telling myself He's great, and why don't you treat Him as great, which you can do any day, and you should do every day, in contemplation, He looks great. In affective prayer, you can do this. You can take your fingers off of these other things that are so important to you. I don't care about my reputation. I don't care about my looks. I don't care about the fact that, you know, these things that are just, you take them off and say, I don't need these things. I don't want these things. These things aren't important. But you can't put your hands onto Jesus and find Him beautiful without the illumination of the Holy Spirit. You just can't do that. You can't do it on cue. You can find other alternatives to Jesus ugly, but you can't find Him beautiful unless the Holy Spirit helps. And in contemplation, let me just give you what a couple other authors would say. Contemplation is where you look at, here's what one writer said. It's simple yet profound gaze of the soul, looking upon the Lord and finding Him all you desire. What does it mean to look upon the Lord? Well, generally speaking, see the scripture you've been meditating and meditating on, you're thinking about it analytically, and then you're trying to bring your own heart in line. And then you turn, let's just say you've been thinking about His righteousness, or you've been thinking about His love, or whatever. And then you say, why don't I, and you're thinking out the implications of it and how you should be acting, and then in effective prayer you give yourself to that. But then when you turn and look at Him and say, Lord, You are righteous. Now that's what I mean by saying the first second you can do that, you can sort of... don't, depending on the Holy Spirit, and the degree to which you see depends on the Holy Spirit. This is why when we get to, I'm going to give you Luther, Luther has a great little work on how to do meditation and prayer, and what Luther says is, well, he has a little method that I'll tell you about, but he says you do your method, you do your meditation, do your meditation, he says until the Holy Spirit begins to preach to you, then make sure you write everything down. Now, this is Martin Luther. Martin Luther, Martin Luther was no Pentecostal, and Martin Luther says when you meditate, sometimes the Holy Spirit begins to speak to you. He's talking about it moves from meditation into contemplation. Sometimes you'll find that the mind will descend into the heart, and it's not the same thing as saying you're thinking in meditation and now you feel. I know that's what it kind of looks like, but I try to stay away from that, because that's not what it is. What happens actually is you just get this clarity. That's the reason why it's probably more accurate to say it's the gaze. You do feel it. Of course, you look at his righteousness and you feel it, but you feel it because you see it. You're not thinking it or feeling it. You're seeing it, and that's the best, and this is what Jonathan Edwards calls a new sense. He says you cannot describe a person who's been born blind and has never seen light, and if the person born blind who's never seen light says, what is red like? Is it like a trumpet? Is it like the sound of a trumpet? And is blue like the sound of an oboe? And you see, frankly, I happen to believe that red is a little bit like the sound of a trumpet, and blue is kind of like the sound of an oboe, but the basic answer is no. You can't really reduce one sense into another. They don't collapse into each other. They're too different, and therefore, when somebody says, what does it mean to actually see the Lord by faith? To move beyond thinking and even feeling to actually sensing his reality, and you know what Edwards would say? Jonathan Edwards would say, until it happens, you cannot, I guess, can't describe it. It is a new sense of the heart, and that's what contemplation is. Contemplation just does not happen all the time, and sometimes it can go, you can go a long time before you really get that sense of the mind descending into the heart. As I said, Martin Luther says, at the end of your meditation, sometimes the Holy Spirit begins to preach to you. Augustine, who goes, I really follow him when I can, because he goes back before the Protestant-Catholic division. You know, he's not Protestant or Catholic. He's just Christian. Great. We don't have any of those anymore, practically. But Augustine talks about retentio, which means getting a, retention means getting the teaching in the mind, and then he says moving to contemplatio and dilectio. And he says very often that just doesn't happen. Look at this quote I have here from John Owen. John Owen was a major Puritan. I think he was Oliver Cromwell's chaplain. So again, you know, not much of a Catholic. But he says the same thing the Catholic mystics say. He says, if we settle for mere speculations, now don't forget, he's right in the 1660s. That's why he talks funny. If we settle for mere speculations and mental notions about Christ's doctrine, we shall find no transforming power or efficacy community unto us thereby. He's actually saying what I'm saying. It might be, you know, the long way around. He's using big, old English words. But when under the conduct of spiritual light, you see, he uses visual sensory language. It's the only way you can. When under the conduct of spiritual light, our affections do cleave unto him with full purpose of heart. Our minds fill up with thoughts and delight in him. Then virtue, which means change in character, will proceed from him to purify us, increase our holiness, and sometimes fill us with joy unspeakable and full of worry. Just sometimes. Where light, see, in other words, well, when light, where light leaves the affections behind, it ends in formality or atheism. In other words, if you have light without heat, that means you have truth without experience. It ends in formality and atheism. But where the affections outrun light, you see, where you have experience without truth, based on the truth, or where you have, you know, truth without experience. If you, where the affections outrun the light, they sink into the bog of superstition. I love that phrase. But anyway, he's talking about the same thing. Sometimes, fill us with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Now, after contemplation, there's something else. Now, I put down here, just to let you know, I have wrestled a little bit with the fact that the Catholic mystics don't just say there's one more thing past contemplation. That St. Teresa of Avila thinks there's four or five more. And she talks about the prayer of quiet, and past that, the prayer of union, and past that, the prayer of conforming union, and past that, the prayer of union, and past that, the And I've been, I've been reading this thing and trying to figure out, are there really five more? Is there, I don't, and one of the things that when I read it, I realize that she keeps talking about, that what makes these things higher and higher and higher is assurance. She knows she's a child of God. Now, in Catholic theology, assurance is much more problematic, because Catholic theology does believe in grace. Oh, yes, he believes in salvation by grace, and Protestants should never caricature Catholic theology by saying, well, you believe in salvation by good works. They don't. Now, plenty of Catholics do, just like plenty of Presbyterians do, but I'm talking about the church. They don't. However, they believe that grace is infused through the sacraments, and you can lose it, and it comes back. And as a result, assurance is a much tougher thing for a thoughtful Catholic to get because of the theology, which I think is faulty at that point. Christian theology is that grace is not infused, but it's imputed, and not constantly, but when you believe, when you stand on the rock. And this is one of the reasons why the Catholics, when they get past, when they get up and heavy in, they wrestle a lot more because assurance is a pretty tough thing for them. They can't really look in their heart and see almost any kind of sinful motions and have any assurance. And we can. However, one thing that everybody seems to agree on, that past contemplation, there is a special anointing. There is a special, and I call it high assurance. And Romans 8, 16 talks about it, and so does Galatians 4, 6, and 7. What are we talking about? Well, what we're talking about is, in Romans 8, 16, it says, the Spirit bears witness with our spirits that we're children of God. Now, there it is. It's a courtroom scene, and it says, your spirit is bearing witness that you're a child of God. Now, what does that mean? Well, your spirit bears witness by looking at the evidence. You say, I believe the gospel. I believe I'm saved by faith, not by works. I have put my faith in Christ. Christ has done all these things. I've seen changes in my life. Your spirit is bearing witness. And you see, to know that you're a child of God is really the main spring of Christian life. The only way you can do all the stuff that we always talk about at Redeemer, the only way you can say, I can be free from a fear of how I look. I can be free from a need to always be perfect. I can be free. The only way you can be free of any of those things is to know that you're a Christian. You have to have assurance. And the ordinary way you have assurance is by the ordinary way. Your spirit bears witness that you're a child of God. You look at the evidence. You remind yourself of the gospel. You see changes in your life. You know, you come and you sing a great hymn, and you sense in your heart, you know, a certain love. And you say, that's me. God has put that love in my heart. But Romans 8, 16 talks about something else. And it says, the spirit bears witness with our spirit that we're children of God. And that means it's like a courtroom drama is going on, and somebody's up there witnessing, and there's a jury and the judge. But another witness comes in and gives a testimony that just makes every, you know, just overcomes all doubt. Case closed. And it talks about the spirit coming and very directly descending on us the way it did on Jesus at his baptism. And at times like that, the spirit says, this is my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased. And when you get that kind of assurance, you really don't, you always, when that sort of thing happens, you say, I'm never sinning again. But you do. But that's how you feel. You wouldn't know why. Why? Because all the things that you normally, you're the basic dynamic that you use to deal with your fears and to deal with your anger and to deal with your despondency by looking and saying, I'm a child of God. Suddenly, instead of having to say it to yourself, instead of just your spirit witnessing, the spirit comes in and very directly just kisses you. And that's the prayer of glory. And one of the problems with the prayer of glory is if it ever happens to you, and it has not happened as a result of moving through all the other stages, you almost always make an idol out of the setting. I had an experience like this one time in which I was listening to a particular song on a cassette being played in my car when I was driving east as the sun was coming up. And I meditated on some of the words of the music, and I meditated on the sunlight, and suddenly wham. And there had been, here's the problem, and I don't think I've completely fallen for it, but there's always a question about what if I put the tape back in? No, it doesn't work that way. Frankly, the reason was because I was meditating on a cassette. years ago, you can never get back into Narnia the same way. The wardrobe door, I mean, the wardrobe is closed. You're going to have to find some other way. That's the great danger. When people have experienced this particular high assurance in a church service or during times of revival, one of the worst things about it is instead of seeing this as the final stage of prayer, after learning meditation and contemplation, after disciplining your heart, after learning the ways of Christian experience, the ways of gospel and spirituality, instead, because it happened to them in a certain situation, they just desperately try to get back to it. They try to get those friends together. They try to sing those songs again. They say, why in the world can't we come back and worship in Advent Hope Church? You know, there's people at Redeemer that had incredible experiences in this room. And they don't know that they've ever had them since. And you might want to come back and maybe even get nostalgic when you come in. That's not the way. This is the way. Now, we never talk in the Protestant Church about this. We don't talk about levels. We're afraid of it. And you see one of the reasons why people are so hungry that it'll be very easy for you, especially as Americans, where you all are to some degree. If you've been here long enough, you're in New York, you know, it wears off. And you may just say, give me the techniques. Tell me how. I want to know the five steps and I want to know the buttons to push. I'm ready. My engines are running. Just give me the map. It's not that simple. However, what we're going to do is this. I have said all along, and you can read the rest of this, I've said all along that the thing that's hard to catch the balance on is grace and truth. Eugene Peterson and a few other people have shown me that probably there is no better way to combine the two than to pray the psalms. I don't mean just read the psalms and then pray. Pray the psalms and pray every part of your life through the psalms. Look on the second page. Look at the italicized paragraph. This is Eugene Peterson. There is a difference between praying to an unknown God whom we hope to discover in our praying and praying to a known God revealed through Israel and in Jesus Christ who speaks our language. In the first, we indulge our appetite for religious fulfillment. In the second, we practice obedient faith. The first is a lot more fun. The second is a lot more important. What's essential in prayer is not that we learn to express ourselves but that we learn to answer God. The psalms show us how to answer. Now what is he saying? He's saying just to simply vocalize your prayer instead of actually disciplining your heart to pray as God asks you to pray. The best way to do that is take the psalms of the Bible which are the prayers of the Bible and learn to pray them no matter how you feel but learn to meditate do effective prayer and contemplate on the basis of them. One of the disciplines I started not too long ago but long enough ago is praying through the psalms once a month morning and evening. It's been a marvelous thing and all I want to do is I want to share some of the things with you that I think over the course of the ten months will enable you to move up the stages. All right? Now the other thing I have on here and if you have never seen it before on the second page this is a way to start meditation if you don't know anything about it at all. This is self-explanatory. I happen to know because I give it to my sons in college and they understand it and if they understand it you can understand it and this is the most basic and the most simple first step on how to move into meditation at least. Now every time we come back every month I'm going to give you some we're going to use some psalms to demonstrate this and to talk about every one of these stages as the year goes by. Okay? Let me close in prayer and then Drew's going to come up and tell you what to do. Our Father, I thank you that you do call us higher up and deeper in. I do thank you that the goal of your salvation is not simply to get us a free pass to heaven to forgive our sins so we avoid punishment. The goal of your salvation is for us to know each other. The goal of our salvation is for us to know you, to have you. Your son Jesus Christ in John 4 said, the Father seeketh worshippers. It's not because you must need us but it must be because you love us so much that you want you want fellowship with us. And so we pray that you would teach us this year more about how to find it. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
