TITLE: Introduction: The Two Prodigals
SCRIPTURE: Luke 15:11-32
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel and the Heart Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/introduction-the-two-prodigals/

============================================================

Now, what we're doing in these conferences is something that we haven't actually done in a while. For various reasons, you might, those of you who have been around a while, realize that you have the worship services, you have small groups. But in between, where you do sort of teaching about topics that has to do with Christian living in the city, partly because we have spread out so much. Now that we're in different congregations, we'll be in three different locations this fall, it gets harder and harder for us to do that. So we've decided to collect the basic stuff, the basic teaching that Redeemer has, in a sense, developed and accumulated over the years on how to live an effective Christian life in the city. And we're putting it together into these three conferences, into a one-year curriculum for small groups, and you'll hear more about that. And so what I'm going to start with tonight, these three, tonight and tomorrow, I will be speaking three times tonight, twice tomorrow, and I want to talk to you about the most basic, kind of fundamental, theological, biblical plank basis for the whole ministry of Redeemer. All that I preach, everything that we do, everything that we've accomplished. Those of you who have been around for a while, it's probably going to be good for you to hear it summarized. For those of you who are newer, it's good to see it undiluted. If you go to Redeemer and you go to the sermons, you'll hear it in different perspectives, in pieces each week, but I'm going to give it to you, you might say, you know, straight up. Tonight, tomorrow, why, what is the gospel? Why is it the key to everything? How does it actually change your life? Now, tonight what I'm going to do is I'm actually going to give you what I would consider probably the clearest biblical text that sort of helps you understand what Redeemer's ministry is about and what I think the key is to living a Christian life. Yes, is one of these off? One of these numerous things that I have appears off, but now it's on. Or it better be. Is it good? Let me read you the parable of the prodigal son. One, my wife's vote for the most important sermon I ever preach, and she's heard almost all of them. It doesn't necessarily mean it's the best sermon you'll ever hear from me, but it's the most important one. This is Luke 15. It starts in the beginning, verses 1, 2, and 3. Now, the tax collectors and the sinners were all gathering around to hear him. But the Pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, This man welcomes sinners and eats with them. Then Jesus told them this parable. Now, let's stop right here. He tells them three parables. The parable of the lost sheep. The parable of the lost coin. And then finally, the parable which is usually called the parable of the prodigal son. That starts in verse 11. Let me read it. And Jesus continued, There was a man who had two sons. The younger one said to his father, Father, give me my share of the estate. So he divided his property between them. Not long after that, the younger son got together all he had, set off for a distant country, and there squandered his wealth in wild living. After he had spent everything, there was a severe famine in the whole country, and he began to be in need. So he went and hired himself out to a citizen of that country, who sent him to his fields to feed pigs. He longed to fill his stomach with the pods that the pigs were eating, but no one gave him anything. When he came to his senses, he said, How many of my father's hired men have food to spare? And here I am starving to death. I will set out and go back to my father and say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Make me like one of your hired men. So he got up and went to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and was filled with compassion for him. He ran to his son, threw his arms around him, and kissed him. The son said to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. But the father said to his servants, Quick, bring the best robe, put it on him. Put a ring on his finger, sandals on his feet. Bring the fatted calf and let's kill it. Let's have a feast and celebrate for this son of mine was dead and is alive again. He was lost and is found. So they began to celebrate. Meanwhile, the older son was in the field. And when he was near the house, he heard music and dancing. So he called one of the servants and asked him what was going on. Your brother has come, he replied. And he said, And he said, And he said, safe and sound. The older brother became angry and refused to go in, so his father went out and pleaded with him. But he answered his father, look, all these years I've been slaving for you and never disobeyed your orders, yet you never gave me even a younger groat so I could celebrate with my friends. But when this son of yours, who has squandered your property with prostitutes, comes home, you kill the fatted calf for him. My son, the father said, you are always with me and everything I have is yours. But we had to celebrate and be glad because this brother of yours was dead and is alive again. He was lost and is found. Now, this parable is almost always called the parable of the prodigal son or the parable of the lost son, right? But Jesus doesn't call it that. He starts off saying a man had two sons. That's his title. That's his title sentence anyway, his introductory sentence. And what that means is that unless you look at the parable as a comparison and contrast of both sons, you will not understand the meaning of it. And generally, it's a very famous, it may be the most famous parable, perhaps, up there with a good Samaritan, I suppose. It may be one of the most famous parables of all, Jesus. And yet almost always, all the concentration is on the younger son and coming back. And as a result, almost everybody thinks of this in a very sentimental way. We sentimentalize the meaning of this parable. Because we imagine the first listeners were sitting there listening to this wonderful story of how no matter what you do and no matter what awful stuff you do, if you come home, God will just accept you and he will love you. And you can imagine the hearer's eyes welling up with tears, but that's not at all what happened. If we look at the context, if we look who he was speaking to, if we look what his purpose was, as we're going to, we will find out that the original hearers of this parable would have been furious. They would have not been wiping little tears out of their eyes. They would have been furious. They would have been thunderstruck. They would have been offended. They would have been astounded. Because Jesus' purpose in this parable is not to give us a sentimental message that somehow God will just accept us no matter what we do. He is here to say basically this. Everything you've ever heard, everything you've ever thought about how to deal with or approach God is wrong. Now, if you're going to divide this, and let me give you my outline here. First thing Jesus is showing us is there's only two ways the world knows to deal with God and they're both wrong. There are only two ways that the world knows, basically, about how to deal with God and they're both wrong. Secondly, therefore, there are two ways to be lost. There are two kinds of lostness. And then lastly, yeah, by the way, it's in the handout somewhere, a place to take notes. And then lastly, even though there's two ways to God, and they're both wrong, and there's two ways to be lost, there's only one way home. And I would like you to know that the understanding of these two ways, and the two false ways and the one true ways, is the essence, what I think, the key, perhaps, to Christian living. You know, and I'm speaking about this after 25, 30 years of ministry. I can't, I can't, if there was one place I got to take somebody to, I'd take you here. That's why I'm doing it. So let's first of all take a look. The first thing we learn here is there are two, there's basically two ways that the world knows about how to approach God or deal with God, and Jesus is trying to say they're both wrong. See, at the beginning of the chapter, Luke gives us two groups of people. Notice, at the very beginning of the chapter, I didn't ask you to bring your Bibles, I'll read it to you. There's tax collectors and sinners gathering about Jesus, and the Pharisees and the teachers of the law muttered, this man welcomes sinners and eats with them. Pharisees and teachers of the law, and tax collectors and sinners. There's the two groups. And if you look carefully, you'll immediately begin to realize that the two sons in the parable represent the two groups in the beginning. Jesus is giving us the two sons and their relationship in order to shed light on the attitude of the two groups. Because, you see, you have Jesus, and all the tax collectors and sinners are coming to him, and you have the teachers of the law and the Pharisees, and they're very grumpy about that. The teacher, the younger brother represents the tax collectors and sinners. The younger brother represents people who have thrown off traditional morality. Let him show you a lot, if the Oğlum kind of hitches Vlad, he reminds us of the same kind who comes to try to create a OtherwiseNive. The first with an demonstration, a carousel земle, the blessed mon Monday lab predator, the clutch spot, and that he tells us to bring him around to you before. The teacher, the younger brother represents the tax collectors and sinners. The younger brother represents people who have thrown off traditional morality, who have left Iowa and Indiana and gone to live in New York, have, you know, have eschewed and rejected traditional faith in every way and rejected the values of their parents and rejected all that. On the other hand, the teachers of the law and the Pharisees are represented by the elder brother, who has stayed home and who is absolutely obedient and sits in church with his father every week and is orthodox and traditional and religious and moral in every way. So you actually have the two sons in the parable representing these two groups of people. And it's not surprising that these two groups of people are both actually kind of surprised at Jesus. See, here's why. One of the things you'll know, and of course this is definitely a theme of the preaching at Redeemer, because it comes up all the time in the Gospels. Over and over and over again, when Jesus deals with people, you see two groups of people in, they're called pericopes. I almost said pericopes, I'm sorry. What is a pericopes? It's a story, okay? These little stories about Jesus in the Gospels. Over and over again, when you see him dealing with an individual, he's not usually just dealing with an individual. He's dealing with an individual, and there's always either another individual or a group around. So, for example, when he deals with Zacchaeus, the tax collector, there's a group of moral and religious people around. When he deals with the fallen woman in Luke 7, there's Simon the Pharisee right next to him. When he deals with Mary, there's Martha right next to her. When he deals with, even when he deals with a Samaritan woman, you know, the outsider in John 4, or he had just dealt with a Pharisee in John 3. Over and over and over again, we have these two groups of people in the Gospels. And every time, and I mean every time, it's the outsider who gets it. It's the outsider who's attracted to Jesus. It's the outsider who figures out the Gospel. So when you have a political outsider like Zacchaeus, he gets it, and the others don't. And when you have a sexual outsider like the various places where you have women who come who are moral outsiders, they get it, and the Pharisees around them don't. Or when you have a racial outsider like the Samaritan woman, you know, she gets it, and other people around her don't. Over and over again. And actually, Jesus actually says it in a principle. In Matthew 21, 31, he says, To the religious leaders, the tax collectors and the prostitutes enter the kingdom of heaven before you. Now, no wonder the Pharisees and the teachers of the law were suspicious of Jesus because most of the commentators point out that the tense of the Greek verb, where it says tax collectors and sinners were gathering around Jesus, that the tense of the Greek verb means that this was the prevailing trend and pattern in Jesus' ministry. In other words, what it's really trying to say is tax collectors and sinners were always gathering around Jesus. Over and over and over again. They tended to be attracted. They tended to come in. They tended to get his teaching in a way the moral and religious people didn't. And that's nuts. Here, can you imagine why the religious people said, These are people who never come to our services. They never come to our services. They never come to our classes. They never come to anything. But they go to his. There's something fishy here. He must be telling them what they want to hear. So they're very, very upset. And I can understand it. Can't you understand it? But before moving on, listen, this is a sidelight. But this is part of what I want to say at this seminar. This is one of the basic assumptions of Redeemer's ministry. The message of the gospel, obviously, when it's clear, when it's clear, broken people, skeptical people, socially, sexually, morally, outsiders, outsiders, they are more likely to be attracted. They are more likely to come in when the gospel is really embodied rightly and communicated rightly than moral and religious people. Now, the reason why that's kind of a radical thing to say, you see it in Jesus. You see it all the time. In other words, younger brothers, in general, are more attracted to Jesus than older brothers. Why isn't that true of the churches in the United States? Now, there are churches in other countries where it is true. But why is that not true in the churches of the United States in general? That we attract older brothers, we do not attract younger brothers. Why? And all I can say is there's probably two possible reasons. One would be that we're not nearly as clear with the gospel as we think we are. The other possibility is we're much more like the older brother than we think we are. Because I know that, you know, I don't know. I don't know. you see how the older brother acts, you begin to see one of the reasons why he wanted to leave. So there's these two groups of people, and Jesus is trying to show us in the parable something about both. Because actually there's almost equal amount of time given to the elder brother as the younger brother. It's silly to call it the parable of the prodigal son. Almost equal. Okay, let's go on. What is he trying to say to these two groups of people, or these two figures? And the answer there is, he is trying to tell us there are basically two grids. There are basically two approaches in the world to God and salvation. I'm going to call them the moralistic grid and the relativistic grid. I mean, occasionally in the preaching and teaching at Redeemer, we can run out and talk about this. And I'll talk to you more about it tomorrow. But it's always an assumption. Let's call it the moralistic and relativistic. You could have other words, but what do we mean by this? All right, first of all, the elder brother represents the moralistic grid. The moralistic grid is an understanding that if I'm going to find God, the way of salvation is finding God by obeying his law. I'm going to obey his law. I'm going to set some standards of some kind. You know, I mean, there's a number of variations of this. But all the religions of the world and not even just religions, traditional people, there's all sorts of people. There's many variations. But basically, the moralistic grid is the way I find salvation, the way I find the divine, the way is I find the standards and I obey them. Sometimes you can fall down. And if you repent, God will forgive you. But basically, you know, you've got to repent. You really have to repent. And you've got to get back up on the course. And so that's the moralistic grid. Now, there's the relativistic grid. And the relativistic grid would say something like this. You have to follow your heart, not the rules. If there is a God, and there may not be, but if there is a God, what he would want us to do is find out what our heart really wants and follow our own principles truly. So there's the moralistic grid and the relativistic grid. Now, obviously, the relativistic grid can be atheistic, but usually it's not. It can be very spiritual. People say, well, I do have a God, and I do believe in God, but, you know, I believe God wants me to be myself. And he wants me, you know, or some people say they don't. But you basically have these two approaches to God. And both grids divide the world into two groups, one that we favor and one that we disdain. Both grids divide the world into two groups, one that we favor and one that we disdain. By the way, postmodern, you know, literary and critical theory, one of the basic understanding, ways of understanding human nature is that you only get your identity through oppressing the other, through separation from the other, other capital O. In other words, literary and cultural studies say, the way you get an identity is you decide who you are, and then you find the other, the not you. And you alienate them, you know, you disdain them, you look down your nose at them, and that's how you know that there's something cool about you. But you see, what's interesting, both in the moralistic and in the relativistic grid, you do that. The moralistic grid divides the world into the moral people and the immoral people, the good and the bad. You see, the people who are decent and then the people who are licentious. But the relativistic grid divides the world into the free spirits, open-minded, and the judgmental bigots. And that's, you know, see, that's the other, is the bigots, the judgmental people, the people who think they've got the truth. Both cases, you've got a group of people, you say, well, if everybody was like them, the world would be great. If everybody was like me, in other words, the world would be great. And if, you know, the real problem with the world is those people over there. So they both divide into two grids. Both grids divide people. They divide it differently. How does Jesus' story address these views? It addresses them by deconstructing them both. Now, it's fairly easy to see how he, in a sense, he deconstructs the younger brother, the relativistic grid. Here's the guy that goes off and says, I'm really going to have fun. I'm going to throw, personal freedom is the most important thing. I'm going to do what I want. And, of course, you know, excess comes home and he's, you know, he's impoverished and he's been taken advantage of and his life is a ruin. And that's, you know, that's not too hard to see how that happens. And, of course, the younger brother's story is well known and he comes on back. But what's really subversive about the parable is that Jesus, at least as much, his target is to also deconstruct the moralistic paradigm or grid. In fact, if you look carefully, back at the very beginning of the chapter, in chapter 15, it's... first, uh, verses says, now the tax collectors and sinners were all gathered around to hear him. The Pharisees and teachers of the law muttered, this man welcomes sinners and eats with him. Then Jesus told them this parable. Who's the them? Probably the Pharisees, probably the elder brothers. And if you actually, I mean, as time has gone on, I've looked at this. Basically his real target in this parable is to show not just the relativistic grid ends up being a spiritual dead end, but so does the moralistic grid. And the way he does it is this. Now this, this is the shocking part of the parable. Let me put it to you in a number of propositions. Jesus shows the father with two sons, one a good boy, one a bad boy, you know, one, uh, extremely good and unselfish and so, you know, unself-seeking and self-discipline and, and obedient and caring. And the other selfish and licentious and trampling on people and using the father just to get the money and all that sort of thing. And they're both alienated from the father, not just one. They're, first of all, they're, that's the big first thing. They're both alienated. Notice the father has to go out to both of them to try to get him into the feast. The father goes out to the younger brother to kiss him and bring him into the feast. But the father has to go out to the older brother who's angry and won't come in. And he goes out and he pleads with him. In other words, the first thing, which is kind of shocking, is it's not like the bad boy is alienated from the father and the good boy is not. They're both alienated from the father. Neither will come in unless the father goes out and draws them. But the big shock, of course, is at the end of the parable, the bad boy is saved and the good boy is not. And I mean, the lover of prostitutes enters the kingdom because the feast of the father is pretty obvious what that is. But the moral and the good and the religious and the obedient and the faithful son is lost. He won't come in. He doesn't come in. I mean, the original listeners knew what he was saying. They would have been stunned. This is a reversal of everything they'd ever heard. But let me press it even a little further. Why doesn't the older brother go in? Why is the elder brother lost? Why does the elder brother reject the overtures of God and the pleading of God? Why is the elder brother lost? Not in spite of his goodness. It's because of his goodness. Why doesn't he go in? He says, I have slaved for you. I have never disobeyed you. The whole reason he's not. We're going to get into this in a second. But the reason he won't go in, it's not in spite of his goodness. It's because of his goodness. It's his goodness, not his badness, is the reason he's lost. It's his righteousness, not his sin, is the reason he's lost. See? He's not lost in spite of his good record, but because of his good record. And this is the reason why an old teacher of mine, John Gerstner, in one of his books, put this years ago. It's taken me years to figure this out. But there's a place where he says, in one of his books, the main thing, he says, the gospel is so different than the moralistic grid and the relativistic grid because the main thing between you and God is not your sins. It's your damnable good works. The main thing between you and your sin, you and God, the main thing keeping you from God is not sin. Here's why. Think about the Pharisees. Did they repent when they sinned? All the time. Every time they did something wrong. They didn't tithe, or they didn't honor their father and their mother, or they broke any of the rules. They repented. But they were still Pharisees. So obviously it's not repenting for sin. It's not your sins that are the main thing. Of course a Christian is supposed to repent of sins. If you do something wrong, of course you're supposed to say, I'm sorry and ask for forgiveness of God and the person you've wronged. I'm not saying anything like that. That's not important. But the point is, that's not the main thing. Pharisees repent of their sins. What makes you a Christian is you repent of your self-righteousness and the reason for your righteousness, which we'll get to in a second. Or let me put it in the most absolutely stark possible way. I mean, it's a little bit of an overstatement, but basically Pharisees repent of their sins. What makes you a Christian is you repent of your righteousness. You're willing to see your pride. You're willing to see that all the good deeds you've been doing were as ways of controlling the Father. Let me press on. See, this is, why would it be that your righteousness could be a bigger barrier to you than your sins? And I'll tell you why. Younger brothers know they're alienated from God. Right? So they know that some, I mean, they may not believe in God or they may be grumpy about religion. There's all kinds of problems, but they at least know that they're not fine with God. Elder brothers don't. Elder brothers are right there. Elder brothers in the front pew. Elder brothers have no idea. If you try to tell them they're alienated from God, they have no idea. What are you talking about? And because they have no idea their father. start talking about repenting they say i repent all the time and if you say well you have to repent of your righteousness what are you talking about repent of your righteousness you know it's supposed to be bad no no no just stop it the gospel is simple not at all the gospel is not simple at all and therefore do you see the gospel is not religion or irreligion it's not morality simple morality it's not immorality it's a radically different approach or put it this way the moralistic grid divides the world into the good people and the bad people the good are in and the bad are out and the relativistic grid divides the world into the open-minded people and the bigots the open-minded people are in and the bigots are out but the gospel divides the world into the humble and the proud says the humble are in and the proud are out the gospel says those who think they're good are out and those who know they're not are in that is not something in the middle that's something utterly different and as we're going to show you there really is no other in the gospel understanding of your identity I have to figure out a place for me to get that into the sermons this year there is no other capital O we'll get to that in a minute because you see no matter who you are if you become a Christian out of younger brotherness or if you become a Christian out of older brotherness you begin to see I was lost there's a moral way to be lost and there's an immoral way to be lost well you say what do you mean there's a moral way to be lost well let's keep on going do you see that the gospel grid has a deeper understanding of sin a much deeper understanding of sin than most people have most people what is sin sin is breaking the law breaking the rules Christianity gives you a deeper view because Christianity says yes of course obviously if God says don't kill and you kill that's a sin but if you really want a better definition a definition that's really all encompassing here's what it is sin is running from God avoiding God as Savior now there's two ways to do that by obeying everything he does says or by disobeying everything he says Flannery O'Connor in her book Wise Blood talks about a one of her characters is named Hazel Motes and of Hazel Motes she says this there was a deep black wordless conviction in him that the way to avoid Jesus was to avoid sin there's a deep black nameless wordless conviction in him that the way to avoid Jesus was to avoid sin now how could that be how could that be here's a man who knows the only way to avoid Jesus as Savior is to avoid sin it's really pretty smart look if you avoid sin if you do everything you possibly can to be good Jesus is your helper Jesus is your example Jesus is a lot of things but he's not your Savior you're your own Savior and if so for example years ago I remember talking to a woman who eventually became a Christian but before she became a Christian I had this conversation with her and showed boy did she understand this she was saying I've been coming to Redeemer and I've heard you talk about the fact you're saved by grace not by your works she says you know I've gone to church growing up but I never heard this and she says why don't I hear this in more churches and I don't know why because I always I'm so you know I'm such a talkative person that when people ask me a question I just go on and on and on but for some strange reason I remember saying well I don't know why do you think so maybe I've had my mouth full I think we were having lunch or something and I said why why do you think so and she yeah it must have been because I remember she put her fork down that's right and she said if I if I if I could get into heaven by being good there would be a limit to what God could ask of me because I have my rights I've paid my dues I've done the things I'm supposed to do and he could ask me to do this and this and this but there's a limit to what he could ask of me but if I am saved surely by grace there is no limit to what he could ask of me she understood that it's very possible by being very obedient and very good to be avoiding God as Savior and by keeping control of your life you see the younger brother wanted the father's gifts not the father right he says dad you got a lot of money I've had it with you I mean I you know obviously as long as I'm here I can go out and spend it but I want basically I don't really want you I want your stuff I want your stuff so give me your stuff and let's get out in other words and that must have been an incredible stab in the heart I want your stuff not you so he leaves but when he comes back and he goes in and the father starts really upset. Why? Because he's very upset with the fact that the father is spending money on this kid. Robe, ring, fatted calf. The elder brother shows, and we're going to get to this too in just a second, is that he's angry because I have slaved for you, I have done everything right, and therefore you shouldn't be doing things unless I okay it. In other words, elder brotherness is, I'm going to control God, so he has to give me the things I really want. You can build your life not on God but on things by disobeying him, or you can build your life not on God but things by obeying him, being extremely good. That way God has to give you the things that you want. You see, in other words, you're being good for things, not for God. You're being bad for things, not for God. Same. They look incredibly different on the outside, but underneath they're exactly the same. Utterly the same. And that woman understood that. She understood that there really wasn't a big difference between living this licentious life and building a life on things and being your own Savior and own Lord. You can do that by being very, very, very bad, or you can do it by being very, very, very good. They're both the same. And that's, sin is running from God, avoiding God as Savior, being your own Savior and Lord, and building your life really not on God, but on the things that really give your life meaning, really give your life hope, and anything from your career or your money or something else like that. You can do that inside or outside of religion. You can do that inside or outside of morality. See? She understood that. And she wasn't even a Christian. At least she was obviously becoming one. Now, what does this mean? If this is true, and if you understand this, this is the most subversive possible text. That means there's two kinds of lostness. And you better understand this. Now, when I say there's two kinds of lostness, that means this. There are a lot of people in the church who actually are elder brothers, and they think they're Christians. They think they've received the Holy Spirit. They think they're really Christians, and they're not. They're elder brothers. You realize that? I'm constantly talking to people after they understand this paradigm who within weeks or months realize they're not Christians, and they always thought they were. But it's not just true. See, we can see younger brother lostness. We can't see the signs of elder brother lostness. The signs of younger brother lostness are easy. They're face down, unconscious in the gutter, under a hangover. It's very easy. There's a younger brother lostness. You know? Okay, party monster. There's younger brother lostness. You know? Over the top, excess. You know? People dying, you know, of overdoses. That's, we know that one. What about elder brother lostness? Do you realize what the signs of elder brother lostness is? Or, do you at least realize the signs of elder brother-ishness? Do you know what elder brother-ishness is? It's what you keep with you if you become a Christian, though you're an elder brother. If you become a Christian out of elder brother-ness, you still are elder brother-ish. Let me show you what the signs are. So you have to understand the two kinds of lostness. We're not the kind of church that only recognizes the one kind. First, let me just show you what they are. These are, I'll give you five. The first sign of elder brother lostness is that the elder brother is always angry about how God is arranging his life. See, notice verse 28, he became very angry. One of the signs of a moralistic spirit is a feeling that God owes you because you have lived such a good life, because you have tried so hard, because you've been just saying no, because you've been refraining from premarital sex and nobody else is that you can even know, that you even know about and you feel like, and now my life's going like this. You see, that's a sign, and that's what the woman understood, that's a sign that you believe that there's a limit to what God can do in your life. There's a limit to what he can ask of you because you've paid your dues. You see, if you feel you've been living right and you've tried your hardest, then what is God doing? then that's a sign that you're an elder brother or at least elder brother-ish that you really don't believe you're a sinner saved by grace, you really don't believe it. You don't. You believe it at one level but you don't believe it down. That's the first sign. You're always angry, really upset, all the time because God's just not arranging your life the way you ought to be. Interesting, younger brothers, partly because they feel like, well, I haven't lived the kind of good life that I should have, they don't get quite as upset, but older brothers, boy, they do. Things don't go right, I don't get the job, I don't get... that was going to be the one. Okay, so first of all, elder brothers are always grumpy about the way God's arranged life. Number one. Number two, elder brothers have joyless mechanical obedience. Notice he let his slip show. I know guys don't have slips. I mean, back then they did. They were wearing those big things. He says in verse 29, he says to his father, I've been slaving for you. All these years I've been slaving for you. Aha. He didn't just say, I've been obeying you. I've been listening to you. I've been slaving you, slaving for you. Obedience in the long run for an elder brother is a grind. This is the reason why some of the most moral and spiritual looking people for years and years and years can all of a sudden just freak and just sort of blow it, just explode and suddenly go do something completely different. And everybody says, what happened? Because there was no intimacy. See, illustration, one of my favorite illustrations on this is when I was in college, I wanted to get good grades so I could get into good grad school and make a lot of money and instead I went into the ministry. But, you know, I didn't know it then. When I was a sophomore, I took music appreciation. I had to listen to Mozart. So I really listened to Mozart. Well, I didn't really like Mozart, but I had to listen to Mozart to get a good grade. I had to get a good grade to get a good job. So I listened to Mozart in order to make money. And today, I spent a great deal of money just to listen to Mozart. Now, what happened? Why do I listen to Mozart? Because I like to think of myself as a culture person? No, I'm already snobby. Do I listen to Mozart because I want other people? No, I don't do it in front of anybody else. Do I listen to Mozart because I want to get good grades or going to make? No, obviously not. Why do I do it? He's an end in itself now. It's satisfying in itself. And the big elder brothers obey God because it's useful, because he's useful to them, because he'll answer their prayers. Christians obey God because he's beautiful, because it's an end in itself. You know, Elizabeth Elliott tells a story that she says people kept writing into her saying, where's that in the Bible? She says, it's not in the Bible. I got it from somewhere else. But a story about Jesus and his apostles. And one day, they were walking along and Jesus says, I want you to carry a stone for me. So Peter, being Peter, if you know Peter, looked around to find the smallest stone possible. He said, after all, there was no, you know, didn't say how big it had to be, you know. So he found the smallest stone possible, put it in his pocket. They walked along. And around lunchtime, Jesus says, get your stones out. And everybody got their stones out. And he waved his hand. They all became food and bread. And he says, now there's lunch. And Peter looked down at his mini muffin and said, all right, great lunch. And he popped it in. And it looked at everybody else. And so he said, oh, okay. So then Jesus says, okay, let's get up and go. But I, first of all, I want you to all carry a stone for me. And Peter said, ah, okay. Why didn't you tell me this to start with? I get it now. All right. So he gets this boulder. He puts it up and he's walking along for hours, getting hernias, you know, and all that sort of thing. But he's thinking, I can't wait for supper. And supper time, Jesus leads him to the riverbank. And he says, now everybody throw your stone in. Everybody threw their stone in. And he says, now follow me. And as he started walking away, they're all standing there looking at him. And he said, who are you carrying the stone for? And, uh, I mean, I know these are tied together. I know they're tied together, but elder brothers treat God as an instrument, as a means to an end. And as a result, their prayer life is filled with petition, but almost no adoration and almost no contemplation. Fill with petition, filled with you. Elder brothers pray when you're in trouble, pray when there's a need, but don't pray otherwise, or at least don't pray very fervently. There's no intimacy. Obedience is a grind for it. Secondly, thirdly, the third sign of elder brother lostness is a coldness to younger brother types. It's a coldness to younger brother types. Now, this is very important. And, and by the way, another link to this, elder, a mark of elder brother, uh, lostness is not only a coldness and disdain to other younger brother types, but actually evangelistic, uh, uh, impotence, basically. Here's why I said that every other, the other grids, the other grids say, I'm okay because I'm moral relativistic. I'm okay because I'm open-minded Christianity, something completely out different because Christianity says, who's in? The people who know they're not good. Who's out? The people who don't. Okay. rid of the other. Now, it doesn't mean there's no other. I mean, there's Christians and there's people who don't believe, and of course, but that's a small O. Because you know, if you understand the gospel, that the reasons those people out there, you see, are whatever they are, are being younger brothers, is the same reason you might have been an elder brother. Same reason. You wanted to control your own life. You wanted to base your life on other things besides God. You see? You just went about it in a different way. You don't look at anybody as an other, really. You can't. You can't do it. And you see, I'll tell you, elder brothers do not like cities. Elder brothers, if they're transferred to New York City, they can't wait to get out. Now, there are definitely reasons why some people just cannot handle it here. That are, okay, legitimate, temperamental, that sort of thing. But there's one, you better look at yourself spiritually if you can't stand all these different people. You know, these people with utterly different value systems, or people with utterly different approaches, or people that you've always heard about that you've always looked down your nose at. Elder brothers do not like cities. And because they don't like cities, because they disdain people, because they have all kinds of other capital O's. Do you see that? And as a result, they disdain younger brothers, they disdain the other, and it also means they feel superior to them. And the way an elder brother tries to share their faith is like this. I'm right, you're wrong, and I love telling you about it. And the way a Christian shares their faith is they don't have a shred of a sense that you are in any way morally superior. The only difference between you and them, you see, is what? Why are you... Or, for example, elder brothers look at people who don't believe, and they say, oh, that person will never become... It'll be a miracle if that person becomes a Christian. Oh, and you weren't? No, I wasn't, because I'm one of the good people. Ah, what's happening? You're an elder brother, or at least you're an elder brother-ish. Well, you would never look at anybody without hope. You would never look at anybody with superiority. Do you understand that? See? So, elder brothers... We've got to finish here. Elder brothers are filled with anger about the way God is dealing with their lives. Elder brothers are joyless and mechanical in their obedience. Elder brothers just have big O, other. They disdain younger brothers. They're evangelistically inept. Fourth sign. Elder brothers show a lack of assurance of the Father's love. They're not sure. Notice the elder brother says, you never threw me a party. He's not sure. And I'll tell you why. Because you... Dr. Lloyd-Jones has two questions he used to ask people. He used to say, are you a Christian? If they would say, of course. Of course I'm a Christian. Why do you ask? He says, if you're not shocked, if you're not surprised, if you're not amazed, if you're not saying, what a joke, me, a Christian, but it's true. If there's an accourceness to your profession of faith, then you really are probably an elder brother. But another thing he used to say is, Dr. Lloyd-Jones would say, are you a Christian? And if people say, well, I'm trying, they're elder brothers as well. I'm trying. I don't know if I'm living up. Of course you're never going to be assured. There's no assurance. There's no joy. There's no closeness. Okay? And lastly, this is real brief, but a fifth sign of elder brotherliness is an unforgiving judgmental spirit. You cannot keep a grudge against somebody unless you feel you would never do something like that. Right? If you're somebody who's habitually late and somebody's late for an appointment for you, you're actually so glad. I'm not the only one. You make me feel a little better. You know? Okay? If you are incredibly punctual and somebody's late, never again. If you cannot forgive somebody, it's because you think you are incapable of that. That's an elder brother spirit. Unforgiving spirit. Okay, now finally. If there's these two kinds of lostness, you realize what a different kind of church we would be if everybody in it understood this. If both younger brothers were getting rid of their younger brother-ness and the elder brothers were getting rid of their elder brother-ness, you see, it would attract younger brothers. It would win younger brothers. In a place like New York City, by the way, there's far more younger brothers out here than elder brothers. But, of course, we're a Christian church and therefore we have plenty of them because all Christian churches do. How different we'd be. But what's the solution? That is to say, if there are these two kinds of lostness, if they're both wrong, what is the gospel exactly? How do we get home? And here's quickly the answer. Number one, we need the father to come to us. Notice, in both cases, the father comes out to plead. The father comes out to kiss. One of the neatest things about the younger brother is before he speaks, he gets kissed. The boy confesses because he was kissed. Don't you think that would have made it a lot easier? You know, you're scared to death. Your father, you've ruined his life. You know, you've squandered a third of his fortune, or half of his fortune. But, you know, he must have been really scared. His father comes out, hugs him, kisses him. I'm sure that made it easier. And let me tell you, that's biblical theology. The first thing you've got to know is, if you want him, if you're convicted by this sermon, he's out there. He's out with you. He's kissing you. He's with you. He's opening your heart. That's the first thing. You know, we need him to seek us. We never seek him. If you want to seek him, if you're seeking him, if you're even thinking about seeking him, it's because he's seeking you. Number one. Number two. Secondly, we have to repent not just of our sins, as we've said, but of our righteousness. In other words, what really, really changes a life is not so much the amount of repentance. You know, you want to go back and get 2,000 sins that you can remember? Fine. You know, some of you are old enough to be able to do that. But it's not the amount of repentance. It's the depth of repentance. Repentance that really changes is recognizing that underneath all of your righteous deeds, what your motives really are. You're really trying to be your own Savior and Lord. See, when you start to be able, are able to repent of that, I'm trying to help you tonight. Surely some of you see the marks of elder brotherness in you. And if you see that, in spite of how good you are, you can start to repent of your self-righteousness. You can start to repent of your works righteousness. That's what begins to change you. That's what saves you to start with, and that's what gets you, that's what grows you every stage of the way. Finding new residues of it. Fourth, I said three. Third, you have to see the cost of the Father's salvation. You have to see the cost of the Father's salvation and rejoice in it. Now, what most people don't see in the parable, I have to say, this is a little bit arrogant to say this, because a lot of, you know, I got this from Dr. Edmund Clowney, who I think he's absolutely right on, but the vast majority of the commentators on parable, the prodigal son say, it didn't cost the Father anything to bring the boy home, so where's atonement? By the way, I read a Muslim expound this passage saying, see, you don't need atonement. God will receive you anyway. It doesn't matter what you do. I read a Muslim who says, the whole idea that you need a cross or atonement is stupid. God will just accept you if you come to him. On the basis of this parable. Interesting. But that's wrong. Why? Here's why. When the younger brother took all of his possessions, his part of the estate, and left and squandered it, completely squandered it, what did that mean? Now, 100% of the father's things are the elder brother's. Right? Every robe, every ring, every fatted calf, every single bit. And that means the only way that the younger brother can get back into the family is at the expense of the elder brother. The only way is at the cost of the elder brother. But the elder brother's sitting there, and he's very angry. Now, what is Jesus trying to get across? Here's what he's trying to get across. If you read all three of the parables, which he gives to the Pharisees, the first parable, there's a lost sheep, and the shepherd goes out and finds him. The second parable, there's a lost coin, and the woman goes out and finds him. In the third parable, there's a lost boy, and nobody goes out. Instead, you have this grumpy elder brother. What is Jesus trying to say? He's putting a mirror up to the Pharisees. He's trying to say, if you were the elder brother, realize what would happen? But what he's actually trying to say is, I am the true shepherd. Therefore, I am the true elder brother. Dr. Clowney, Ed Clowney, it's a true story, by the way, of a man who, during the Vietnam War, he had a brother who was lost in action, never found him. But what he did was, he came to Vietnam and just went into enemy territory looking for his brother. And the Viet Cong understood, when they figured out what he was doing, they sent the word out. This is a true story. Don't touch him. They had such admiration for this man who was willing to go into danger for his brother. They had admiration for that kind of family loyalty. And in fact, the Viet Cong just called him the brother, the searching brother. Do you know that we have an elder brother who absolutely, exactly what, you remember when the father comes out and says to the elder brother, everything I have is yours? We have an elder brother, truly, who obeyed the father perfectly. And therefore, everything he had, everything the father had was his. But he was willing to come to earth. He was willing to seek us out. And on the cross, he was stripped so we could wear his robe of righteousness. me? He lost the Father so we could have the Father, you see. In other words, there is an incredible cost to bring this young man back in. But it's not the Father exactly, if you understand. It's the elder brother. We have the true elder brother. We have the elder brother who went out and got us and brought us back on his shoulders rejoicing like the shepherd. And gave us his robe and his ring and his fatted calf. We will never stop being elder brothers until we rejoice in the work of our true elder brother. To the degree you see that and rejoice in it, you will be able to get that elder brotherness out of your own life. Let's pray. Father, we thank you for giving us a picture. That everything the world ever told us about how to find you is wrong. And we see how very much the church needs to be renewed by understanding that the gospel is something that is not just opposed to irreligion but religion. Not just opposed to immorality but self-righteous morality. That the gospel creates a whole new identity. That the gospel creates a whole new attitude toward the world and everybody around us. The gospel is utterly transforming. And we pray that you would help us as a church to realize that and become a community like that. It's not going to be what people expect. Not people either, neither younger brothers nor elder brothers will understand us. But we pray that you'd make us something else. And we thank you that it's possible to have these things as we study your word and your Holy Spirit enlightens us. We pray, Lord, that this weekend, this conference, we can think out the implications of that. What it means to be gospel-transformed people living life here in the city. Not as elder brothers or younger brothers, but as images of our true elder brother, Jesus Christ. In his name we pray, amen.
