TITLE: Introduction to the Ten Commandments
SCRIPTURE: Deuteronomy 4:8–14
TOPICS: The Ten Commandments Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Ten Commandments 1989
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/introduction-to-the-ten-commandments/

============================================================

As this body of laws I am setting before you today. Only be careful and watch yourselves closely, so that you do not forget the things your eyes have seen or let them slip from your heart as long as you live. Teach them to your children and to their children after them. Remember the day you stood before the Lord your God at work, when he said to me, Assemble the people before me to hear my words, so that they may learn to prepare me as long as they live in the land and may teach them to their children. You came near and stood at the foot of the mountain, while it blazed the fire to the very heavens with black clouds and deep darkness. Then the Lord spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words that saw no form. There was only a voice. He declared to you his covenant with ten commandments, which he commanded you to follow, and then wrote them on two stone tablets. And the Lord directed me at that time to teach you the decrees and the laws you are to follow in the land that you are crossing the Jordan to possess. This is the word of the Lord. I was visiting with my parents this summer, and my mother had discovered a junior high school yearbook. And so there I was, paging through all the faces and names of my ninth grade classmates. And it is a very odd experience. My 11-year-old son David came up and asked me what this was. I told him what it was my junior high school yearbook. And so he looked at it, and with complete seriousness he says, Hmm, I guess most of these people are dead now. And help me to understand and reflect how I faltered his scars and disdainced the old. My keyboard, my computer keyboard, broke down. It was this week. After six years of giving me no trouble, and just to let you know how out of step I am with our culture, I was infuriated. Six years, I said. It's only six years old. And I looked at me and said, A keyboard? Six years? Boy, this is from the Ice Age. I don't think it's a dinosaur. You should be so glad if your keyboard lasted six years. I mean, it's incredible. College professors will not use a textbook that's more than four years old. Even the ones that are teaching on ancient history won't use on ancient, ancient history. Because you see, who wants something that's old? Who dares to propose that ten laws for human behavior, ten commandments, that were written over 3,000 years ago should be the linchpin of our lives and the basis for our civilization? Who dares to make a statement like that? Let me tell you who does. The Church of Jesus Christ, because it was Jesus Christ that said, Heaven and earth may pass away, but not a jock or a till of the law of God may pass away so that all is fulfilled. Now, what he was saying was that the law of God, the word of God, is greater than heaven and earth. Now, that's something. The mountains themselves are like scaffolding. They're fluff compared to the law. And the implication is that our lives, our lives scaffolding, are no more than the fluff unless the law of God with all its greatness comes in and is written on our hearts. Now, let me give you an example of what I mean on the inside cover here, I think, I hope, I hope it's here, of the bulletin. I have an interesting quotation by or from Eugene O'Neill. He's quoted in Time Magazine, November 7, 1988. He says, I'm fed the teeth with the damn theater. Probably the first time you've heard that word in a Presbyterian church or any church, but I want you to realize I'm a groundbreaking church. The game isn't worth a candle. If I got any real spiritual satisfaction out of success in the theater, it might compensate. But I don't. Success is flat. It's as flat, spiritually speaking, as failure. After the unprecedented critical acclaim to mourning becomes a lecture, I was in bed nearly a week, overcome by the profoundest gloom and nervous exhaustion. Now, this is a scary thing to read because I dare say that that keeps many of us going is our dreams. New York, I keep reading this. New York is great because there's so many people here, after a dream, they're saying to themselves, it's tough to live here, it's expensive to live here, it's a rough life, but I might be able to make it in that area that I'm trying to make it in, I might be able to bring to fulfillment the dream that I came here with. That's what keeps us going, that's what keeps this city great, supposedly. But listen, look, here's a man that got far closer to his dream than probably any of us in this room ever will. He reached the pinnacle of success, the greatest critical of playing, and he was empty. Now, there's only one possible explanation for that, and I'm going to say it twice. That the human soul is so great that even this kind of achievement cannot satisfy it. Huh? I mean, in a way, that's a great thing and also a scary thing. The human soul is so great that even this kind of achievement cannot satisfy it. And if this is all you give it, and a lot of you are saying, oh, I never even thought I did that, but if that's all you give it, your soul will shrivel up. Because the soul of a human being is meant to be infused with the very character of God, the moral grandeur and glory of which is outlined in the Ten Commandments. They talk about integrity, you see, and nobility, and courage, and love, and truth, and peace. I knew a man, an English teacher, several years ago, who just came into his English class, which was cool, by the way, of a 15-year-old boy and girl, and all he did was write up on the board a series of words, and he just waited, he didn't say anything, he just waited to see the reaction, and this was the series, nobility, chastity, valor, courtesy, virtue, splendor, purity, and grace. Now what do you think happened? Just those words up there, without any comment, began to make all those kids so uncomfortable they began to smear. Because you see, in our culture those things are silly, those things are laughable, but I'll tell you what, what's not laughable in this culture? Achievement! But when the soul is full of achievement, and is absolutely devoid of those things, the soul shrivels up and dies, because it's too great for just achievement. That's the thesis of this passage, that's the thesis of the Bible. It's what it says here in verse 1, Hear now, O Israel, the decrees and laws I'm about to teach you, follow them so that you what? Follow them so that you might live. If you really want to live, the only thing that will come into your life to be your real life is the righteousness of God. That's all. And not all the achievement, not all the critical plan, not all the plaques with your name on Time Square, not all the yachts, Harvard at the World Trade Center for $500,000 a year, none of that, as incredible as that is, if that's all that comes into the soul, it shrivels up and dies, the soul is too great. Now, somebody says, wait a minute, this is very exciting, except you're bringing me to the Ten Commandments, and I want you to know, I hear somebody say, that I've been there, and they swamp me. They don't make me feel great, they don't make me great. What happens is, I just begin to feel guilty when I get into the Ten Commandments. There are times in my life in which I try very hard to live, according to them, and I always feel swamped, I always feel oppressed, I always feel broken. The answer is this, the Ten Commandments are fairly well known, and I can thank God for that. But a lot of people just know them, and they don't understand everything the Bible says about the law. They don't understand the context the Bible puts the law in. And as a result, people are getting crushed, and they're crashing on the Ten Commandments, like rocks, you see, in a harbor. But, there's two, no, there's three basic misunderstandings that we have to remedy, and they're remedied by this passage. And let me just very, very briefly name each one of those three. If you can get them straight, the law of God no longer cracks you, it no longer crushes you, but it becomes high steel. You see, if you watch a skyscraper being built, they have to build steel, girders, light up, they have to create a framework on which they can hang a great skyscraper. And the law of God alone is the high skyscraper. etc. So let's listen to one of those misunderstandings. Listen carefully, because the Bible says these words are your life. So let me listen. Listen for your life. Number one, this text tells us the first misunderstanding is people don't understand that the motive of obedience to the law is intimacy with God. Look, verse 10. In verse 10, we're told this. Remember the day you stood before the Lord your God at Corinth, when he said to me, Assemble the people before me to hear my words, so that they may learn to revere me, as long as they live in the land. Now, this is a recollection of the fact that the law of God was not given to the children of Israel and Egypt, wasn't it? The law of God was not given to the children of Israel and Egypt. It was after God had brought them out and delivered them, and put them in front of himself on the mountain. And when he said, I want you to relate to me, I want you to revere me, I want you to know me as your king, then he gave you the law. Do you realize how important that is? That sequence. You see, many people believe that the law of God is like the law of the land. The law of the land is basically a trade-off. We have to restrict our personal freedom as a necessary evil that got ordered. And a lot of times people look at the law of God like that, but that's silly. The government has to have you restrict your personal freedom, if it's going to even survive. God doesn't need a thing from us. So what is the purpose of the law? The word Torah, I'm sure many of you have heard, which is the basic biblical human word for the law, is a word that means instruction between a father and a son. Instruction. And the motive of instruction is to bring that son to maturity for a relationship of intimacy. You see, listen. Did God come to the children of Israel in Egypt and say, here's the law, obey it and I'll save you. I'll deliver you. And if you obey enough, I'll pull you out. No. God, with his love, he set his love on the children of Israel and he pulled them out and he delivered them. And then he sat down with them and said, now, because I want to be your God and I want you to be my people. Because I want you to grow in and your life blossom, you see. Because I want you to be everything you're designed to be. Because I want to have a life, a relationship of intimacy. Here's the law of God. Don't you see? There are two different motives. And ultimately two. With which you can afferce the law of God. And the one motive goes like this. Listen, I see the law of God. I want to obey it so that he will hear my prayer. So that he will accept me. So that he will help me. So that I know that I'm going to heaven. I will use the law of God as a ladder to heaven. That's the one way. And the other way is to say, because I receive him as Savior. Because he has pardoned me out of his sheer grace. It's not an event that I have ever done or should or can do. Because he has forgiven my sins for Jesus Christ death on my cross. Now, I want to become like him. I want to please this great one. This great God who's done this for me. And I want to live a life of intimacy with him. Now, friends, those are not two different attitudes. And you see, the first approach that says, I'm going to obey the law in order to get God's love and acceptance. There's only two possible results of that. One is, you're crushed by the law. You try and you try and you hate it and you try again and you hate it. You hate yourself and you begin to hate the Bible and you begin to hate the church. The next thing you know, you're a fundamentalist and honest. And the only other possible result of that first approach is to become smug and self-righteous because you think you're really up to your standards. You know, you can be crushed or you'll be smug and there's no other alternative. But if you take it the proper way, the way it says, I have saved you now. Opain the law so that we can be friends. So that we can have a personal relationship. That transforms. It doesn't crush. It doesn't pardon. It doesn't smug it by. It transforms. Don't you see, friends, the genius of the Christian religion is that God is a person that you can know personally. Now, friends, with the way that you relate to an impersonal object is very simple. Impersonal objects make no claims on you. They make no demands, do they? It's not their nature to. You just express yourself for them near your convenience. After the latest YouTube channel, Iuin Thank you. But that's not the way it should be. Persons have claims. Persons make demands. In other words, there is no such thing as a personal relationship without commands. Only if you're in love, you don't feel like you're commands. You know, when you're deeply in love, you know, I can remember the first way of calling into love. That when you call to love, you don't even wait. You don't even send the love phone. You don't say, hey, listen, is there anything you want me to do for you? You don't even wait for the love person to tell you. You start to say, I'll bet you this would please her. I'll bet you that would please her. I'll bet you she really wants that. Those things are claims. Now let's face it, as you get out of the marriage, those things have to be articulated. Because that first blush, that makes you feel like, oh, I have no problem treating this person as a person. Whereas often, the real sin of our lives comes out. You see, we use each other. We don't want people to make claims. But in any real personal relationship, there are claims, there are demands, there are commands. And if you have a personal relationship with God, you see, the greater the person, the greater those claims are. You know that. There are certain people that you will drop everything for. You will mess up your schedule if they will give you an audience. Right? The greater the person, the greater the demands of the relationship. And if you love that person and you want a relationship, that's okay. You're very happy to screw up your schedule if that person will just let you have a talk with them. So how much greater the great God, who says, this is the way that you can relate to me. Don't you see, in John chapter 14, verse, in John chapter 14, 21 and 22, Jesus says, He who has my word and obeys my word, my Father and I will come to him, and we will manifest ourselves in him. What a promise. If you want God to be real to you, if you want to know him personally, there it is. Obey. And that's your motive. And by the way, friends, the test of an obedient person is that you're a very personal person. I know people that are very, very proud of their morality, but nobody wants to go and share a problem with them. Nobody wants to enter into a personal relationship with them. And that person who's kidding him murders them. Because the mark of someone who really is obedient, out of a proper motive, of intimacy with God, becomes the most personal of all people. The most approachable. Second, misunderstand. The first one is the motive. The motive of obedience is intimacy with God. Not trying to get yourself saved. Secondly, the actual, excuse me, the actual result of obedience is always freedom, not condemnation. Because, as it says right here in verse 1, it says, obey the law, God, that you might live, and you might possess the land. I know that conventional wisdom says freedom is the absence of discipline. But listen, when I listen to people play the piano or play the organ, or I watch people dance. Sometimes they get jealous. And I say, oh, if only I had the ability to do that. How freeing it would be to be able, when you have these deep feelings in you, to be able to sing, or be able to dance, or be able to express myself like that. How liberating it is. Except ask those people who have got those abilities, and who are experiencing that freedom, now they're out there. They're out there after what? Years and years of scales. And deep knee bends. Freedom always comes. At the end of the discipline, more than that, freedom also always comes as a result of honoring your design. You know, here's a bird that says, you know, when you look at a bird, you see the bird flying around, and you say, how free. But what if the bird says, I'm not free, because I do not know how to do high dives. And I want to be able to swim around like a fish. And of course, if a bird does that, the bird doesn't become more free, the bird loses its freedom. Because it's not built to hide out. If the fish is sitting in the aquarium, sitting here, you know, watching TV with everybody else in the family, like he always does. And he says, I'm not free, because I want to sit on a circle like everybody else. And if for some reason he's able to flip himself on the circle, we'll get you more free. What about your car? Everybody loves the open road. American commercials are just full of the open road, you know, getting in a car and going on the open road. It's also true, no effects of the maintenance. But the maintenance manual, from the creator of the car, says, obey this manual. manual, and if you don't obey the manual, if you don't change the road properly, if you don't do everything right, nobody's going to come to sign a final, nobody's going to come and say, $50 fine for not obeying the owner's manual, no, because frankly, you will be punishing yourself, because to move against the owner's manual, it's to move against your own investment, the word of God is your owner's manual, how can you discover your design, the bird, the fish, the car, you check the owner's manual, it's pretty obvious, but you see, a human being is a very complex creature, how can you check the owner's manual, how can you know, a lot of people say, the only person who knows what they really want, you have to look in your own car, you can't let some preacher tell you, if you can't let some book done, you have to know yourself, how so excited can you be, don't you remember, you probably knew what you wanted 10 years ago, and you are all wrong, but you're sure you know what it is now, and we talked about this last week, don't we, 10 years from now, you're going to look back and say, I still didn't know what, friends, you don't know, you think that you know now, but the only way to know is to ask the creator, is to ask the designer, and anyone who obeys the design of the creator experiences is an explosion of freedom and power, you see, like the bird who finally obeys his own design, like the fish, who obeys his design when he swims, you see, and like you, when you obey the design of the automator, you have the open road and the wind in your face, you see, as long as you submit to discipline and the design of the creator, friends, that is the fact, it's not just true of you, it's true of all communities, all communities, you know, one of the most interesting things about the history, our social history, is to see how slavery in the Western world was overturned. One of my friends, who is now dead of cancer, but he was a marvelous, brilliant young historian, who studied at Yale, got a doctorate there and was teaching in college, he did his doctorate dissertation on the roots of the abolition movement, and one thing that Jim Tillman was fascinating is, he says, standing here in the 20th century, we can't imagine why anybody ever counted slavery. But he says, you have to realize that for thousands and thousands and thousands of years, everybody took slavery for granted. If you conquered another person, you stuck it in chains, and that was it. He says, it's hard for us to understand, but what the scholars have got to try to figure out is why, when after thousands of years of everyone taking slavery absolutely for granted, anybody ever got into them in their heads, it was wrong. Where did that idea come from? And Jim said, let's look at history. Who knocked it out in the British Empire? William Wilberforce and the Clapham said, who knocked it out in this country? The abolitionists, and who were they? The Quakers? The Methodists? People who read the commandments? Oh yes, there were plenty of Christians on the wrong side in those battles. But the real question is, where did the idea come from? Where did freedom come from? In this one small area of society, it came when somebody said, are we obeying the owner's name? Last time, the first misunderstanding is the right motive of obedience is always in a mistake. The second misunderstanding is that the right motive has got to be freedom. Obedience does not bring slavery. Obedience does not bring a sense of being bound, but a sense of freedom. The third misunderstanding is that obedience is about the external believers. When the Bible says, obedience is about the heart. Look, you know, here in verse 9, this is the last thing we can say. Only be careful and watch yourselves closely so that you do not forget the things your eyes have seen or let them slip from your heart as long as you live. The whole purpose of the law is to get it in your heart. Jeremiah 31, 33, God says, here's the new covenant that I'm going to give you in the last days. I'll write the law of God in your heart. That means that Christian obedience is not a matter of taking this external series of regulation and just twisting it and turning yourself to it, even though it looks like it's going to really cut into your tongue. Instead, the Bible says that one person receives Christ as Savior, the Spirit, bit by bit, stage by stage, writes the Word of God, writes the laws on your heart so that you begin to develop, what? The integrity that the Eighth Commandment talks about, the purity that the Seventh Commandment talks about, the generosity, the love, the come inside. It's a process of growth. It's not anything like what most people seem to think it is. And that's the final thing. And actually, even though I said that I don't expect everybody to come here and preach twice on Sunday, our evening service all during the fall will have to do with the process of growth. Because, you see, obedience, the purpose of obedience is to get into your heart. God cares about who you are when nobody's looking. Who you are in your heart. When no one is telling you what you have to think. When nothing is taking your thoughts and forcing you to think, where did your thoughts go? And only the Spirit of God working your life can do that. And that can only happen when you receive Jesus Christ as Savior, and in comes the Holy Spirit in your life. Listen. We have to close. Psalm 1. You don't have to turn to it. I'll just tell you basically what it says. Psalm 1 talks about the God of the man. And what it says about the God of the man is this. It doesn't say that the mark of the God of the man is that he prays day and night. Though he may even know it. The mark of the God of the man, according to Psalm 1, is not that he goes to church day and night. On Sunday. Even though some of them do. The mark of the God of the man is not that he's outside on the streets, He's talking to people about Jesus day and night. Though that's a wonderful thing to do. Psalm 1 says, The mark of the God of the man is that his delight is in the law of God, and upon it he meditates day and night. He loves it. He loves to have God tell him what to do. Do you like that? The answer to that question, do you like that? Is there a delight in your life for the law of God? The answer to that question will tell you the state of your soul. It will tell you whether you're a religion that sees the law as a judgery or not. We're going to take a moment of silence to reflect on this. Some of you need to recognize that the reason there's not reality in your life, the reality that Jesus talked about in John 14, is that you are not being obedient. And you need to look your life over and say, Lord, the next few weeks I want you to point out to me in those areas where I'm committing things I shouldn't, or where I'm omitting things that I should. Because lack of regality, lack of personal relationship, is not mysterious. It comes from obedience of my Holy Spirit. And I hope that there are some folks here that recognize that we talked about as two different religions. The attitude toward the law that says, this is the way in which I'm going to get God to love me. And the attitude toward the law that says, God already loves me through Jesus Christ. This is the way in which I am going to love me back. Perhaps some of you recognize that you are the former religion. It's not Christianity. You need to come to the place, and you can do it this morning, where you say, Lord Jesus Christ, I've been using the law again, and as I now see, I have to be saved in a completely different way. The law of God is there to swamp you, Frank. Yes. Galatians 3 says, it's a schoolmaster to lead you in Christ. Let the law of God swamp you so that you see that you'll never get to heaven that way. In fact, if you feel swamped, and if you feel frustrated because you don't see your life changing, that's good. That's the schoolmaster doing its work. Now turn to the Lord Jesus and say, I can be saved only by receiving you as Savior, strictly on the basis of your work. We didn't have printed a prayer in the bulletin for the youth, if you want to make that commitment to this morning. Let's take time to some sign of the book on how we can apply this teaching to our hearts, and then I'll close in prayer. I'll close in prayer. Thank you. Thank you. Our Father, forgive us for thinking. law is a way to get to heaven. Forgive us for thinking that your law is just a way of killing our joy. Forgive us for thinking that your law is just a lot of busy work. Help us to see that your law is a way of personally relating to you. Help us to see that your law is a way of finding out who you really are and obeying the laws of our own design and experiencing a new freedom and transformation of character with the help of your Holy Spirit. And Father, if there's anyone here that recognizes that they have trusted in their own efforts and not in your Son, I pray that they might pray this very prayer. Lord, I have run from your rest and rebelled from the very love that would free me. Now I no longer trust in my own efforts and law keeping, but I receive praise to Savior and rely on His perfect right on my behalf, taking me to do something.
