TITLE: Is Diversity Possible? E Pluribus Unum (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Race
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/is-diversity-possible-e-pluribus-unum-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Well, now, usually after we do one of these things, we always, on Monday, the staff gets together and says, you know, what did we do? What was good? What was bad? And I know what everybody's going to say. They're going to say, well, the music was so good, it wasn't enough of it. And everybody's going to go away thinking, we had too much of that white guy that couldn't sing. Too little of those ones that could. Yeah, a stand would be a nice thought. Thank you very much. You know, what does black gospel music and Bach have in common? Anything? Doesn't seem like a lot. Yet the fact of the matter is, they both grow out of the same root. They have everything really in common, for anybody who really looks to understand them. Our topic for tonight is taken off of our money. E pluribus unum. Maybe unum. I'm not a Latinist, I'm afraid. Is it possible to have a culturally diverse country and yet bring a unified country? Is it possible to have unity out of diversity? I think in light of, in light of the bombing in Oklahoma City, the question really takes on a poignancy, does it not? The very idea of the United States was always kind of audacious. It was always audacious to say, we're going to have a country. I guess we were certainly the first major effort at this. If there was any other efforts, I don't know. We're the first effort of this. We're going to have a country that's not based on common blood. It's not based on racial homogeneity. It's not based on racial unity. It's going to be based on, it's going to be a unity based on common principles, common respect for each other. We're going to bring a unity out of diversity. That's always been an incredibly audacious and really wonderful goal. But in the first couple hundred years of our existence, we only have been successful at getting a certain number of European nationalities to kind of forget their past differences and sort of homogenize. But when it comes to actually bringing unity out of diversity, America has a very long way to go. Not only did we never, ever learn how to get white and black to live together, but now as the song goes, we have red and yellow, black and white. Now as the song goes, we have Latinos and Africans and Anglos and Asians. And how is America going to bring unity out of diversity now? And every day, I don't know if there's any of you, every day for the last couple of weeks, there's a picture of the bombed out federal building somewhere that you see. It's on TV, it's in the papers, in the magazines. And you see it and it makes the question even more poignant because even though there hasn't been a lot of talk about this, the network of fairly deranged and violent people that spawned the Oklahoma City bombing were very agitated and upset about a number of things. But one of the things they're upset about is they're upset about the growing diversity of the country. They're upset about the loss of power and influence that they see for white people. That's part of this. When you see that bombed out building, one of the questions, I know a lot of people say, the question is why? How could somebody be this cruel? Well, maybe the question underneath that picture should be, will we ever be able to live together? How can we live together? Now the question, if you want to make e pluribus unum a question mark, if you want to make it a question, here's the question. What has to happen to our hearts? What has to happen to the citizenry as a whole? What kind of convictions, what kind of view of the world has to take root in our hearts so that we develop a society in which people show respect and justice toward those with whom we deeply differ? What kind of heart do I have to have? What kind of heart do you have to have? What kind of heart do we have to have that enables us to treat with respect and justice people who are very different from us? What has to happen? See, we're not here tonight to talk about government policies. I'm not qualified to lead a discussion like that, and I know you're going to run into clergy that think they are. They're not. If you run into somebody who's, you know, if you run into clerical people, clerics, you know, ordained ministers who want to lead discussions on that, they're over their head. But this is a place to do public moral reasoning. question. Regardless of all the laws, regardless of government policies, the only way we're going to live together, the only way we're going to bring unity out of diversity, is if there are moral convictions of some kind, convictions of conscience, that sink deep into the hearts of the majority of the citizens of this country, those convictions enabling us to treat people who are very different than us with respect and justice. What would those convictions be? How can we develop convictions like that? You see, there's a, you know, in the famous I Have a Dream speech, there's a place where Martin Luther King says, I have a dream, most of us have heard this part, that one day on the red, no, not the, not the, I've got, there's a Martin Luther King quote in the front of the bulletin, that's not the one I'm talking about right now. I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down at the table of brotherhood. But now listen, a little later in the paragraph he says, with this faith, we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood. With this faith, we will be able to transform the jangling discords of our nation. With what faith? Now see, what he's saying is, we're never going to get the jangling discords of our nation together unless there is some common conviction. There are some common convictions. There's something that sinks into our hearts that enables us to treat people who are very different from us with respect and justice. What are those things? I'm going to suggest, I'm going to make a proposal tonight. I'm going to say that we have to recognize the real roots of racism and bigotry first. And then I'm going to suggest that there really is an antidote to the disease of racism and bigotry. It has to be applied to the heart. Otherwise, let me tell you, the laws and the government policies that promote racial justice are good laws. They're valid laws. They're necessary laws. But they're only going to create more hostility unless they're accompanied by a change of heart in the citizenry. So the only way we're going to develop that faith that Martin Luther King was talking about, the only way we're going to develop those common convictions, I think, is to understand the roots of racism and then the roots of the disease and then to apply a certain antidote to that disease, a certain medicine to that disease. Let me show you what I think it is. And then, of course, as I mentioned at the top, the way we work is when I'm done with this talk, we'll have a musical interlude and then we'll conclude and I will come and stand right here and anyone who wants to continue with the question and answer time. We have open mics down here. We will continue. We give people a chance, if they wish, to leave for people whose schedules don't allow them to stay. But at the end of my time, there's a lot of opportunity to talk back. So think, if there's anything I say that confuses you, upsets you, intrigues you, bothers you, you can stick around and talk back to me. Now, first of all, we'll never deal with racism and bigotry unless we understand the roots of it. You can't, no doctor can deal with a disease unless the doctor knows the etiology, the roots. What's the cause of the disease? Is it bacterial? Is it viral? And so on. There's no way you can talk about getting rid or dealing with racism and bigotry in a society unless we can agree on what the roots are. What causes racism? What makes people racist? That's so basic and yet I never, I almost never hear people make much discussion of it. The advertisers give you some ideas. Did you see last year an awful lot of advertisements of little black, brown, red and yellow, black and white babies together and then underneath the caption it said what? Remember? No one's born a racist. Well, okay, that's a theory. Nobody's born a racist. Well, then where does it come from? Let me give you three possible answers. Once you ask, where's racism and bigotry come from? I think there's only three answers that are possible. The first answer is, it's inevitable because it's part of evolution. The first answer is that there really isn't anything right or wrong about racism. It's just, it just is. It's inevitable because look what we have here. Evolution, the survival of the fittest, natural selection. The only way that we know human beings operate is we're part of this great evolutionary process and we're part of nature and you look at nature and you'll see the strong continually devouring the weak. You'll see animals turn. You'll see animals turn. different and they peck them to death. That's the way nature is. In nature you have the strong devouring the weak, the survival of the fittest, that's it. And this view says racism is part of that. It is inevitable. It is natural. It is unavoidable. In fact, that view says also there's no way that you'll ever overcome it. Nor should you. Who's to say it's wrong? It just is. That's the first view. Maybe some of you, maybe it's not a popular view because people don't like to say that and yet that's one of the most important possible answers to the question of racism. There's a lot of people on the extreme right that actually use that as a kind of justification. But we'll get back to it. Secondly, now the second view is it's not something that's natural. It is the result, it is the product of certain kinds of people. We're not all racist. You see the little sign says we're not born racist. That's what the poster says. We're not born racist. Some of us are racist, but how do we get there? And the second view is that racism is the product of some groups of people or some kinds of people. We're not all that way. It comes from certain people. Now, for example, this week's New Yorker tries to figure out why Hitler was Hitler. Anybody seen that? I haven't read the whole thing through, but what they're trying to say is what made Hitler into the genocidal racial maniac that he was. And they try to figure it out. They say, well, of course, it couldn't be. It couldn't be that we're all like that. Okay. This must racism and bigotry and genocide only comes from a certain kind of person. So why? And the theory is, was he abused as a child? That's one possibility. Another part of the theory is that I saw one thing as I was reading through the article was that he was, he was missing one of his testicles. And as a result of that, he had a tremendous amount of, you know, he needed to defend himself. He, it was an ego defense mechanism and so on. Now this, a lot of people say that. Look at the people who did the bombing. Who are they? Well, ask the New York Post and they will say, wackos of hate. You see, that's, that's who did it. Strange people. They might have been abused as children. Maybe they only have one testicle. I mean, they're odd people. Now, let's keep going with this. U.S. News and World Report said that when the GIs started liberating the death camps and saw what the Nazis had done to the Jews, they looked at the German guards that were still there and they said, if you are capable, if you were capable of doing this, you must be subhumans. I could never do this. Real human beings could never do this. And you know what they started doing? The U.S. News and World Report gave a little report on this, eyewitness accounts. The GIs now admit, 50 years later, they started bludgeoning the guards to death. They started shooting them. They just killed them, wiped them out. No court, no trial. Why? Because they felt these must be subhuman people. Anybody who's capable of this kind of racism must be terrible. So it's the same. It's a variation on this second view. See, the first view is it's inevitable. It's evolutionary. The second view is we're not all racist. Nobody's born a racist. Only certain twisted, messed up people are racists. Certain groups. Now, I'm going to give you another variation. I'm treading very carefully. This is a very, very explosive topic. So I'll just try to tread carefully. And if you feel like I've stepped over someplace later on, you have a chance to talk about it. I was reading about a debate between two black men. And the one man said to the other, he said, I'm a Christian and I believe all human beings are sinners. Therefore, I believe that if black people, if the African race had had the economic superiority and the technological superiority, we would have oppressed the whites. And the other man who happened at the time to be senior editor of Ebony magazine said, impossible. White people are like that. Black people would never do that. Now, that's pretty close to the Americans looking at the Germans and saying, you may be capable of this sort of genocide, but not me. Our race isn't your race is. There's certain groups of people that are capable of racism. There's certain troubled people that are capable of racism. Another variation on this is that men are capable of it. And I've heard some people say, well, it's angry white males that are doing this. Women would not be so violent. They wouldn't be so proud. They wouldn't be so oppressive. Now, all of these are variations on the second view. The second view is nobody's born around. the poster. Only some sick, twisted people are. Certain groups, certain types, certain cultures, maybe a certain gender, maybe people who have had certain family backgrounds. The third view, you see, the first view says it's natural to everybody and it's okay. Can't do anything about it. There is no right and wrong, it just is. Marquis de Sade, whatever is, is right. Because this is all we have. We have nature, we have evolution, who's to say what's wrong and right. The second view is that it's unnatural, but it's also not universal. And the third view is that it is absolutely universal, but unnatural. You see that? First view, universal and natural. Second view, non-universal and unnatural. The third view, it's universal but unnatural. The third view says that racism and bigotry is intrinsic to the heart. It's part of the way the heart operates. There is a moral disorder at the roots of every human being's heart. It's a selfishness. It's a pride. It's a kind of superiority. It's a desire to see yourself as superior to people who are different, not just race, but people who are different age, people who are different gender, people who are different region, people who are what the desire to see yourself as superior. And some conditions bring that out and make it very, very virulent. And some situations suppress it and make it more subtle. But it's always there. Which of these three views is right? I don't think there's any other views. Oh, if you can think of any other views, they're subheadings. They're in there. They're variations. Which of the three views is right? Let me reject the first two and bring you to the last one. And unless you want to have some idea about the roots of racism, you can't deal with it. You see, the third view says you need moral regeneration. The third view says it's important to have laws, but let me tell you, laws and curricula in school is not going to get at this. This is much deeper than just race. This is much deeper. This goes to the roots of our hearts. And unless there's some kind of spiritual and moral regeneration, you're never going to get to the roots of racism. Now, which of these three is right? Let me eliminate the first two. I'm going to give you a couple of minutes on this. The first view says there is no God. There really is no right and wrong. All we've got is nature. All we've got is we got evolution. That's it. And therefore, you can wring your hands about racism and you can say, gee, kind of what a shame. But that's the way it is. In fact, says this view, who's to say, what is right and wrong anyway? Now, let me point out that this view is both specious and dangerous. You say, well, it's obvious. Well, now wait. Now look. In the New York Times magazine two weeks ago, it was April 9th. Is that two weeks? No, it's more than that. Four weeks ago. Interesting article about a leading anthropologist, very famous. I'd never heard of him. I don't know much about anthropology, but very famous anthropologist named Clifford Geertz. And he's up in years now, but it talks about how he brought about a real revolution in the whole field of anthropology and therefore sociology as well. This is what he said. This is what the article said. It said, when Geertz started in anthropology in the 1950s, it was commonly assumed in the social sciences that the goal or the, yeah, the goal of the social sciences was to find the basic truths about human nature that were transcultural truths. In other words, let's look at all the cultures, let's look at all the different societies, but what do they all have in common? What is really human? What makes a human being human? And let's find out what those transcultural truths are, and then we'll be able to figure out, in a sense, we'll have a science of society. We'll try to be able, we'll use the findings that we get from social science, and we will be able to eliminate racism. We'll be able to eliminate crime. Maybe we'll be able to eliminate poverty. That was the idea. And Clifford Geertz led a movement, which of course now is ascendant, and as soon as I talk, as soon as I paraphrase it, you'll see, of course, this is the way people think now. He says, you know what? There is no transcultural truths about human beings. Everything is relative. There's no way to know what's right and wrong. What he said was, science can only tell you what is, not what ought to be. If there's no God, if there's no eternal world, if there's no right, if there's no heaven and transcendent moral order that's transcultural. There's no transcendent moral order that we all have to abide by. Every culture is different. Every culture has rights and wrongs. They're all socially constructed, so there's no way to say what is right and wrong. Now, you know what the implications of that is? See, that is certainly the reigning way of looking not only at things in anthropology, but in almost all the sciences today and all the academic fields. But then the article points out what problems that creates. For example, this man says, you know how silly it is that there's this movement of people who's so upset with a particular practice that's very widespread in Africa. And that practice is the practice of female mutilation of the genitalia. It's very common in Africa to mutilate the female genitalia so they do not have sexual pleasure. That's just the custom. And of course, it's a euphemism, it's called female circumcision. And maybe some of you have read articles about how people are saying this is terrible, this is wrong, this is unjust. What does Clifford Geert say? He says, who's to say that's unjust? You may wring your hands over it, but if there's no transcendent moral order that we all have to bow to, on what basis do you go to some other culture and say it's wrong to oppress women? On what basis, he says? He says, well, you know, you hate to be such a relativist, but you say that's where we are. Do you understand what's going on here? Here, let me give you the racism proof of God. If there's no God, says these folks, there can't be anything wrong with racism. If there's no God, there can't be anything wrong with sexism. Why? Where do you get your standard? How dare you tell some other culture that this is wrong? Therefore, if 51% of a particular culture says it's okay to wipe out 49%, who's to say they're wrong? You know why this is a proof of God? We know that racism is wrong. We know that rape is wrong. We know that these things are wrong. And if your premise leads you to a conclusion that you know is wrong, then you ought to go back and question the premise. And if the idea that there's no God, there's no transcendent order, and there's no eternal world, and there's no heaven and hell leads you to conclusions that we know are wrong, we ought to go back to the premise. The fact is, that first view puts you in a position where you have no basis not only to fight racism, but you don't even have the ability to define it. You can't even define it. No God, no racism. If there's racism, there's a God. You heard it here. The racism proof of God. We're going to have to add it to the cosmological, teleological, ontological proofs of God. Poor St. Thomas Aquinas didn't know about this one, and now we can add it. Now, the second view, the second view says, well, it gets rid of that whole idea of saying, well, of course we know that racism is wrong, but it's only certain bad people. Nobody's born a racist. It's just messed up people. I suggest again that this, that view is both specious and dangerous. Let me first of all show you where it's specious. It's specious in this way. If you look at your own heart, you'll see the roots of racism and bigotry. When I, now I haven't heard anybody refer to this, but I heard it with my own ears. I was in a car coming back from Pittsburgh. It was right, it was the day that the FBI announced that it was bringing in a suspect about the bombing. Nobody knew much about him, and I heard the lieutenant governor of Oklahoma, it's a woman, a lieutenant governor, I don't remember her name, and I heard her say something that just amazed me, and nobody's referred to it since. She says, if this person is an, who did this is an Oklahoman, we're going to have an awful lot of trouble sleeping tonight. But if, as the reports are, this person's from Michigan, we'll rest easier. Okay, I heard it. Now, you know, wait a minute. This goes a little beyond racism, doesn't it? Or maybe it doesn't. Maybe, maybe she's saying, well, you know, the Michigan race, those rate, that race of people we call the Michiganites. We know what kind of people they are, but we Oklahomans are really decent law-abiding people. Now, what's going on there? I admit that she might have been under stress. I know something about how misleading a soundbite can be taken out of context. Maybe it's, but, but I believe when you make a slip of the tongue, it's. you see evil in somebody else, you don't focus in on what you have in common with that person. You always automatically, instinctively focus on what's different, where that person's different from you. If a woman, if you're a man and a woman deceives you, you want to say the reason that she is such a deceptive scoundrel is she's a woman, because that's where she's different than you. You don't say, that's how us human beings are. You say, that's how women are. Why do you do that? It is absolutely instinctive. See, this lady, the lieutenant governor, who I'm sure is a wonderful person. And, you know, I hate to pick on her, but I believe that this, when you look at this, you'll see your own heart. Why would you sleep easier? Hmm? Why would you sleep easier? It's your way of escaping from the reality of your own sin, the reality of your own evil, the reality of your own selfishness. It is an ego defense mechanism. It is absolutely instinctive, and it is very deep. That's the reason why we always want to focus in on anything that's different, even if they live in a different state. Yeah, I mean, you know, there's not much difference between the natives of Oklahoma and the natives of Michigan. And yet she was willing to focus on that, on instinct. Why? Because they were so appalled. You remember, do you not, how easy it was on the first day after the bombing for people to say, it's those dirty foreigners. Yeah. And as soon as the pictures we saw of the guilty people were people just like the folks who were blown up. Same kind of persons, you know? Suddenly there was a, why? Why is that so hard? Why do we have trouble sleeping? This is a person like me. It's, we instinctively try to get out from under the reality of our own sin by focusing in on the differences between us. It's a form of self-justification. And, let me go this far. It's not only do we see the roots of racism in all of us and bigotry in all of us, but let me show you what happens if you really do believe that racism and bigotry is only a problem for certain people. Why did the GIs just start to slaughter the German guards? One of the GIs who was doing it was quoted in the U.S. News & World Report as saying, you know what? I got that sick feeling that we came over here to stop this and here we are doing it. Yeah, let me tell you what it is. The way you're able to abuse and oppress somebody is if you are convinced that person is a notch below you in the humanity scale, a notch below you in the evolutionary scale. The only way you can really mistreat somebody if you say, that kind of person is one notch below me. They're beneath me. They're subhuman. They're less human. They're a little lower species in the human, you know, group. And as soon as they were able to say, you guys might be capable of this kind of atrocities, but we're not, that gave them the pretext to do the same atrocities to them that they were doing to the Jews. How do you think those German guards were able to do that to the Jews? Because they've been told the same thing. The Jews are a notch down. If you believe that racism only happens to certain people, certain wicked people, certain depraved people, certain kinds of people, you bear in your soul the very seeds that enables racism to grow. And oppression. You can only oppress people that you look down on. You can only oppress people who are down the scale a little bit. And if you look at racists as intrinsically different than you, that's the same basis that racists use to oppress people. So you see, both of those views you've got to get rid of. The view that says, well, there is no right and wrong. There is no right and wrong. There is no God. You want to know why the great civil rights leader of the 20th century was able to have the moral power and the success that he did. I did quote that in the bulletin. Martin Luther King, his letter from Birmingham jail, what does he say? He says, a just law is a man-made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God. To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas, an unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal and natural law. Martin Luther King. Don't you see? Do you A moral law that we all have to obey regardless of who we are, regardless of our culture, regardless of what the courts say, regardless of what the public opinions polls say? Do you believe that? Then you have a basis for fighting racism. Do you not believe it? You don't even have the ability to define racism. Do you say, well, I know it's wrong, but there's only certain people who offend the moral code, the natural law of God. But if you do that, you put yourself in a position to do the very thing to those folks that they have been doing to others. No, no, no, no. The only way out of it is to admit that racism is a sin. It's against, as Martin Luther King says, the eternal and natural law of God. But that it's a sin in your heart and my heart, and it needs moral regeneration. And you've got to do something about it. Now, lastly, once you understand that that's the roots of racism and bigotry, once you see that, what do we do about it? Now, I'm going to tell you what Christians do about it, and I want to admit that Christianity isn't the only religion that says racism is wrong. But let me show you how the essential message of the gospel, the essential message of Christianity, is an incredibly powerful antidote to racism. Let me just show you. First of all, the Christian gospel is the most powerful basis for multiculturalism there is. Today we have, I'm going to call it contemporary multiculturalism has an approach that it tries to use. If any of you have been in corporations where you've gone through what's called diversity training, you will have experienced this. You've heard about it. Contemporary multiculturalism works this way, and I want you to see why it's inadequate. Because its basis is contradictory, and its effects are partial. Look carefully for a second. On my floor, in our hallway, where my family lives, in our apartment building, we've got a family who's a Hindu family, and we also have, or until recently, we had a couple who were living together, but they weren't married. A man and a woman living together, not married. Now, historic Christianity has always said that the Hindu people may be moral and very nice, but they're lost. They don't know Jesus Christ. And historic Christianity has also said that those, that man and that woman, they may love each other, but they're living in sin. Now, the contemporary multiculturalist comes to me and says, now you know what? If you hold on to historic Christian beliefs, if you believe you've got the truth, you will not be able to treat those two families with respect and justice. Therefore, you have got to, if you're going to treat them with respect and justice, you have got to see that they're right in their own way. That all religions are equally okay. That all sexual lifestyles really depend on the person. And until you reject historic Christianity, you will not be able to treat them with respect and justice. Now, superficially, that makes sense. Why? Because so many bigots over the years have said, as a pretext for their bigotry, I got the truth, you don't, therefore I'm going to oppress you. But let me show you how that whole approach to multiculturalism, I think, fails. First of all, its basis is contradictory. It's totally contradictory. How so, you say? Well, first of all, whenever you come to me and say, the only way we're going to get along is if we see that every, all truth is relative. If all truth is relative, then we can live together. You've got to get rid of historic Christianity. But don't you see what's going on here? What you're saying is we can all get together as long as your belief system you jettison. Wait a minute. Real multiculturalism should give me a basis for treating all belief systems and all cultures and all religions and all races with respect and with justice, even though I deeply differ with them. But the contemporary multiculturalist comes to me as a Christian and says, we can only get along if you change your view. In other words, we can all get together as long as we all agree on relativism. So if they say, you know, it would be very wrong. You cannot treat that Hindu family with respect if you believe they're lost. You shouldn't try to change their religion. But as you do that, and you say that to me, you're trying to change my religion. And if you feel like wandering from me, you're going to say, And if you do that, they're lost. You shouldn't try to change their religion. But as you do that, and you say that to me, you're trying to change my religion. You at the moment are doing the very thing that you have just said I can't do. And there's no way, therefore, to create a basis for real respect across religious and cultural divisions by saying the only basis on which we can get along is that we all agree on relativism. In other words, if you are a historic Christian in your beliefs, you're out. You can't be part of this. In other words, relativism only respects other relativists. It's extremely narrow. Not only that, as I said, it's self-contradictory because I was reading in one of the diversity training manuals that I was reading, there's this interesting quote. It goes like this. It says, no human race is superior. No religious faith is inferior. All collective judgments are wrong. Only racists make them. Well, you see what the problem is? No religious faith is inferior. What about Hitler's? He had a faith. He believed he was on a moral mission from God. Oh, you say, well, that was wrong. Why? It's intolerant. Wait a minute. If every religious faith is right, if everything is relative, then tolerance has to be relative. How dare you impose tolerance on everybody? It's so silly to say all collective judgments are wrong. What the heck is that? And therefore, multiculturalism as it exists now is very narrow. It can't really extend to everybody. Only people who agree on the relativistic basis of it. And it's contradictory at the heart. Christianity is quite different, and here's why. I believe Christianity gives you a tremendously powerful basis for treating people with whom we deeply differ with great respect and justice. In fact, every part of the Christian gospel does that because there's three parts to it. The doctrine of creation, the doctrine of fall and sin, and the doctrine of redemption. See, the whole Christian faith can be summed up as saying, God created us, but we fell into sin, but he has redeemed us. Creation, fall, redemption. Every part of the Christian message gives us powerful reasons why we must and can motives to treat people with whom we deeply differ, even relativists, especially relativists, people who say we can treat them with respect. And here's why. First of all, doctrine of creation is that every human being has been made in the image of God. When Martin Luther King accepted his Nobel Peace Prize, when he made his speech, he said this, I refuse to believe the notion that man is mere flotsam and jetsam in the river of life, unable to respond to the eternal oughtness that ever confronts him. You know what he's saying there? If there is no God and we're accidents, then there is no difference between you and a rock as much as you feel there is. There's no difference. We're accidents. You know what Voltaire said? You know what he called us? Tormented atoms in a bed of mud. Yeah, you're a bunch of atoms. Here's a rock, a bunch of atoms, and here's a human being, a bunch of atoms. What's the difference? There is no difference except the rock's not tormented and you are. Why? Because for some reason, by some accident, you have developed one of the most inconvenient faculties that any beings have, and that is consciousness. But it's just an accident. You're just flotsam and jetsam in the river of life. You may feel that human beings have dignity, but there's no basis for it. You're just tormented atoms in a bed of mud. What did Martin Luther King have as a basis for honoring the dignity of every human being? He knew that we're created in the image of God. What does that mean? The Bible says that when God created us, he made us human beings like him. We are creative. We love beauty because God's creative. We're rational. We want to know things because God knows things. We're relational. We want to love because God loves and is personal. And there's even some eternity in us. We want to last. We don't want to die because God's eternal. When I meet another human being, because that human being is in the image of God, I must treat that human being with utter respect. Go back to Genesis 9 and you'll see God says, you must treat every human being as sacred because I made you in my image. Imagine if you, what if the person who meant the most to you in your whole life was your dear departed mother? What if she meant the world to you? What if she put you through college working on her hands and knees, you know, and saving her pennies to do so? I mean, what if you owed everything to her and now she's departed and you have this beautiful picture of her in your living room? It's her image. It's a way of honoring her. Okay. Okay. somebody comes along and draws a mustache on it, if somebody comes on and makes it look ridiculous, how deeply you're offended. It wouldn't be the same if they did that just to some picture in the paper. This is the image of the one who I want to honor. And God says, every human being, regardless of what they do, regardless of their record and behavior, they're not flotsam and jetsam on the river of life. You have a basis for treating them with infinite respect. And the people who don't believe in God, and the people who don't believe in the image of God, and they don't believe what the Christianity teaches, they don't have anything like the same motivation. Now, the Bible teaches that in their conscience, they know that human beings are made in the image of God, even though intellectually they want to deny it. That's the reason why they know this. But if you understand the gospel, it gives you this powerful motivation. Secondly, the doctrine of fall. The Bible says we're all sinners, all of us, everyone. And here's where Christianity differs with traditional religion. And this is why having the truth, if you understand the gospel, cannot and must not issue in a kind of racism. The Bible says in Ephesians 2, those who are far and those who are near, Jesus Christ died for both of them, and on the cross, he broke down the wall between them. Now, he's talking, Paul's talking about Jews and Gentiles. And he says the Jews were close to God in the sense that they were religious and they knew the Bible and they were very upright and they were very moral. And the Gentiles were far from God because they were living violent lives and debauched lives and they didn't know anything about moral decency and about God. Paul says Jesus had to die for both of them. Why? Because whether you're far away or very near, whether you're moral or immoral, whether you're religious or irreligious, you all are sinners and you all need to be saved, not by your good works because nobody's good enough, but through faith in Christ. That's the gospel. Illustration that my wife tells me I need to keep using kind of goes like this. If you put three swimmers on the coast of California and you say swim to Hawaii, the Olympic swimmer might swim 500 miles before she dies. The second swimmer might be a good swimmer and swims 25 miles before he dies. And the last swimmer doesn't know how to swim at all and swims 25 feet before he dies. So you might say that the Olympic swimmer was, I forget, a hundred times better swimmer than the second one and a zillion times better swimmer than the third one. Who's more dead? Who's more dead? Which one's more dead? The Olympic swimmer, because she's so much better than the other ones, is she less dead? She's dead. She's a hundred percent dead. And so is the first one. Why? Because nobody can get to Hawaii on the basis of your own swimming ability. The Bible says you're supposed to love God with all your heart, soul, strength, and mind, and your neighbor as yourself. Nobody gets there. Some people are far, some people are near, but you're all sinners. And anybody who believes in Christ, when you believe in Christ, when you're willing to swallow your pride and say, I can't be saved because of my good work, save me for Jesus' sake, the gospel is that that's when you're pardoned and you're brought into the lap of the master, the lap of the father. But you see, if a Christian understands that, then a Christian looks around and expects a lot of non-Christians to be more moral, have a better conscience. There's lots and lots of people that Christians know who are not Christians that are really nicer people, more self-controlled, better families, because salvation is not based on how good you are. If you don't believe the gospel, religious people believe that you're saved by doing good deeds. And those are the people who, when they believe they have the truth, feel superior to the folks who don't. See, traditional religion says, I've got the truth, therefore I'm saved. Christians say, I'm saved, therefore I've got the truth. Two very different things. Traditional religion says, I've got the truth, therefore I'm superior. Christians say, because I got the truth, I know I'm not. And therefore, I see a lot of people who aren't Christians who don't believe what I believe, but they're way ahead of me in many ways. I expect that. And I respect the image of God in them. I respect that. I see people with better consciences. They haven't seen what I think is the truth. They haven't seen the nature of their sin. They haven't seen Christ as their savior. And I hope they do. But I can't feel superior to them, because salvation is by grace alone. So you have creation, you have sin, and then you have redemption. What's redemption? So you have sin, you have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. You have sin. Thank you. do, but I can't feel superior to them, because salvation is by grace alone. So you have creation, you have sin, and then you have redemption. What's redemption? I'm a sinner saved by grace, utterly alone. And let me put it together for you. When I see people who are not Christians, I know that God's image on those people means that they are much better than their false beliefs should make them. And when I look at myself, I know that because I'm a wicked sinner, saved strictly by the grace of God, that I'm not nearly as good as my right beliefs should make me. I'm not as good as my right beliefs should make me because of the doctrine of sin. They're not as bad as their wrong beliefs should make them because of the doctrine of creation and redemption. And therefore, I cannot look at them as people who I look down on. I mustn't. I cannot. I've got to come to them as weight. I've got to come to them knowing I'm a sinner saved by grace. There's a tremendously powerful antidote to racism in the gospel. Do you believe the gospel? Do you believe and understand the gospel? It will regenerate your heart and will wipe racism and bigotry out. Now, I've got to end, but I've got to say one other thing. A lot of people are saying, I can refute everything you've said. It sounds fairly good at certain points, but I can refute it. If Christianity is so great, if the gospel is so great, how could it be that the Christian church could have been silent in the face of American race-based slavery? How could it have been silent in Germany in the base of the Holocaust? How could it have been silent in South Africa over apartheid? How could it have done that? You know, and of course, if you point to, well, I want to go into the history of the thing, but here's why. Racism is a very deep thing. In Acts chapter 2, Peter, the first preacher in the history of the church, on Pentecost Sunday, the Holy Spirit comes down in Acts chapter 2, and it fills all the disciples with the Holy Spirit, and they speak with other tongues. And they come out and they begin to preach, and people from every tongue, tribe, people, and nation come to faith in Christ. Years later, Peter will not even, this is Peter, will not eat with Gentiles who have become Christians because he feels superior to them. He's Jewish, and he says, well, I'm glad they believe, but we are a superior race to them. God has to come and give him a vision. He lowers a great big sheet out of heaven in the vision, and he shows Peter all the unclean.
