TITLE: It Takes a City to Raise a Child
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/it-takes-a-city-to-raise-a-child/

============================================================

I'm going to give you more of a talk, a lecture, but I'm really glad that both Elizabeth and Karen, in many ways, are giving you embodied case studies of what I'm about to tell you. In fact, most of what I'm about to tell you, you just heard in one of those two testimonies. I'm sure a couple of you are saying, gee, Tim, why don't you show a little emotion when you talk to us? I said, you know, to me, you're just old hat, really. I'm sorry, Kathy's not here tonight. We were supposed to do this together. Kathy spent the week in the hospital with an infection that came from a minor surgery a month ago, it turned out. And she's doing all right, but she's been in bed all week, and she just got home this morning, and she really couldn't do it. And she did point out to me, she said, what do you know about raising children? And I just said, well, you taught me everything I know. It's true. When I used to go see, as a minister, I used to go see in the hospital, if somebody just had a child, somebody in our church would just have a baby in the hospital, I'd go to the hospital. I'd pray with the mother and the father, usually. I'd come home, and Kathy would say, oh, that was great. Was it a boy or a girl? And I would say... And she would go, men! How is it possible? But she has taught me a lot, and I'm going to try to share it. I'd like to talk to you. Here's my thesis statement. Thesis statement is that, on the whole, cities are better places to raise kids. Not for everybody. Not for every child. I'm saying, on the whole. Cities are not just good places to raise kids, or even possible places to raise kids. In many ways, a city is a better place, and the city actually helps you raise your children. In spite of all the caveats, I mean, you know, it's one thing, interesting, it's one thing to raise your children from cradle. Another thing to move here. And actually, we experience the very same thing. Even though our children were 11, 9, and 5, there's just no doubt about the 11-9-year-old had more trouble adjusting than the 5-year-old. It's just like a language, you know. When you move kids, if you would move an 11-9-year-old and a 5-year-old to another country, the 11-9-year-old would struggle with the language, the 5-year-old would pick it up in weeks. And it's the same thing with the city. So, with all that background, in general, I still stick with my thesis. It's not just a good, but on the whole, perhaps a better, for in many ways, a better place to raise kids. I want to be fair and balanced, so what I'm going to do is give you three cons, three ways in which cities are harder places to raise your children, and eight ways in which they're better. Okay? Three and eight. Here's the three. Now, you heard some of this already. The first is money. The taxes and the rent alone. If you just move across a border, just move across a river, you would probably, you know, it depends on who you are, but I've had people tell me, and I try not to think about it, so I don't really know the numbers, but some of you who do say, if I just moved across a river, moved across a border, suddenly our expenses would go down 15%, 25%, you know, depends. And that does mean you have less money to spend on investing, in some ways, in things that you do as a family. No doubt it's a problem. Just no doubt. And it's one of the main reasons, and even a good reason, why some people say, we can't live here. Okay? That's a big con. Second con. Now, the second con is the physical logistics on the front nine. The physical logistics on the front nine, not the back nine, of raising your children, are hard. And I know this, and if you're on the front nine, you know this, too. It is just simply more difficult to physically get around. You can't just throw the kid into the car seat, drive them to the store, put them into another car seat, you know, go around in the car, you know, put the shopping, getting around with little kids. Very, very difficult. Far harder here. And also, the fact is, they can't just run out the door and play for a couple hours, and you just look out the window at the kids playing in the, you know, out there in the park, or, I mean, out there in the yard. Excuse me. Remember yards? However, on the back nine, I just want you to know that whereas the front nine is physically harder logistically to raise your children, the back nine, it's considerably easier. Now, here's what I mean by that. But all the friends that we've had who are our age, and we track with them, our relatives and our friends who live in other parts of the country, spend an enormous amount of time transporting their kids around everywhere. Because from the age 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, the kids can't drive, and you can't get anywhere unless they drive. That's not true here. The kids can get, I never, I never drove my kid to the dentist, or never drove my kid to the doctor. They just go, and they love it. And they get around. I'll never forget, actually, and by the way, I'll never forget the first Sunday that we came from Roosevelt Island to 111 East 87th Street for the service. There was no subway yet on the island. And so we had to take the tram. We had to walk to... order to get on the up, you know, on the 6th uptown, we had to go underneath, if you know, you have to go underneath the, and come up on the other side and stand on the platform and go north. Who took us? Meredith, Meredith, pardon me, I said Meredith, Morgan Klein Connect, who was seven. Glenn and Carol Klein Connect said, oh, Morgan will show you how to go. She was seven. And she led us through the whole thing. And we were told over and over and over again that when your kids are 10, when the kids are 10, fifth grade, they'll go to school with other, you know, 10-year-olds on the subway or they'll go on the bus, they'll go to school without you. And they told us that and we said, no, no, no, no, never, never. And it was true. They all did. And in many ways, the back nine, you might say, in some ways is easier than the front nine. And Karen made some reference to that. I'll get to it in a minute. So the money is a problem. The physical logistics when the kids are little is a huge problem. And I say the third thing is the educational complexity or the complexity of the educational terrain. In most places, you've got three or four options for school. And here you've got so many options that it really does overwhelm. And if some of the most affordable options aren't options for you for some reason, it can look pretty overwhelming. So there's no doubt about that. Though even there, the educational complexity of New York could also be seen as educational richness. Nevertheless, I think most people see it as a con. The money, the physical logistics of just getting around, and the complexity of the educational terrain. However, I do think that the eight things I'm about to tell you are pretty strong and pretty counterbalancing. And before I give you those eight things, I'd like to set this up with a little case. When I was a seminary professor, I supervised the doctor of ministry program. And I supervised one doctor of ministry student who did a pretty interesting project. He was trying to study the factors associated with children embracing the Christian faith of their parents. He wanted to know, why is it that some kids raised in a Christian home embrace the Christian faith and others don't? And he knew enough to know, you know, he was a Christian minister himself. He knew enough to know that he couldn't find the causes. But he did want to know what were the associated factors. And he actually, I remember this, he was able to take a survey at a huge kind of Christian youth event for 15-year-olds, 16-year-olds. It was in the city of Philadelphia. I forget what it was. But there were like 20,000 kids there, and like 6,000 filled out the form. And he basically asked them, are you on your way to embracing your parents' faith? Do you think 10 years from now you'll be a Christian going to church or not? And he discovered quite an interesting variety of answers. And he saw some kids who were saying, no, I'm not that interested in being a Christian, and I don't think I will be. And others said they were really strongly, and others were in the middle. And so what he did was he took all those 6,000 questionnaires, and he also asked them things about their family, about their practices, to try to see factors associated with embracing the parents' faith. Interesting? Very interesting. And he, there were a couple things that he thought for sure would be associated. One is that he was actually a big backer of, he was on the board of his local Christian school. And he discovered, and he thought that if you sent your kid to Christian school rather than public school, surely they'd be more, more willing to embrace the faith. He discovered, which I will tell you, I'm pretty sure he was right on this, that Christian school is really helpful at helping kids understand the Christian faith and understand how to think as a Christian. But he found there was no difference. In other words, kids at Christian school, Christian families who sent their kids to Christian school versus public school versus home school, there was no difference across the board in the percentage that embraced the faith and the percentage that walked away. Interesting. Okay? It doesn't mean that that means nothing educationally. It just means it did not, it didn't translate into difference there. Then he asked things like family devotions. He asked, did you have family devotions or not? Do you have, do you like your youth group? Do you go to a church with a youth group? How many times a week do you go to, I mean, a month do you go to church? And all that. And he saw no difference. The parents who went more or less, who did devotions, who didn't devotions, there was no difference. And then he discovered something interesting. He did find a huge factor of difference. If kids said, my parents understand the real world, and they understand my world. And if I had a problem, I think they'd understand it. The kids that said that were much, much, much more likely to embrace their parents' faith. And the kids who said, no, that their parents did not understand the real world. They didn't understand my issues. And I, if I had a problem, I couldn't possibly talk to them about it. They were the ones who were wrong. to think that raising your children in a city enhances the factors that are associated with children embracing the faith of their parents. Let me give you eight pros for raising your kids in the city. Number one, your kids, if you raise your kids here, they will think that they're living in the real world. They will think New York City is the real world. If you raise kids in places that you and most everybody else out there thinks are great places to raise a family, the kids will not be, they will be chafing, they will be straining at the bit once they get past about the age of 14 to get out of there. In other words, the places that you think are great places to raise their kids, by the time they're from ages 14 to 24, they don't want to be there. They want to be here. They want to be places like this. They say, this is the real world. Are they right or not? You know what? Everywhere in the world is the real world, you know? Honestly, I mean, that's not philosophical rocket science. Every place is a real world. But I'm telling you, they will think that. If you raise kids in places away from a place like New York City, they have a tendency to be very, they have fantasies about the glitz. They are attracted to it. They see the films. They see the videos. They see the movies. They see television. They say, oh, it would be so great to live there. You know, they think, for example, that everybody in New York City has an apartment like Friends. You know, these are people who obviously are underemployed. They have nothing to do. And they live in these enormous apartments. And somehow they, oh, that's what it's like to live in Manhattan. Well, what I'm saying is that you'll find the kids that grow up here don't have these fantasies about how incredibly great it would be to live in LA or Hollywood or New York City or a place like that. It is a great place to live. They know it, but they also don't have unrealistic expectations. And they think you've brought them into the real world and you're raising them in the real world, number one. Number two, if you raise them here, besides the fact that they'll love it, and all young kids love it. I mean, listen, agreed. You bring a kid here when he's 15 or 16. He's never lived here before. He can have a horrible experience. I'm talking more generically. If you raise kids here, they'll love it. The second point I'd like to make is that raising your children here undercuts their self-righteousness toward you and your faith. Now, here's what I mean by that. Kids want to believe their parents don't understand the real world. It's part of, since, as you know, if you come to Redeemer, the default mode of the human heart is to justify yourself by your own good works. The default mode is not grace, but to feel superior to other people and to say, you know, and to earn your own salvation. Self-righteousness is the default mode. What teenagers tend to do is they want to say, my parents don't understand. They don't understand what life is really like. They're living in a la-la land. They don't understand. But if you raise your kids in New York City, they know you. They know you know the real world. See, if you go to the soup kitchen, if you've got friends who've got AIDS, if you know artists and business people, if you know people of different races, and they see that, they can't feel superior to you, nor can they believe that your faith doesn't work in the real world. It undercuts their self-righteousness toward you. It provides an enormous amount of respect. There's just no, two of my three kids, and you can guess which ones if you want, two of my three kids would not have, would not have had much respect for Kathy and I except that we moved here. And they always said, what a gutsy thing to do. What a cool thing to do. There was just, there was, there was, you know, you get older, you lose your hair, you start to get fat, you're going to look stupid. I'm talking to the men, of course. But moving here was a way of undercutting your kids' self-righteousness. They do not have the very same attitude toward you. They recognize that you do know what life is like. Number one, you, they think you're moving them to the real world. Number two, so they're not as, you know, starry at about, about New York City. Number two, they undercut self-righteousness. Number three, your children will become considerably more confident and self-reliant because they're here. I remember my youngest son, Jonathan, went on a trip in eighth grade with a bunch of other kids from New York City. It was an educational trip. It was to Paris and Florence with another group of about 30 or 40 kids. They're all, I think, eighth grade. And when the parents, I remember that, you know, we had to go to some prep places where they were explaining to parents what you should bring, what you should send with your kids, what are the, you know, what, you know, how are we going to, how are you going to do, keep the kids safe, and what about their medicine and all that stuff, you know. It was like a 10-day trip. ride herd on kids from New York City. And we said, what do you mean? And they said, well, you see, all other tourist groups, you take eighth graders from any other place in the world, and you get them out of the bus in Paris, or you get them out of the bus in Florence, and they hold each other's hands and they walk around like this, and they say, show me where to go, because, you know, I don't understand this place, and it's big and it's scary, and I would, New York kids get out of the bus, and they just take, oh, yeah, I got it, they take off. Paris, Florence, okay, I can get it, I can make it. I mean, they use the subway, they get around. From the time they're, you know, 10 or 11, nothing intimidates them anymore. Not after New York, why should anything intimidate them? Very, very self-reliant, very confident, very, very self-sufficient, and they basically feel like, you know, I can handle this, because I can handle New York. So, there's the confidence, self-reliance. Number four, the kids are going to be a whole lot better, if you raise them here, at handling diversity. They're going to, they're going to meet people of all walks of life, all classifications, all races, and they're just going to have an incredibly more diverse set of friends and associations over the years. If you think about it, the essence of suburbia is zoning, and zoning means you keep people segregated by economics and by, which ultimately means race. I mean, not always, but the fact is that when I hear parents say, that would be a great place to raise children, I'm sure it's indirect, I'm sure it's sort of subconscious, I'm sure it's just an implication, it's not direct, but those places are almost always more homogeneous. In other words, there's fewer people unlike you. I don't know, I mean, I don't, it's not, I don't, I don't even think, I don't even call it unconscious racism, I'm not even going that far. All I'm saying is that there's something that says, oh, that would be a great place to raise kids, it usually means, because everybody else is like me, and everybody's like us. Well, I don't know if that necessarily prepares your kids for the real world or not. So anyway, the fourth thing is, you raise your kids here, they're going to have a far more, a far greater breadth of experience in relating to different kinds of people. Number five, okay, we get, oh, now Karen has referred to this, the city pushes the family together, and it even creates more coherence between home, work, church, it pushes you together. Now, I already mentioned the downside is when the kids are little, you can't just, you know, send them out the door, you can't even really just let them go over to a friend's house, you can't even just sort of let somebody else show up, you know, and take your kids to a party. And yet, what does this mean? What it means is you go everywhere with your family at first, almost everywhere. And next thing you know, and Karen already referred to this, I was to this, I'm really glad she did, is you find yourself actually spending considerably more face time with your kids than you would have in a suburban situation, considerably more face time. There's a couple ways to look at it. Number one is, generally speaking, the commute is lessened. So if you live in New Jersey or Connecticut, or if you live in, you know, on the mainline of Philadelphia or something like that, you're commuting, it takes about two hours at least, and sometimes more, that if you were a suburban person is taken away from your time, face time with your family, and now it's given right back to you. Secondly, like I said, you tend to do things together, you tend to eat together, you tend to go places together. But thirdly, even when your kids get older, there are so many, no matter what your kids interest, there are so many incredibly interesting things to do with your child. Do they like music? Do they like indie rock? And if you like indie rock, and you live in Orlando, I was just there this week, you know, all you can do is listen to it. If you have a kid who's 13 or 14 and likes indie rock, everybody who's anybody in that scene is having concerts here. You just go online, you find them, and you go with your kid. Do they like high culture? Do they like sports? No matter what they like, do they just like a certain restaurant? We found with boys, and we only had boys, boys don't talk. And they talk a little bit to me, but they hardly would talk to my wife. So what we found out was, if you say, what is your very, very favorite pub, your very, very most favorite, coolest place to eat? And if every, once a quarter, I took each of my kids one-on-one out to eat, they opened up. I guess there was nothing else they could do. You could sit there, there's you, there's him. Next thing you know, you know, especially they come back from college, you would do that. And, uh, you know, I get home and Kathy would say, so how seriously is he with that girl? You know, cause I would, it's the only way to find out. You have to take him out to eat. But in New York, there's so many places to do it. No, seriously. Uh, it is since, since the restaurant, as you know, in New York is part of your living space. It's just not true in suburbia. It's part of your living space. Your kid will feel it's part of the living space. And you'll very often find that as a result of that, um, you, the kid very often feels more grown up when you take them to a restaurant and you're able to get them one-on-one in a way that you don't at home. My kids would be different when I took them out. Um, so in all those ways, I would say, this is number five, the, the, the family, uh, the city. pulls everybody apart. You don't live near where the people you work, you know, in other words, you work someplace where you don't live. The people you work with live at other places. You don't live with the people you work with. You don't work with the people you live with. You're pretty far away. The kids are going off in all these different directions. The wife very often has to sort of drive the kids all over the place. That's where the term soccer mom came. They had to have a van. Whereas the city pushes everybody together. Number six, here's probably the key one. I've recently talked to my kids about this. My kids actually would go so far as to say that my kids would say, look, dad, I know we're Calvinists. So this is a little silly to say. But humanly speaking, at least two of my three kids probably would not be at all interested in Christianity if we hadn't raised them in New York City. And they'll tell you that. Why? I'll tell you why. The typical Christian family sees a church and they say, well, this will be a good place to raise my kids because it's got a great youth group. Actually, if you go to a church with a group of 50 kids, 60 kids, 100 teenagers, you say, great. Do you think the kids are going to learn that much about Jesus from the other kids? They don't. In fact, they learn a lot of bad things from the other kids. The Klein Connects and the Kellers raised their children at Redeemer when everybody was single. And for years and years, there were only five kids in the church. We had 1,000 people. We had 1,500 people. There were five kids in the church. When they were all teenagers, that was it. That was it. We didn't really have a Sunday school class. We really didn't have a youth group. Not really. Somewhat. Craig and Cook did a really good job even back then with all five of them. But here's the point. When kids go to a typical church and they look at the adults, they don't see Christians they can envision being. They look at parents married with children and they can't envision being 35 and 45 and 55 and they just can't envision it. What they can envision when they're 15 is being 23 and 24 and being hot. They can envision being some hot young Wall Street analyst or just some hot looking thing or a model or an artist. They can envision that. But they can't really envision the kind of people they see in their suburban church with a big youth group. The kids, the people they can envision being, which is the young adults, the young single adults, aren't even there because, of course, they don't want to live there. They live in the city. My kids, growing up, saw all these kinds of people that they wanted to be like and they were passionate Christians. You know, I'll never forget when my son Jonathan was, I mean David, was kind of enamored because he kept hearing it. He went to Bronx Science and all the kids, they were talking about the clubs, like the limelight, the clubs and lying. Of course, fortunately, David was always short. Don't tell him I said so. So Jonathan was, every one of my kids got taller. And the great thing about a short kid is it's very hard to lie that you're older when you're that short. Otherwise, he probably would have done it. And everybody was saying, oh, it'd be great to go to these clubs. I remember we were at a picnic and Steve Arceria overheard David talking. Now, Steve, he's still great, but he was even younger then. That was a long time ago. And he was a young single guy and they loved Steve. He was a talent agent. He knew all these actors and all that sort of thing. Steve said, I've been to the limelight. I can tell you all about it. I'll take you there. I can get you in because they don't really care. And I'll show you the rooms where the people are having sex and I'll show you the rooms where people are doing cocaine. It's so unhappy. It is such an unhappy situation. I've been there. I'm through that. But if you want to see it, I'll take you. And my 16-year-old son said, that's okay. Who else could have said that? See, my kids grew up looking at every single Sunday, the kind of people they wanted to be. They saw them as passionate Christians so they could envision being that kind of Christian. They could envision it. And they wanted to go there. And I can't tell you that if I've just took them to a typical church that most people think is a great church to raise your kids, then they wouldn't have seen those people. They wouldn't have. They would have just had a hope that they liked the other Christian kids in the youth group. But of course, the Christian kids in the youth group are sort of floundering around too. And some of them probably aren't particularly good examples for the others and so forth. That was absolutely huge. In fact, recently, Michael, my son Michael said, you know, dad, it's really ironic. You went to New York like a missionary thinking, oh, you're going to sacrifice for Jesus. And you're going to go to a place where maybe it's going to be hard to raise a family and it's going to be difficult. And so you started the very kind of church in supposedly sacrificing for, you started the very kind of church that your kids needed in order to find Christ in. You never, you weren't smart enough. None of us were smart enough to realize it. the only kids out there, and there's no youth group or anything like that, that you're really helping the kids, but we were. So the sixth thing I'm trying to say is, is it the sixth one? Yes. The sixth thing is, is that in the city, your teenagers more easily see a Christianity they can envision and respect. Because the churches are filled with younger people and the kind of people they can relate to and see. Number seven and eight, I'll be fast because we're going to have to question. Number seven, you can help your kids start to process the real world when they're here. The sort of things that my kids ran into, with their gay friends, ran into with the drugs, ran into with a lot of other things. A lot of that. The sort of things my kids, I realized around the time they were about in ninth grade, the sorts of things that my kids were running into now were the things I didn't run into until I was in college. Because my parents raised me in a place which was good to raise children. And as a result, it wasn't until they went off to college, most people go off to college, that they start to run into all these kind of confusing things, and you're not there. You're not there to walk with them. They feel like they're too old to talk to, and of course, you're not physically present. And I began to realize that by raising my kids here, I'd gone to college with my children. It's just that college starts a lot earlier. Kathy often said, you know, New York is sort of a college campus on steroids. Everybody lives in dormitories, for example. You know? And it actually is very much all the culture and all the events. It really is. It's like this massive, massive university. And you've gone to college with your kids, and so you're able to start to help them process all the things that otherwise you would not have been able to do. One last thing, and this is qualified. The eighth thing is, in general, I believe that kids raised in cities do not have the same amount of pressure brought on them to conform. Now, what I mean by qualifying, I know that if you send one of your kids, if you have the money or the reason to send one of your kids to one of the elite private schools here, there will be pressure, plenty of pressure. So I don't want you to think that that's across the board. But generally speaking, my kids would say, Dad, you know, compared, they would compare notes with their cousins or their friends in other cities. And in most other cities, you go to a high school, and there were three or four. There's the cool kids, and, you know, there's the cool kids, and there was the uncool kids. And there was this. He said there were three or four. He said, well, you go to Bronx Science, for example, or you go to most of the schools here. It is so diverse. There are so many different kinds of kids. There are so many ethnicities, so many languages that, generally speaking, the kids did not feel the need to fit into a cookie-cutter form. Now, I've heard this. I made this eighth because I'm not sure this is true across the board, but I've heard it so many times in the last 15, 20 years where kids said, living here in New York City, I can be whoever I want. I do not feel this need to conform because what would I conform to? It's so different. There's so many different kinds of people here. My goodness, how could we possibly conform? In the end, three things happen to bring a person to faith. There's the influence of the Holy Spirit, there's the nurturing environment, and there's the choices of the kid. And you can't really say it all comes down to raising your children right, or it all comes down to the kids' choices, or it all comes down even to the Holy Spirit because even us Calvinists believe that God works through means. And therefore, it's complex why or how a child embraces the faith. But I believe that New York City, at least in my own experience, and not just in my experience as a family, but from what I've seen over the years, is a great, the city, raising a kid in a city is a great place to bring to bear on them the factors that are associated with their embracing the gospel. So, now let's take some time for questions. ...had the opportunity to explore other religions because of the environment. Yeah, absolutely. The children, well, for example, I remember at one point, the main playmate for the kids in our building, it was on our hall, was a Saudi Arabian family, and they were Muslim, and then they did Ramadan, and I remember, I forgot, oh my God, it's been such a long time, I can't remember the child's name. See, that's why Kathy would be here, she would remember the child's name. She would say men, you can't remember the name. But I remember, we talked a lot, I remember we used to talk about the fact that the child was paid quite a bit of money by his parents to do the fasting, and I remember there was plenty of discussion on that in our family. And Jonathan, Jonathan went to a Catholic school for several years, and so he'd come home all the time because he got Catholic doctrine in school, which was fine with me, because he'd come home and said, do I believe this? And I said, well, we don't, I guess you might, because after all, there's this thing called free will and all that, but I wouldn't if I were you. had plenty of talk and i in a place like new york it's an issue you heard elizabeth say religion is an issue you're going to be actually their kids were asked a lot about their faith and it was yeah quite a lot absolutely yeah if you live in a small town i remember in hopewell uh people talked if you were baptist you people talked about methodists as people of a different religion yeah it was just like oh those methodists you know anyway okay great other questions when you talk about a city how do you define a city as opposed to suburbs so are you talking about proximity or you're just talking about size of city or inner city versus say nearer parts of new jersey are closer oh yeah to to midtown than south of parts of manhattan well there's no way to define a city other than to say it's a it's a it's a spectrum the more dense density and diversity the more density that means the uh uh the more packed in the greater number of people per square mile and the more diverse class and race it is the more urban it is and um in fact generally i think when people talk about city the urban urbanologists would say there's three things church filled with city as opposed to a suburb uh density diversity and mixed use that is to say you've got uh you know you have uh residences and uh businesses and cultural institutions in pretty close proximity that's why what's interesting is a small town and a city are are similar in that way you know you'll have the store you'll have the people living in this right there in a small town and a big and a big city do mixed use and the suburbs are totally because of zoning it's all homogeneous however it's some are more cities than others i mean you know if you lived in manhattan for a while i just spent some time in minneapolis and i was amazed at how unurban it feels right in the center of it it's nowhere near as diverse and it's nowhere near as dense and uh there was a couple of chinese uh friends with us that and uh you know in the middle of minneapolis a car came on by of college kids and they made fun of him and said hey go back to china he said i've never been in a city where that happened i in other places so uh you know minneapolis seemed like a small town so it's it's obviously there's no place where you can definitely cut it off and say that's a city and that's not so the more dense and the more diverse um and i would say in many ways some of these things i would i'm talking about uh get stronger the more dense and diverse it is manhattan is about the city of city there is we have 60 as you know 60 000 people per square mile live here whereas in philadelphia in boston it's 12 000 people per square mile inside the city limits and so forth okay hi tim um you i thought you had a lot of great things to say about why the city is good for families but of course redeemer's mantra has always been that we're here not just to take from the city but to serve and build a great city so i'm curious um i think there was a little hint about this in the testimony as well but if you could talk about how this has been a good place both for your kids and for you and kathy to to learn about service well yeah actually that's exactly right i think the uh i should have said that under the real world it was number one i said the kids are going to think that you've come to the real world because there are first of all there's uh poor people around that they can see and really see and they see the needs and if you're part of a christian community that community that uh is involved with the poor for to start with that is extremely interesting to them that is almost on uh as you know if you live in a sort of typical suburban area or a small town you have to you have to go on mission trips to find areas of need but in a place like new york city your you and your and your kids can be involved in service projects all the time you could you can be involved with something that happens once a week or once a month all the time the sacrifice in general i think my um elizabeth recognized that in her parents my kids recognized the fact that we were sacrificing to live here they knew how expensive it was and they knew how difficult it was in many ways and so you might say sacrificial service was something in the uh writ small you can help your children with because there's so many needs around and you can be involved in service projects but writ large um very few of us are wealthy enough to live here without sacrifice and the kids recognize that and when they when if you're willing to verbalize that we're here and i don't say to i always say to people if you're going to be here for two years stay four if you're going to be here for four years stay eight if you if you were going to be here short term just stay longer term and let your kids know that even though even if you say to your kids i don't know we're going to stay forever they should know you you you uh body of christ in the city you're right i should have mentioned that thanks tom hi you mentioned that new york is a real world and there's so many resources and kids grow up so fast but i've noticed raising my daughter in the city and now raising in the suburb and contemplating moving back into the city that sometimes knowing so many things at such a young age and when i say young age she was five years old and she was already thinking that she knew everything and how do you control that and teach them humility and humbleness and keep them at a level head especially her transition into the suburbs was very difficult because of the different types of rearing habits that they had yeah which kind of habits different types of the way the children are raised in some yes from birth yes um well that's a great question um i would have to remember i told you that the default mode of the human heart is self-righteousness i would say um since your kids will be sinners no matter whether they're raised here or not uh raising them in the city does undermine their self-righteousness toward you in other words they're not going to think you're out of it but it doesn't necessarily undermine their self-righteousness toward the rest of the world who doesn't live in new york city whatever will your children is there a danger of the kids being snobs and feeling like oh and i'm so jaded i know everything and uh you know my cousins and other people don't really know anything yeah that's a problem i mean your kids self-righteousness and pride is going to show up somehow though so in other words keeping them out of the city doesn't help that it's going to show up somehow so you're going to have to address that with christian training in the gospel and and christian nurture and uh and sometimes direct confrontation so i would i guess i would say you're right about that that there's there's a peculiar temptation to certain self-righteousness kids like to think of themselves as superior because they're from the new york city i mean there's a lot of jokes i could tell you about how i mean sometimes the kids make my kids eventually started making fun of themselves for their their attitude because when they would go on vacation or when they would you know they go on family reunions and they talk to all their cousins at a certain point the cousins started to say enough about new york city you know enough about the things that you do or that you have done and so you sometimes you're just going to have to talk to the kids about it but if you raise them somewhere else you're going to find the pride and self-righteousness come somehow and that's another seminar you know just on how do you how do you counsel your children on an ongoing way about the resetting sins um i'm single but uh i've been going to redeemer for about uh 10 12 years now my sister though uh went to redeemer she got married and she started having a family and i'm not sure but there was a big debate should we live in the city should we move out of suburbia and there was a battle between that and their first child was just born and something happened to redeemer and i don't want to bring up old bad memories but after that it was like no we're out of here and basically a message said look i want to have children and there were all the the cons that you mentioned but if i'm not in an environment that is only for single people and then you it's okay if you get married but then you have children you're on your own we're out of here what is your hopes for redeemer because the front nine is the tough part what can we do because i find that families they just need they need support and what can redeemer do for these young families because it's you know to help them in this time when they're you know got their kids because they need some help okay well um yeah that's i'm glad somebody asked me the question we would we've been slow at institutional support for families uh when we when we raise money for the vision campaign there's a a slice five percent of the uh no is it five i can't even remember what it is now but anyway there's a pretty good slice of it for uh family ministry it's a very high priority even even tonight is actually the beginning of a series we have never done anything like this and uh we're going to staff for family support we're going to be uh there's gonna be over the next three years there's gonna be a huge increase in what i would call support for families however i was trying to say i grew you know i think if glenn and carol and we're here glenn and carol are you here you guys here didn't think so anyway um the client connects and the callers would tell you that we we we raised our kids without any family support now you know what it's possible because i saw that that raising my kids in a um a church filled with singles was the best thing i could have done for them i i very often will talk to families who say well i don't see anybody else with kids around here so i'm out of here and i say um that's very short-sighted because i don't i'm not sure you understand what it takes to raise a child it doesn't take a youth group it doesn't take a family program it takes I'm telling you that we're still going to respond. We know that the church needs to do considerably more. We're the opposite of most churches. Most churches do everything for the families, and the singles spend years screaming about their needs aren't being met programmatically by the institution. And, of course, we're the opposite. When people say, oh, how do you reach all these singles? I say, you have a great singles ministry. I say, what do you mean? Redeemer is a singles ministry. What we need is a family minister. We need family support. And so we're going to get it. However, I would say that the knee-jerk reaction, that this isn't a great place to raise kids unless I see lots of other families, is a mistake. I try to show that tonight. Okay, let's keep going. Yeah. You didn't mention them as cons, but I was wondering if you could address the city being dangerous and living in a transient population where, you know, I grew up in a suburb and I had friends for a long time, and, you know, you have less of that. Well, you know, what are your thoughts there? That's great. Those are two great questions. You know what? But being in the advanced age I'm at, I'll start with the first one. You might have to remind me of the second one. Well, actually, the one I'll start with is in the handout I make some reference to the fact that one of the most difficult things about New York City is having to constantly replenish your circle of friends because it's not symmetrical. It's not like every six months or every year you lose half your friends. But what happens is in New York you're going along okay and you're really feeling pretty connected and you've got some good friends, and all of a sudden a third of them leave, you know, in one, and then suddenly, oh, my gosh. And honestly, my joke about the advanced age, it actually has gotten harder for me. It seems to be more of an effort for me as I get older to start over with friendships. It's like, oh, my gosh, you know. The older you get, the more you realize how much it takes to develop a friendship, and I kind of hate to want to start over, but it's dangerous. If in 1995 I've got ten really good friends and they start peeling off and I don't replace them somewhere around the year 2002, I'll just want to leave because I don't know anybody. That's just what's going to happen. However, having said that, even though if you live in the suburbs you don't have the same amount of turnover, what we've been saying here tonight is that it's also harder to connect in the suburbs. The other people go away every weekend. You know, the other people on your block go away every weekend, and very often the husband and the wives commute far away. So they really are bedroom communities. They don't live their lives in the community. They sleep in the community, but they go other places all over the time. And therefore, even though you may not have the same amount of turnover, you may not have 30% of the homes on your block changing owners every year, whereas you may have 30% of the people in your apartment building changing owners. So there may not be as much turnover out there, but it's actually very hard to connect, very hard to find the people. So, come see, come saw, in a way. I would say, though, you do have to, you have to be very intentional. I have to, every year, look at some people who are maybe, here's your A-level friends, here's your B-level, you know them pretty well, you like them, but you haven't really done a lot of connecting. Every year I've got to find a couple of people in the B area, people I think I could be good friends with, I really like. Like, we just haven't had an opportunity to get together much. And I just have to promote people. Now, you don't tell them you're promoting them, because actually, you may be wrong. You may spend some time and do something together and say, hey, you know, we've been talking about this, let's do this. And you find it doesn't quite click, because friendship is mysterious. There's no doubt about it. Friendship is more mysterious than romance. Who you end up being a good friend with is a lot more weird and strange and counterintuitive than who you fall in love with. But that is a very important part. I didn't talk about it here, because if you were asking, if tonight we were talking about what it takes to live in a city long term, that would be one of the things. Tonight was raising a family. What was the first? I knew I would forget it. Danger, Will Robinson. You know, it's funny. Maybe you're right, I haven't. See, when I moved here in the late 80s, it was so much more dangerous. It was so much more dangerous that honestly, I haven't thought about it in a long time. I mean, you know, when I got here, and of course, I do know a number of you who were here then, was you never got on a, I mean, there was places you just didn't go. And there were things you always looked behind you, and you never got on a subway car when there were only three other people in the car. And all sorts of stuff like that. And I saw blood on the street, and I saw people mugged, and I saw people knifed. I saw them, and I wasn't, you know, just gone to work and things like that. to reflect upon. However, I'm not sure it is all that. When I go to other places where there's not as many people on the street, I really feel a lot less safe. There's so many people around. It's a pretty safe place, and it's a pretty good, pretty safe city. There's still crime, of course, and we still have, you know. But actually, even there, we were victims of crime almost every year when we first got here. And that hasn't happened in years. So maybe because of that, maybe I've been desensitized to it. But I wouldn't say it's all that. And then, you know, the other thing is, every so often, you know, you have school shootings in Amish country, and you have shootings in malls in Atlanta and things like that. And you begin to say, well, I think things are such that I'm not sure cities are necessarily more dangerous than anywhere else. By the way, having said that, this is a terrorist target, New York City. And I mean, should I be, maybe as a minister, it's not a wise thing for me to remind you of it. But it would seem to me that there's a bullseye on this place in a way that no other place in the world is targeted in the same way. And I have been surprised that there hasn't been anything else. And I expected after 9-11 that I was going to spend the next 10 years trying to find ways without really, without coercing people to try to help people continue to live here. And I really did think I was going to, because I don't want to keep people here. And so, oh, no, God wants you to stay here. And then something happens and they're killed. And they're here because I said they ought to stay. And right, you know, the night of 9-11, almost every person in their 20s in this, and obviously other people in their 30s, got a phone call from their parents saying, get out of New York City. We don't want you living there. And a lot of people did just leave. And if it actually really, truly gets dangerous in that way again, we'll have to, we'll cross that bridge when we come to it. Because you have to have Christians everywhere. And very often, as J. Kyle, who's a missionary and who works for Redeemer's Church Planning Center said, generally speaking, the most dangerous places in the world are places that are the most strategic for God's work. And it doesn't mean everybody's got to live there, but some Christians have got to be willing to live in those places or else you're not really on the cutting edge of what God's doing. Okay, a couple more. Yes. Hi. In terms of maturity, kids seem to grow up a whole lot faster here in the city is what I've been told and what I have observed. Myself, that they're maybe three years ahead of how old they actually are. Is there anything that you would do to protect them or just so they don't grow up so fast and they are able to be a child? Well, now, you know, I know what you mean. I remember the first time I did a focus, you know, I spoke at a focus Bible study like one of the first years I was here. And I was a little bit shocked because the kids, though they were 15 and 16, sounded like college students and what they seem to know about the world. But I'm not, I don't know. It's hard for me to break it down. I would say that if we, and I can't do it here and I'm not going to make you do it in front of everybody. If you start to define what do you mean grow up, what do you mean they know everything, I'll bet you it's a mixed bag. There are some things that it's just, it's better that they know about. There are a lot of things that it's better that they know about. So they're not shocked and surprised and disillusioned later on. There might be other things that I wish they didn't know about. So, you know, I'd have to sit, I'm not giving you a good answer because I would, what I'm trying to say is I don't think you can just say, yes, no, let's slow it down. It depends on what, what, what, what you mean and you'd have to break it down. But I do remember, I do remember my eight-year-old, this is in Philadelphia, coming to me and saying, Dad, I've been watching the Doughboy channel with my friend over at his house. I said, the Doughboy channel? Yeah, the Doughboy channel and the women have ears. It was the Playboy channel, by the way, all right. And he was eight years old, it was David. And I said, so what did you see? And so he sat down and told me he was seeing sex acts on a cable television. This is in the suburbs, by the way. This is not in New York City. He's eight years old and he's been watching sex acts because his, his eight-year-old friend, his father, not with his father, but his eight-year-old friend knew how to get into the, I don't know. Into the, into the thing. So I said, well, let me tell you. So I went down and talked about sex with him and went through the whole thing. He was eight years old. It was a little earlier than I wanted to do. And, and then I remember, oh, I remember, see, originally he said, I have to have a talk with you. So he went up into my, into my office and he sat down and he looked around. He said, Daddy, tell me about the Doughboy channel. So he went all through that. Next thing you know, my six-year-old, my six-year-old. and so my six-year-old said dad i need to have a talk with you in your office and i said to myself okay six i'm not i don't care what he asked me i'm gonna lie i don't care i don't care i'm not i am not going to tell him about it i'm gonna lie this is michael by the way so michael he gets up i close the door behind i said oh my gosh what's going to happen he's six years old he sits up back on and he's so happy to be in you know having a talk with my dad in the office so i said okay michael what do you want so he says dad do you think there's any more dinosaurs he just wanted to have an intimate talk with his father and he didn't really know what else to do so i said well michael let's talk about it you know it was actually hard to sort of drag it out to 10 minutes so he felt like he was really having this hard time to talk with his father but anyway so anyway but getting back to whether they grow up too fast i it depends on what you're talking about and i'd have to break it down i think okay uh excuse me i will see time expecting my first child anytime soon and i hope it won't be tonight so it'll be more comfortable i just would like to make a few comments and i would like to thank you very much for uh all these things that you said uh the first one is that uh when we found out that we are expecting the child with my husband everybody was very surprised if we really want to do it in new york city and uh one of those things were that it's really difficult to have a small child and you you got is a negative physically getting around when they are small but uh when you live in the suburb you have to make a play date and you have to drive there yeah uh i see it much easier here just to come to the park and your child just finds a friend and can relate to you know anybody who is in there so for me this part is really easier in the city than to find friends that you feel comfortable also because then you have to spend one hour with parents when you want and you don't always want to do that keep going keep going but um i also point out that children in a city are an enormous icebreaker when you have little children you're safe for some reason and uh it's not just other people with little children will talk to you but anybody will talk to you and they'll help you out or they'll help you you know they'll help pick the stroller up to get up over a curb or something and it's a remarkable way to meet people in new york city so it's it's it very much having a child here is actually good for community go ahead and then i um i grew up in uh not really in suburbian area but in a small village in europe in slovakia and we moved here three years ago and i can see how much i've changed here my view on the people diversity that you mentioned and many many things and i could see how i've changed and it will be just great to know that my my children will already grow up in the environment like that and uh well slovakia is actually white country you know like if you see any other race which is which is typical you know when you go to china or you go to europe or you go anywhere else you just have certain types of people so it's great to be somewhere when it's really different okay all kind of different people so if you know if they can grow up with something that i have to experience after many years and change that would be great and the other thing that i wanted to say that recently i went to the uh it was a trip for a national youth gathering and i went with the church with children from the church from new york city and it was amazing to watch them also compared to other a few years ago i had the same experience with children from michigan teenagers from michigan and uh i don't want to insult anybody but it was really much it was different feeling i had a feeling that they were more open more normal um more first of all they all knew how to eat with uh silverware doesn't know what happened in suburbs so and the last question that i also want to have i see one problem that is for family in new york city when we mention money i hear many many people who just say that you know they cannot afford more than one child uh and i just want to i just you know i know we all depend on god's grace and you know we have to trust and walk by sight not by faith not by sight but it's very difficult for this how to encourage families and show them that they you know many times it's we have small apartment we have we don't have enough money the schools here are really expensive and i can see many people who really don't plan more than one okay well the only the only thing i'd say the reason the reason money is such a problem with regard to children it's the rent it's that extra bedroom i mean i was just shocked that's when i realized when i got here and i'm sure things have changed now is if you have uh there's no place else on earth that you add a bedroom and you add a thousand dollars a month that you that you that you the key. The key is when you have to have that next child, means it pushes you suddenly, doubles your rent or even triples your rent. There are some people who say, I just simply can't afford it. And I have never, as a pastor, said, yes, you can, or no. I mean, I don't know what they can afford, and they have to be the judge of that. To be here takes a sacrifice, but there's a certain place at which it's irresponsible. And I don't know, I don't, unless somebody wants to give me their W-2 form, I can't tell them. You know, I could, give me your W-2 form, and I'll say, oh, that's not too much for you to pay. And even there, that's subjective. So I do, what we have always done here is we've said, stay, stay, stay, stay, stay. When somebody says I've got to leave, I say, oh, okay, well, there's got a great church there. We'll be missing you. I'm sure God, you know, in other words, what you have to do is you have to, the motivation for staying in the city has to be all positive and no negative. It can't be, you don't shame people. You don't say how, you know, what's the matter? Where's your commitment? None of that. Because people have to, there's nothing in the Bible that says you have to live in cities. So you can't bind a person's conscience. So, I mean, and the real problem is the rent. The only thing I often say is, you know, as Charlie knows he lives in the Bronx, it's not another thousand dollars a month in the Bronx for every room, or is it? It's getting there. What do you think? Not yet, Elizabeth? Well, I'm just saying there's some parts of the city you could move to that are less expensive, and you could still have your city life, and very often you can either come into Redeemer or go to one of the daughter churches. Nevertheless, that's up to the conscience and up to looking at all your various commitments. And so we don't, you know, I try to get people, I try to attract people with the joys of living in the city, but not coerce people by saying, you know, you have this duty. I don't think you do have a duty. So, okay. Yeah, what are the most important things that you did or we parents can do to influence our children for Christ? Well, I think I may have already told you, because, for example, devotions never worked for my family, because I couldn't get them to sit still, and I was afraid that I was going to make them hate the whole experience of sitting and praying, and I just, so we didn't do it. When they got older and my kids said, I don't know how to pray, they met with me one-on-one, and they liked that quite a bit. I met with my children and trained them how to pray, but not until they got past, not until they got in college. Before that, it was just almost impossible to do. I think that the, let me go back to what Carl, well, I won't mention his name, but the man who did that doctor ministry project, he said, if children believe that if they tell you their problems, you're not going to come down their throat, but that you'll be understanding. How do you convince your children of that? I believe it starts, it's a process, and it starts even when they're rather little, and your attitude toward their faults and their flaws and their failures and their doubts and their fears, very, very, very important. You have to convince them that you'll understand and that you won't come down, you know, you won't come down too hard on them if they talk about their doubts or their fears. Convincing them of that is, that's all a matter of your character and your relationship with them. And that is more important than the devotions or whether they're a Christian school or public school or anything else. Having taught Sunday school to high school students before, tonight we talked a lot about the influence that parents have on children. But it seems to me that, especially as children become older and become teens, that a lot of their influence comes from their peers. And so one of the questions I have is what your vision might be for children who become older who might seek other Christian peers, and is there a way that we can help facilitate that as a church? Well, you heard Karen saying, she was always praying for more families to stay put. You can't have a, you know, the peer group has to grow. I was, see, I was, I think that's right. And I think it's right when people say, let's, let's give more institutional support, which means more staff support to creating environments for family, for supporting families and creating environments for kids in various ages and stages of their life, bringing them together. For example, right now, if somebody's going to bring together teenagers across the 13 daughter churches as well as the Redeemer church, that's going to take staff work. It's too hard. You can't do it. And Craig can't do it even as a part-timer. So, so on the one hand, I would say institutional support is important, but don't forget what I said before. And that is that, that it's been good for my kids. the high school kids do this and all this. In other words, it's segregated. What's kind of nice about New York is that the kids were not always segregated by peer group, but they're always hanging out with people a whole lot older than they were, and that's because the 20-somethings are so dominant here. But the big brother, big sister thing, some of you may know that, for example, when we did have a high school, Sunday school class for our high school students, which had like basically three kids in it, for a number of years, it was taught by a Rockette. I think a runner-up to Miss North Carolina, she was. My sons were there every week. I can tell you a lot of the stories like that, and they are funny, but cumulatively, the young adults had an enormous impact on my kids, just an absolutely enormous impact on my kids. So, in some ways, I like the fact that they weren't looking as much to their peers, and they were looking to a variety of people. Though, you know, here's the point. My youngest son is the kind of kid that basically sticks with his peers, and he finds the ones he wants, and he's not all that good at hanging out with older people. The other two were much better, and I think it served them well. So, okay, another. Dan. As some of you may know, we, my wife and I got married, and we moved out of the city before we had kids. And we moved to the suburbs, a pure suburb, and we had two children. And we continued to listen to your sermons, and we started to buy into it. Not that we didn't enjoy you before, but... Yeah, so you became part of the cult. But we realized we wanted to be missional about how we lived, and we wanted to have an impact on the world. And we felt like New York was the place we wanted our kids to be raised, so we moved back. We were, many people do this, but we chose to move back to have that impact on our kids. So, and I've challenged you on this before, I don't discount that New York is a very expensive place to live. When we moved back, we had very little money, and we had no income. And we did it because we felt like we were missionaries of sorts. And I said to you, I don't think money should be the reason people leave, because most people who leave spend the same amount of money where they go. They just get a yard and a second car. But I asked this question, would anybody tell a missionary or ask a missionary who's going to Ecuador, hey, what's the school district like? You know, how are you going to save for retirement? I think, so I want you to speak to that if you can. Aren't we to be missionaries? I think you're actually, Dan has challenged me on this, and what he means by that is he's challenged me to challenge people more, perhaps. I think actually using the term missionary is perfect, and here's the reason why. Missionaries have this tension. Missionaries, they know not everybody is called to be a missionary, and yet they also know that a lot of people aren't even listening for the call because they have this idea in their mind that somehow they've got to have a tidy, safe little life. And so it is a very, very difficult balance to strike. If you are a missionary and you're trying to ask people to consider missionary service, you have to know that you can't say to everybody, you need to be a missionary, you need to go overseas, it's safe here. What about all those poor people? There's missionaries that go overboard like that and try to guilt people and not recognize the fact that not everybody is called. But on the other hand, if you're too namby-pamby about it, you realize that a lot of people aren't even listening for the call because they just screen out the possibility of a sacrificial, committed life. And actually, in a way, I would say that living in New York City is very, very similar. If you're going to raise your children here for any period of time or indefinitely, it is very similar to being a missionary. You have to hear a call, you have to sense God's call, you have to be willing to make a sacrifice, you have to challenge other people to listen for the call without you trying to be the Holy Spirit yourself to them. And that's not easy. Yeah? We haven't been here that long, but I'm a bit concerned about the materialism that I'm seeing, or that I'm experiencing, and I just wonder if you could talk to that a little bit more. Tell me, materialism, you mean the amount of money people spend on their... The amount of things people spend on everything, I think you spend so much money on your rent, then it doesn't seem like that much to spend a little bit more on your car and a little bit more on your clothes, and it kind of gets things out of proportion a little bit, and then there's the brand names that are everywhere, and I know I'm coming from a different place. Well, now, where'd you come from before? The issue of the state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state of state it kind of gets things out of out of proportion a little bit and then there's the brand names that are everywhere and i know i'm coming from a different place well now where'd you come from before michigan well see now look i would um honestly people who live there are plenty of people who would say because new york is expensive um a lot most of us are having to um well yeah i know um i'm just trying i mean i i'm trying to be very i'm trying to be judicious there's really parts of this country where the materialism is and and the glossiness and the and the importance of looks is much more uh dominant than in new york i mean one of the things i like about new york is it's well you know the you know the waylon jennings song too dumb for new york too ugly for la you don't know that one when i heard that song i said that kathy there's only one city for us we only have the only hope we have of reaching a little delayed reaction here i mean for example honestly in spite of the fact it's true it's new york and therefore you have you have the greatest wealth in the world is here i mean it's the wealthiest place in the world and there's enormous wealth and there's some people that you you you come near and you realize what they're spending on their pillows there's no doubt about that but as a culture from top to bottom it's not as materialistic a culture to raise your kids in as as a lot of other places i know um and uh in even the elite schools are pretty big on i mean you know uh my kid got my youngest got a uh a scholarship for three years to a very elite school and of course you know there were some of the kids that he was with who you know his parents had a house in florida and a house in the hamptons and a house upstate and an apartment you know on fifth avenue park avenue but there was also an awful lot of pretty relatively poor kids because the even the elite schools put a lot of emphasis on scholarships and so on so i um it's a little dangerous to make such generalizations but i compared to some other places where i know people are raising their kids and even certain suburbs it's it's uh i don't know that it's quite as glossy and as materialistic uh but the rent is the uh thing that a lot of people look at by the way the midwest is scandinavian and german and it's a very frugal place it just is and you're not going to you go to the west coast or other places it's it's different and if you came from the midwest to here i could imagine it's pretty scary but try some other places but i won't say them on tape okay yeah just one comment as a person half foot in the city and half on the way out maybe but uh one thing to think about is the idle time that your kids have in the suburbs um growing up christian home perfect neighborhoods suburbs it's wonder i'm alive half the stuff we did because you could be in the house in your idle time your parents don't have a clue what you're doing yeah that's true let alone in the yard or anything else let alone when you finally get in the cars with your buddies it's you know when you're in new york city in your small apartments you have no choice but to be right next that's true i mean karen referred to that yeah you're right so you're just making a comment you're not asking a question right no i'm not really when you said idle time i thought you mean when they're bowing down at the suburb yeah those suburban people they're just bowing down to idols all the time it's terrible out there i'm having these arguments back and forth no i agree i agree with you it's all it's also the same thing with cars by the way excuse me uh let me just say um actually this isn't quite right because remember somebody asked me about the safety thing when your kids uh in the suburbs turn around 14 when their older friends can start to drive already you know there is uh i am was so happy that my children weren't out driving around for you know from the age 13 to age 18 with their friends um when you live in a driving culture the kids always want the car so they're always out by themselves and they're not good drivers they're especially not the boys they're terrible especially the boys are terrible drivers i mean you can see the statistics and uh but worse than that is when they're in a group driving around it's even worse because of the joking and the and sometimes the drinking and and and the showing off and all that sort of thing and therefore when my kids were always going when they went out they went on the subway they went on the bus and they went with friends incredibly safer unbelievably safer and so anyway i'm just you know just trying to keep in mind that i when i when i think back when i whenever i get out and i see what other kids are doing with that i don't tell you uh but the point is even there it's more social they don't drive solo off someplace so they uh i i just find that in the city they're with people they're with us they're right with us i mean it's true what our kids are doing our kids actually have enough room for everybody to have their own room. And yet the rooms weren't that great places to hang out. We generally would read and study and, you know, out in, we had a kind of living room, dining room area, and we're all there, all the time. And it was much more, you know, Prairie Home Companion than you would think New York City would be capable of. Yeah, okay, another one. Hi. I just picked up on what you, the comment you made about private schools in New York City, and it's something that we've been thinking about. Our son goes to certainly not one of the elite private schools in the city, but a school that goes from nursery school to sixth grade. And we just went to an event where one of the teachers, who in fact is one of the most respected teachers in the school, gave a summary of a class they take in the sixth grade called World Religions. And we sat there the whole time waiting for the moment where he said, and what we try and do is incorporate each children's faith into the lesson and teach the group how everyone can learn from that. And it never materialized. And it really brought up for us the concept of intellectualism in the city, sometimes being at the expense of your faith. Yeah. And I wanted to see if you could talk about that for a little bit. Now, I still think that for K to six, it's not that big a problem. I do think in the high school years, their approach to world religions and cultures and sexual ethics and all that, I think does become a bit of a problem. And you have to, you know, it depends a great deal on your children. It really does. Some of them are much more impressionable. You know, it's even true, of course, in discipline. You know, that proverb that says, train up a child in the way he should go. Some people say that the best way to translate that is, is really adapt your discipline to the way the child is. See, train up the child in the way he should go is a way of saying, adapt your training to the child's nature. That's what it's probably saying in Hebrew. And we found that we have, you know, one of my children, you just look at him like this and he melts. He, you know, just completely, you know, just, there's a meltdown and that's all you have to do. And other kids, you've to get, it just doesn't get through unless they're grounded, unless you sit down with them. They just, you know, they're just stubborn and they, you know, the same genetic pool. And we kind of raise them the same. How could they be so different? And therefore, there are certain kids that can navigate a more pluralistic situation. They if, for example, they're very close to you, they're pretty committed in their faith, they're pretty smart, and they are willing to dialogue with you, then you can take them through those kinds of places. And it might really make them, you know, be pretty good. If they're really quiet and they don't really express themselves very much and you're really not sure, or they're very impressionable, then you might not want to be putting them in a school like that, that is going to kind of go after them on, on religion and on, on sex and on, uh, culture and things like that. So that's the only thing. But when they're younger, I don't think it matters a great deal. In spite of the fact that they, as some of you know, that they will, uh, uh, teaching about marriage can happen in second and third grade, as some of you know. For whatever reason, I think it's important to start telling people, telling kids in some schools, uh, not to be, not to look down at anybody for any sexual practice at all. So they go after them sometimes in second and third grade. But even there, I still think that that's not that difficult to navigate. It's later on high school, junior high school and high school. I think we can take one more because then we have to have a couple of announcements. Yes. This might be a longer question than you want to answer. Sorry. Oh, good. Um, but, um, how important is it to present an example for your kids versus showing them that you also have struggles? You talked about, you know, them respecting you and believing that you'll understand. How important is it to show them an example versus showing them that you also struggle and you're not perfect? That's a great question. And actually that's a great question. Now you, but you, there's a, I see what you're saying. You're saying on the one hand, if you talk about your struggles and are open about your failures, maybe you're not being a good example as opposed to showing them a good example, which means you might be hiding some of your, or, or being a little less forthright about your own flaws and failures. Ah, but there is a, there is a magic solution to that. And it's a thing called repentance. Your kids do need to see that you can repent because what that does is that draws the line between the two. Um, a, a person who knows how to repent without groveling, without, uh, a person who shows that repentance is not traumatic and groveling and, and, and, and a horrible, uh, excruciating experience, but, but no excuses, is open repentance, humble, and even. say i really blew it it was really wrong there's no excuses this is one of the reasons why i'm a christian because i became a christian through repentance and i'm growing through repentance but and i i really can make these changes and i will but i have i have i have nothing i have no excuse for what i did for your kids to see that and sometimes for you to do it for to them repent to them for blowing up for example or being inconsistent or something like that crucial because then on the one hand you're being a great example for them you're giving them a skill without which they're not going to navigate life they certainly won't be able to handle marriage on the other hand you're also showing you're also being honest about your weaknesses which is really crucial because if the kids grow up thinking that you're kind of flawless eventually they're going to see through it even though you don't think they have if you if you're kind of hiding it you think you're hiding it but they live with you and they can see so repentance is really really crucial okay i'll tell you what we are going to uh ask rim or somebody or just both of you rim's going to come and talk you talk to you about what's coming next okay you're going to come and talk to you about what's coming next okay okay you're going to talk to you about it okay you're going to be talking about it okay
