TITLE: Jesus at His Friend’s Feast
SCRIPTURE: John 2:1-11
TOPICS: God's Love
SERIES: The Vision of Redeemer
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/jesus-at-his-friends-feast/

============================================================

The scripture reference comes from the second chapter of John, verses 1 through 11. On the third day, a wedding took place at Cana in Galilee. Jesus' mother was there, and Jesus and his disciples had also been invited to the wedding. When the wine was gone, Jesus' mother said to him, They have no more wine. Dear woman, why do you involve me? Jesus replied, My time has not yet come. His mother said to the servants, Do whatever he tells you. Nearby stood six stone water jars, the kind used by the Jews for ceremonial washing, each holding from 20 to 30 gallons. Jesus said to the servants, Fill the jars with water. So they filled them to the brim. Then he told them, Now, draw some out and take it to the master of the banquet. They did so. And the master of the banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. He did not realize where it had come from, though the servants who had brought the water knew. Then he called the bridegroom aside and said, Everyone brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the guests have had too much to drink. But you have saved the best till now. This is the first of his miraculous signs Jesus performed in Cana of Galilee. He thus revealed his glory and his disciples put their faith in him. This is God's word. We've been looking at the vision of Redeemer all fall, and this is the last sermon on which we'll be looking at that subject, because if you've been around for a long time, you know that both the content and the themes of this particular passage have had a huge impact on Redeemer over the years. It wouldn't be complete to look at what Redeemer stands for and believes without looking at this passage. Now, this is the story of Jesus at the wedding feast of Cana. Pretty familiar story. And there's an oddness about it. Reynolds Price, Duke University professor, says, If you were inventing a biography of Jesus Christ, that is, if you're just making up stories about Jesus to get across his power and glory, who would invent, as the inaugural sign of Jesus' career, a miraculous solution to a mere social embarrassment? In other words, Jesus is using all of his great divine power on a catering disaster. Okay? A catering disaster. And if you were making up stories about Jesus' greatness and power and glory, you would never make up a story like this. That's right. Which means it's here because it happened. But why did it happen? Why did he do it? What did Jesus mean by it? What was he teaching by it? Let's study this passage under three headings. We learn here what he came to offer, how he provides it, and how we can receive it. Okay? What he came to offer, how he provides it, and how we can receive it. First of all, what he came to offer. There was a wedding, verse 1. And you've heard, certainly, that in ancient times, in fact, in less, you know, more traditional cultures, weddings are bigger deals even than they are here. And these weddings in those days lasted about seven days. And the key to the wedding was the wine, of course. That's what made the wedding a feast, a party. And it was the groom's family's job to make the feast a great feast and to supply the wine, and to supply enough wine to last seven days. Now, we find here, though we don't know how or why, the wine ran out early. And it was a disaster. And even though we just made, you know, we made a joke about it just being a catering disaster, in that context, it was a lot more serious because that was a shame culture. And in a shame culture, the social expectations of the society, if the family did not fulfill those social expectations, it was a great disaster for everyone. So in a shame culture, this was not a small thing. And so Mary, who hears about it, and probably, therefore, was close to the family, or maybe she was a relative, that she found out about the catering disaster before anybody else did, comes to Jesus, tells him about the situation, and Jesus does something about the situation. Now, we're going to talk about how he does it in a moment, but for now, let's just simply ask ourselves the question, what does it teach us that he does it? What does it teach us that he actually does fulfill the need and produce the wine? It's an extremely important question because this is his inaugural sign. See verse 11? This is the first of his miraculous signs by which he was revealing his glory. This is the first of his miraculous signs This is the first of his miraculous signs extremely important question, because this is his inaugural sign. See verse 11? This is the first of his miraculous signs by which he was revealing his glory. When you roll out a new magazine, or when you go public with a new enterprise or business, you want to make sure that every single word is carefully crafted to convey the quintessence of what that enterprise is all about. What does it mean? That the first inaugural sign of Jesus Christ's mission, by which he's telling us who he is and what he's come to do, he does not raise somebody from the dead. He does not heal a sick person. He does not preach a sermon. He does not call anyone into discipleship. What does he do? He produces 150 gallons of the best wine to keep a party going, and that's his first sign. What does that mean? How could that be his first sign? And if you and I, and I know it's true, I mean we laughed at it and we're scratching our head, if you and I do find that odd, that means that perhaps we don't understand what Jesus is really about very well. Why does this term, verse 7 and 8, tells us about a character at the wedding called the master of the banquet. Now it's a Greek word that actually literally means the ruler of the table or the lord of the feast. Now we don't really have, I don't think, in our wedding something quite like this, unless it's a really, really big wedding. This was a person who was essentially a master of ceremonies, maybe an emcee, but his real job was to make the party a real party, to make the banquet a real banquet. It was his responsibility to make it a great feast. But the point of this passage is what? Who is it that makes this a great feast? Who is it that supplies the wine in the end? Who is the true lord of the feast? It's Jesus. And Jesus Christ is saying, by making wine his calling card, he is saying, I come, yes, to bring self-denial, yes, to bring rules and regulations, yes, to bring humbling, yes, to bring codes of conduct, yes, I come to bring all of that, and my followers will experience all of that as well. But ultimately, what am I here to do? Where am I driving the universe? We saw it earlier this fall, Isaiah 25. In the last day, the lord of hosts will make for his people a feast of the finest meats and wine well refined, and on this mountain he will swallow up death forever. And the lord God will wipe away tears from all faces, and your reproach and shame will be taken away forever, for the lord God has spoken. Jesus says, I am the lord of the feast. I come to bring festival joy. I remember some years ago, a pastor in the church where I was a member was talking about some people who had recently been nominated for officer, and at one point he said, I really love this man, but this man has not taken responsibility yet for the fact that he doesn't have much joy in his life. And that sure sounded strange to me. What do you mean responsibility? For joy? And yet Jesus here says, I come to bring you joy. That's what I'm about. I'm driving the whole universe to there. I'm driving the whole world to there. Why is it that over and over again, the Bible uses sensory language to get across what God offers us? So, for example, Psalm 34 says, taste and see that the Lord is good. First Peter 2 says, now you have tasted that God is gracious. Ephesians 1 says, I want the eyes of your heart to be enlightened that you may know his power in us. Ephesians 3 says, I want you to have power to grasp how long and wide and high and deep is the love of Christ. Now, look at that language. We know God's good, but I want you to taste God is good, says the psalmist. You know God is a God of grace, but I want you to taste his graciousness. We know God is powerful, says Ephesians 1, but I want you to see his power, not just to know about his power. We know that he loves us, but I want you to grasp. I want you to feel his love. Paul says, his love is shed abroad in our hearts by his Holy Spirit. Why all this language? Christians are being called in all of these passages to go beyond just believing into experience. It's not enough, the Bible says, just to know God is loving and know God is powerful. You've got to taste, you've got to see, you've got to grasp his love and power. The person who put this best is Jonathan Edwards in this very, this famous place in his sermon, The Divine and Supernatural Light. I'll read it more slowly than I usually read it because it's so important. Edwards says, there is a difference between having an opinion that God is holy and gracious and gracious and having a sense on the heart of the Lord. it up, all right? There is a difference between having an opinion that God is holy and gracious and having a sense on the heart of the loveliness and beauty of that holiness and graciousness. So there is a difference between knowing that honey is sweet and having the taste or the sense of its sweetness. A sense venue can only be understood in terms of itself, not in terms of another sense venue. So, for example, if a person who is born blind, born blind, says to you, is blue like the taste of salt, is red like the sound of a trumpet, you're going to say, not really. What you're going to say is that you can't really convey the reality if you don't have eyes. You're never going to be able to really grasp the full reality of color by having it described to you in a book or in terms of some other sense. You have to actually see color if you're ever going to experience the reality of it. Now, what Edwards is saying, what the Bible is saying, and is this, it's one thing to say, oh, I know God loves me, but have you seen, have you tasted, has it been shed abroad in your heart? Have you actually had the life-shaping reality come upon you? You say, oh, when you talk about sense of the heart, you mean the feeling. You're talking about emotions. Oh, no, I'm talking about something much deeper than that, not less than emotions, but more. Because the heart, the heart is the control center of the life. It's where your deepest commitments and trusts are. It's where you, it's the things that you cherish the most, that's what your heart is. And the things, therefore, that have captured the imagination and control you, mind, will, and emotions. And therefore, if you say, oh, I know God loves me, and yet you still live a life of shame and failure, you don't have a sense on the heart of his love for you, or you'd be living with confidence. Your life would be shaped from the inside out. Or if you say, well, I know God is wise and powerful, and yet you're scared. You're always worried. You're always anxious. You're worried about this and about, you're worried about money. You're worried about your children. Oh, I know God loves, is powerful. I know God's wise, but you don't see his wisdom. You don't see it. It's not a massive, majestic thing that overshadows all other threats so that you actually live your life with boldness. Until that happens, until you taste, until you see, until you grasp his love and his power and his greatness. Until you feast, you see, until you feast on him. Jesus says, behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man will open and come into me, I will come in and I'll eat with him, not just I'll visit with him. What's all the sensory language about? The answer is, Jesus Christ says, I come to bring you festival joy. I come to bring you, I come to bring you the experience of God's love and the experience of his reality, his reality that so shapes you through joy that you don't live like you used to live. That's what I bring. Take responsibility for it because that's what I come to offer. So that's what he offers, festival joy. How does he provide it, secondly? And here's how he provides it. How he provides it is seen in how he actually gives the wine. So verse two, pardon me, verse three, and when the wine was gone, Jesus' mother said to him, they have no more wine. That's a very reasonable request. Mary certainly knows that this is a disaster. She goes to Jesus because though she certainly doesn't yet know the fullness of who he is, she certainly has more of a sense than anyone else that there's hidden power in Jesus. And she knows he's a loving man. She knows he's got a certain power. So she goes and says, can you do something about it? What is his response? Now, the NIV and most other translations just don't seem to want to get across to us the rudeness of Jesus at this moment. It says, dear woman. That's not what he says. The word dear is not in there. He doesn't say mother. He doesn't say mom. He doesn't say, he says, woman. That's all he says. Woman? Very brusque, emotionally brusque. Woman, why do you involve me? Very sharp, very harsh, and clearly Jesus is troubled by something. What is it? My time has not yet come. Now, what is going on? of all, if you're young and you're single, like Jesus, and by the way, Jesus was 30, and therefore certainly people at that time and in that culture were saying constantly, why aren't you married yet, Jesus? All right. All the time, constantly, all right? Why aren't you married yet? So if you're young and you're single and you live, especially in a traditional culture, pretty much if you live anywhere, and you go to a wedding, what are you probably going to be thinking about? You're going to be thinking about your own wedding. When will it be? Will it ever be? Who will it be with? And, of course, that can kind of get you, you know, your mind a million miles away as you're sitting there, you know, in the wedding, thinking about another wedding. But, you see, if Jesus is really thinking about his wedding, because of his self-consciousness, he would be much more profoundly stirred than you and I would be. And here's why. All through the Old Testament, all through the Hebrew Scriptures, God tells us that he does not just want to relate to us as a king to subjects or as a shepherd to sheep or even as a father to children. He wants to have such a profoundly loving, close, and intimate relationship with us. He wants to relate to us as a husband to his wife. And, therefore, in an astonishing number of places like Isaiah 62 and Hosea 2 and Ezekiel 16 and Jeremiah 2, God calls himself the bridegroom of his people. The bridegroom of his people. With that understanding, do you realize the audacity of what Jesus said when there's another place here in the gospel where people were coming to Jesus and say, hey, look, your disciples don't fast, and they don't pray, and they don't do all the various sorts of spiritual disciplines that other disciples do. And Jesus says, no, no. Do the friends of the bridegroom fast when he is still with them? He calls himself the bridegroom. And then one chapter later in John chapter 3, there's a place where people come to John the Baptist and say, hey, you know, you used to be the big prophet in town. Now everybody's going after Jesus. Doesn't that bother you? Everybody's following Jesus. Everybody's following Jesus. And you know what John says? He says, of course. The bride is for the bridegroom. I'm just the best man. The bridegroom. Jesus Christ, therefore, is probably sitting at this wedding feast thinking about what John, the writer, shows us at the end of the whole book of the Bible in Revelation chapter 21 where we read, and I saw the holy city, Jerusalem, coming out of heaven prepared as a bride, beautifully dressed for her husband. And I heard a voice crying, blessed are those who are invited to the wedding feast of the Lamb. Jesus Christ is thinking about that great day in the future in which his people, his bride, will fall into his arms in unity and embrace. But wait a minute. Why is he troubled? Why does he say woman? And why does he say my time has not yet come? Now, you and I, certainly for many years I read this and I saw the place where Jesus says, Mother, my time has not yet come. And I thought he basically meant what you probably think, and that is it's not my time to do a miracle. Mom, it's not time to do a miracle. But he immediately turns around and does it. And I don't think, therefore, that's what he's saying. Because, see, I don't think Jesus relates to his mother quite the way you and I relate to our mothers. You know, it's, oh, Mom, no, Mom, no, no, no, Mom, no. All right. You know, no, Mom, no, no, I'm not going to do it. I'm not, oh, all right. But that's not, there's no indication that that's how he was working here. Oh, no, because when he says my time has not yet come, he actually uses a Greek word. It means literally my hour is not yet come. And every single place in the book of John where Jesus used the term hour, he's referring to the hour of his death. Wait a minute now. Now suddenly realize this is not quite as much of a non-sequitur as you think, though it still looks pretty weird. She comes up and she says, Jesus, they have no wine. And Jesus says, but it's not my time to die. Jesus is thinking of another wedding. And he's saying, Mom, the only way that I'm going to have wine at my wedding feast, the only way I'm going to be able to lift the cup of festal joy and have my spouse fall into my arms at my wedding feast, I'm going to have to die. And if you think that's not what he's thinking, that I'm reading that in, I'm going to have to say, When he starts to go ahead, see, he's thinking about another feast, another wedding, another kind of wine, of which this wedding and this issue and this wine is just the image. But when he turns and begins to actually create the wine for this wedding feast, notice where he goes. He says, nearby stood six stone water jars, the kind used by Jews for ceremonial washing, each holding from 20 to 30 gallons. And Jesus said to the servants, fill those jars with water. Jesus deliberately chooses these jars that were used for ceremonial washing. Well, what do you mean ceremonial washing? Well, see, when the Jews went into worship to God, they would wash ceremonially with water. It was a symbol, of course, but what was the symbol of? It was a symbol of the fact that they were sinful and they needed to be cleansed if God was to embrace them in love. And this is what Jesus Christ is saying, Mom, the only way that my people are going to fall into my arms, the only way I'm going to embrace them and love them, the only way I'm going to be able to lift the cup of festal joy with them is if I drink the cup of eternal justice for them. This, he says on the last supper night, this wine is my blood. Let this cup pass from me, he says to the father. See? He says, the only way that I'm ever going to have my spouse, my love, the only way I'm ever, the only way we're ever going to fall into his arms, and know the absolute unity of oneness with him, and know his love, and know that joy, is if he, first of all, sheds his blood, if he can only raise the festal cup of joy with us, if, first of all, he drinks the eternal justice cup all by himself. And that's what he's thinking about. And that's what he is laying out. Now, do you know what this means? Do you know the implications? Do you know what this means? That he's the bridegroom. Do you know that every single time that God chooses an image for himself, he's saying something about us? So, for example, when he says, I am the shepherd, you know what he's saying about us? You're stupid. You're sheep. Okay. I am the shepherd. You're sheep. I am the king. You're subjects. I am the bridegroom. What is he saying about us? One of the things that is intriguing to me about wedding customs is there are some wedding customs that are pretty much universal. And one of them is that the bride is absolutely bedecked with colors and with jewelry and with the most beautiful garments and with cosmetics. And the bridegroom is not allowed to see the bride until the last minute. Everybody else does. You know, the groomsman might see. Everybody else sees her in various stages of, you know, becoming more and more beautiful bit by bit by bit by bit. Not the bridegroom. Why? So that when the bridegroom is standing at the bottom by the altar and around the corner the bride comes, everything that's happened on that day is to create a powerful impact of beauty on the groom. The sense of her beauty on his heart. Everything has moved into that direction so that that is what, that's the key. So that when he, when she turns the corner and starts coming down the aisle toward him, he's ravished. He's delighted. She looks more beautiful than he's ever seen her look. He wants to throw himself at her feet. He wants to not only promise undying faithfulness, but perhaps dying faithfulness. And he wants to give her the world if he could. How dare Jesus Christ call himself the bridegroom? How dare he use this metaphor? He better mean it. And he does. He is saying, I am that ravished with your beauty. I am that delighted with you. And if he is that ravished with our beauty, and he is that delighted in us, and he loves us like that, and he wants to give us the world, if he wants to give us the world, he will. And that's the reason why we're told that you become the spouse of Jesus Christ. The minute you are betrothed to him, the minute you look at him and you say, with all that I am and all that I have, I honor you. I give myself to you. And on the wedding day, the last day, the day of the great feast, we fall into his arms. And on that day, the universe is consummated, not just our marriage. The history is consummated. the loving union between us is going to transform the world and make it a new heavens and new earth. That's what it means. And that is the wine. Are you living on bread and water? Jesus is my king. I need to obey him. Jesus is my shepherd. You know, he takes care of me. Even that. Do you have the wine? Do you believe this where it says, be glad, O daughter of Jerusalem, the Lord has taken away your punishment. He takes great delight in you. He quiets us with his love. He rejoices over you with singing. Do you taste that? Do you see that? That, by the power of the Holy Spirit, is what is being shed abroad in your heart. That's the feast. It begins now. It begins now. The wine begins to flow now. The joy begins to shape you now. Live in the reality of that. That's what he offers and secondly, how he provides it. Now, thirdly, how can we receive this? And I would like, there's a whole lot of ways of applying this, but I would like to just apply what we've just learned here to your prayer life. Your prayer life. Let me give you five ways in which the knowledge of what he came to offer and how he provides it should transform your prayer life. Let me give you five ways. Number one, let me talk to you about saving prayer. Father, some of you have been coming for weeks, I hope, or more, and it might be time for you to cross a line. Do you know what it means to become a Christian? We've got a beautiful picture of it right here. What do we see? What we see is, then the master of the banquet tasted the water that had been turned into wine. He did not realize where it had come from, and then he called the bridegroom. Of course, the bridegroom, the groom's family is the one who's screwed up, of course, and this, he calls the bridegroom and says, everyone brings out the choice wine first and then the cheaper wine after the guests have had too much to drink. This shows us this really happened. Who would make this up? But you have saved the best till now. Guess what? Jesus does the work, and the groom gets all the credit, and that's what it means to be a Christian. Don't you dare say, oh, Lord, I would love to have a relationship with you. I've tried very hard, and I've ticked off all the lists, and the party's going fine, and I've really worked very hard, and now would you please reward me for all of my hard work? That's not how you become a Christian. What you have to say is, I've absolutely blown it. I'm out. I don't just need to be topped off here. I'm out. I'm out of wine. I'm out of joy. I'm out. Give me credit for what Jesus has done. Jesus has gone to the cross. Jesus has provided the wine. Jesus has shed his blood. Jesus lived the life I should have lived and died the death I should have died. And now, for Jesus' sake, love me. Give me credit for what Jesus has done. And that's what it means to be a Christian. If you don't understand that, you're always going to be anxious, and you're not going to experience wine. It's going to be bread and water, bread and water. You're always going to be saying, I wonder if I've lived a good enough life. No, no. Learn how to do a saving prayer. Admit that you're out. Admit that you need salvation. And then take credit for what Jesus Christ has done. And ask God to transfer what Jesus has done to your account. Saving prayer, number one. Number two, petitionary prayer. You know what I love about this passage? Remember what I said in the very beginning? Reynolds Price says, a lot of people are scratching their head. This seems unworthy of Jesus to use his divine power just to deal with a catering disaster. Do you realize what this means? When you really love somebody, you care about the things that, you care about the little things in their life. You care about little inconveniences, little things that clearly are hurting them or wringing their heart or just making them feel kind of downcast that day. If you really love someone, you don't just care about the big things, you care about the little things. Jesus Christ did not think it was a poor use of his divine power and precious time, did not think it was a bad use, to wipe egg off the face of two disorganized teenagers. That's what you've got here. Two disorganized teenagers who are basically going to be embarrassed for a while. It's just Jesus saying, hey, I've got bigger fish to fry. You know, I'm the incarnate son of God. I'm down here to save the world. Give me a break. This is beyond. He never does that. Of course not. He loves them. And if Jesus Christ comes into your life with omnipotent power and yet love that detailed, that, with that kind of, that kind of care and detailed love of you, I don't know what you should be afraid of. So go to him with little things. Don't think there's anything too small to bring to him. Don't say, oh, I can only... he comes into your life and he cares about everything, every part. Go to him with everything. See? Pray without ceasing. So saving prayer, petitionary prayer. Thirdly, oh, patient prayer. Oh, gee. Look, Mary comes to him with a reasonable request and says, could you help me with this problem we have? First of all, Jesus yells at her, woman. Secondly, he says something that's totally cryptic and completely confusing. My time has not yet come. And then thirdly, he sends everybody off to start to fill jars with water, which has nothing to do with the problem, at least as far as anybody can see. There you have a beautiful picture of the future of your Christian life. Year after year, you're going to ask God for things. He's going to either seem to either just brush you off or say confusing things to you or just fill your life filled with all sorts of tasks that you think have nothing to do with what you really need. This is your future. So respond the way Mary responded. Because what does Mary do? See, what a lot of us do is we get in a huff and we say, I work my fingers to the bone for you, Jesus, and what thanks do I get? That's what a mother can often do. She says, I, you little, you know, in other words, mothers, you know, I wiped your nose. I wiped your behind. You know, I'm your mother. You don't have any right to talk to me like that. Oh, yes, he does. You know why? She remembers the angels. She remembers that there's infinities and immensities in him that have not yet been revealed. She realizes that he's not like anybody else, and you've got to realize the same thing. Or you're not going to be able to deal with this, with what look to you like brush-offs, and what look to you like, like red herrings, and what look to you like things that he's sending into your life that you don't need. You need to remember the angels. You need to remember who he is, and you need to do what Mary does. What does Mary do? You know, he's abrupt to her. He's harsh to her. You know, he kind of, he brushes her off, and he's confusing, and he, what does she do? She turns around, and she says, do whatever he says. Whether it makes sense or not, whether it fits into your agenda or not, do whatever he says. I remember the angels. Now, when you're in trouble, and when everything's going wrong, and you're filled with disappointment, you're ready to give up, or even give up on God, just do whatever he, whatever he says. Remember the angels. Follow Mary. Be patient. So, there's saving prayer. There's petitionary prayer. There's patience prayer. Okay. Fourth, there's perspective prayer. What do I mean by perspective prayer? Jesus deals with the present by looking to the future. For him, that meant constant sorrow. But for us, it means power and joy. Many years ago, I heard Edmund Clowney preach a sermon on this text, and at one point in the sermon, he said this, and it suddenly the entire passage made sense to me, and it's been the basis for this whole sermon. Edmund Clowney says about Jesus, Jesus sat amidst all the joy, sipping the coming sorrow, so that today, you and I can sit amidst all this world's sorrow, sipping the coming joy. Do you see that? The reason why Jesus, in the midst of all this happiness, was sad was because he was living in the present in light of the future. But Jesus sat amidst all that joy, sipping the coming, experiencing the coming, tasting the coming sorrow, so that you and I could sit in the midst of the worst sorrow and handle it. Because we're sipping, experiencing, tasting, to some degree, the coming joy. In fact, we've got a stability now because of that coming joy. Every time you do the Lord's Supper, and the Spirit of God makes it real to you, you're getting an hors d'oeuvre. You're getting a foretaste of that incredible feast. And let's apply this to one area, marriage. Here's Jesus Christ at a wedding, and he's not married yet, and he's got this kind of faraway look. And boy, think about this. Many of us are unhappy about marriage because we're not married and we want to be. And many others of us are unhappy about marriage because we're in a marriage and it's not a good one. And that's a whole lot of the human race. And so marriage very often is just a source of great pain. But sit in the midst of your sorrow, sipping the coming joy. There is only one lover. There is only one spouse that can really give your heart all that your heart needs, and he awaits you. There's only one marriage feast that will really... being, and it's guaranteed for you. It awaits you. And only if you sit, sipping that coming joy, will you be able to handle the great disappointment of marriage. In fact, I have to say that even those of us who are experiencing pretty good marriages need to do it. Otherwise, we will put a burden on the spouse that no human being can possibly bear. We're going to make that other spouse have to be practically perfect, because all of our hopes and all of our happiness and all of our sense of self-worth come from that person, and that will destroy even a good marriage. Sit in the midst of this world, tasting that coming joy, and you will have something that will enable you to face anything. So, last of all, so we have saving prayer, petitionary prayer. We have patience prayer. We have perspective prayer. And last of all, I guess I call it presence prayer. This entire passage is here to say, don't just pray, give me prayer. Oh, Lord, give me this and give me that. You know, help Mommy, help Daddy, help Aunt Gertrude. Go for the wine. Stop settling for bread and water. Dwight Moody, who was a minister in Chicago in the late 1800s. His church was destroyed by the Chicago Fire, Great Chicago Fire of 1871. And many of his people's homes were destroyed by the fire. And, you know, after that disaster, and some of you know about this if you've been through disasters, he went into a period of depression. There was a great sense of weakness and despondency, and he just couldn't lift it. And he was actually in New York City raising money to rebuild homes and the church in Chicago. And he was praying, oh, Lord, become a reality to me. I'm in bread and water. Give me the wine. And one day, he says, interestingly enough, he says, well, one day in the city of New York, oh, what a day. I can't describe it. I seldom refer to it. It's almost too sacred an experience to name. I can only say that I had such an experience of God's love, I had to ask him to stop. I would not now be placed back where I was before that experience if you should give me all the world, which is an amazing statement, because what he was actually saying is, I was pretty happy, and then I became depressed. And then I, because of that depression, I got an experience of God's love that was worth the depression to have. I would never want to go back to the way I was before. Do you know anything of that? Do you know that wine? Isaac Watts has got a hymn, and one line goes like this, the hill of Zion yields a thousand sacred sweets before we reach the heavenly fields and walk the golden streets. A thousand sacred sweets. Take responsibility, some responsibility for your joy. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for showing us ways in which we can sit down and eat and feast with your Son, even now, even though all we get now is only a foretaste of that great feast, that great eschatological feast, which is going to be the new heavens and the new earth. We ask that you would help us to, though, begin to experience some of that, so we can have our lives absolutely shaped from the inside out by experience of your love and your grace and your goodness. And we thank you for ways in which you've shown us today in this passage that we can approach that. And we ask that you would, by your Holy Spirit, empower us to do what we now purpose in our hearts to do. And we ask all this through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen. Amen.
