TITLE: Jesus, Our Hero
SCRIPTURE: Acts 5:29-33
TOPICS: Doctrine
SERIES: The Book of Acts
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/jesus-our-hero/

============================================================

Acts chapter 5, verses 29 to 33. Let me read it for you. Peter and the other apostles replied, We must obey God rather than men. The God of our fathers raised Jesus from the dead, whom you had killed by hanging him on a tree. God exalted him to his own right hand as prince and savior, that he might give repentance and forgiveness of sins to Israel. We are witnesses of these things, and so is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him. And when they heard this, they were furious and wanted to put him to death. This is God's word. Now, we've been looking, actually, for a number of weeks, of course, all fall, at the book of Acts. But chapter 3 and 4, and even here in 5, is really all about one major event. It's the first persecution of the church. The new church, it's for the first time, faces persecution. And some of the previous weeks we've talked about the fact the apostles had been jailed, and the apostles had been threatened with the loss of their goods and their lives. The way in which they responded to the persecutions, not just here, where they say, in front, in this public place, they say, we must obey God rather than you or any human beings. We are witnesses. We're not going to stop. Now, this heroism is a difficult thing to account for. They're heroic. Now, some of you surely have doubts about, perhaps, the historical accuracy of something like the book of Acts and the Bible. But, you know, if we were talking about Noah or Abraham, that would be one thing. But we know this. We know that for the first 200 or 300 years of the Christian church, in the first two or three centuries A.D., that there were numerous persecutions of Christians. For over 100 years before Constantine declared Christianity the religion of the Roman Empire, it was illegal to be a Christian. At any time, if you were known to be a Christian, you could have all your goods confiscated or worse. It's a historical fact. In fact, we know that the reason Christianity grew, as one historian puts it, the reason Christianity succeeded over dozens of other religions was because Christians died better than anybody. They died the best. That's the reason that the religion did the best. They died forgiving their executioners. They died with joy. They died singing. Nobody died like they did. Nobody dealt with the torment, with the death, with the persecutions the way they did. But there's even this incredible phrase that comes down to us from that era. Tertullian, one of the early church fathers, he said, of course, in a different language than we speak, he said, Semen est sanguis christianorum, which means, the blood of Christians is seed. That's an unbelievable statement. You know what he's saying? He says, the more you kill us, the faster we grow. It's almost a kind of way of saying, come on. The lower you lay us, the higher you raise us. The more you kill us, the more we grow. The blood of Christians is seed. Now, where did they get this kind of heroism? In those days, there were certain people who were groomed for the heroic. People in military schools and military academies. These were ignorant fishermen. How did they get so heroic? And the answer is, right here, in this verse, where he says, God has exalted him. Here's the reason we're not going to obey you. Here's the reason we're not going to listen to anybody else. God has exalted him to his own right hand, Jesus Christ, as prince. Excuse me. There's a word here that is very odd. It's a very interesting Greek word, and it's translated here as prince. Peter, in chapter 3, when he made another speech, he uses it previously. I went by it without comment, but I'm not going to do that today. In chapter 3 and in Acts 5, the same word is used. It's the word archegos. Jesus is the archegos. And in chapter 3, it's translated the author. Here, it's translated prince. In the book of Hebrews, it's also used twice. In chapter 2 of Hebrews, it says, it's translated this way. He's the captain of our salvation. In Hebrews 12, it's translated, fix your eyes on Jesus, the pioneer of our faith. Why in the world would the same Greek word, every single place it appears, it has a different translation? about it, if you read the English Bible. And the answer is it's just too rich to be gotten across through one word. And what it really means is Jesus Christ is our hero. It's our champion. This word, if you read Greek literature, and we don't, but if you read a lot of Greek literature, you would know this word is more used for the person named Hercules than anyone else. This is referring to the heroes, the ancient heroes of Greek mythology. The ultimate one is Hercules. And Peter says, Jesus is our hero. Jesus is our champion. We fix our eyes on him. And the heroic has now washed back into our lives. The use of this word is extremely significant. And it tells us what heroes are. It tells us why heroes are. And it tells us why Jesus is the ultimate of all heroes. Look, first of all, Peter using this word is a deliberate reference to a very, very strong concept that we don't have much of. One of the most significant books in philosophy the last few years is a book by Alistair MacIntyre of Vanderbilt University called After Virtue. And in that book, he points out that the ancient Greek and Roman societies did not just have heroes in their midst, but they were based on the very vision and concept of the heroic. If you get out any book on mythology, old ancient Greek or Roman mythology, they'd always say, here's the stories about the gods, and here's the story about the heroes, Pericles, Hercules. When Peter uses this term, he is referring to something that in those days people knew about, the vision of the heroic. He's evoking that. And, you know, we have no idea what he's talking about because modern people have lost the idea of the heroic. What I did in order to get the gist of this, actually, for an entire week, I've been reading old Greek myths, and I've been reading these things. What do heroes have in common? Because that's what Peter's doing. Peter's saying, you know about the heroic, let me tell you about the ultimate hero. Here's the problem. If I say to you, you know about the heroic, as modern people, we don't know about the heroic. So it's hard to know what Peter's saying. Here's what I see. Here's what the books say constituted the heroic. Number one, heroes followed character over appearance. Heroes. A hero said, I'm going to do what's right, no matter who sees it. Now, that's kind of different than the modern star, is it not? You know, in Nicole Kidman's movie, To Die For, she says, you're not anything if you're not on television, and she says, what does it matter to do anything worthwhile if nobody's watching? About a few months ago, there was an article in the New York Times book review. It was a review of the movie, not the movie, a review of the book Churchill, and the reviewer said this, there's a huge difference between a star and a hero. In fact, and this is what the reviewer says, he says, the modern leaders today are stars, not heroes. And he says, leaders with which we're generally familiar are stars, not heroes. Stars are surrounded by crowds. Heroes walk alone. Stars consult their focus groups before they speak. Heroes consult their conscience. Heroes didn't care how they looked to anybody. They didn't care about the outside. They didn't care if they weren't liposuctioned. They weren't airbrushed. Okay? They didn't have cosmetics. All they cared about is who I am when no one's looking. They followed their character, character over appearance. Secondly, that's the difference between a hero and a star. Secondly, heroes had fidelity to something greater than their own hearts. Fidelity to something greater than their own hearts. The mark of a hero was to say, this is true, and I'm going to stick with this, though it's difficult for me, though it hurts me, though it's fatal to me, this is right. Two years ago, there was a set of articles in the magazine, the Utney Reader. And the Utney Reader had a series of articles on heroism and how we've lost heroes. There's a very interesting article by Walter Truitt Anderson in which he says, it's good that we've lost heroes. And this is what he says. He says, we're moving away from the old idea of leadership, the old idea of leadership which had to do with heroism. The new idea of leadership does not. We don't look now for salvation in unblemished, omnipotent heroes. We look for leaders who are complex and dependent and changeable. See, modern, post-modern leadership has to do with pride and changeable. In an courage to oppose. As well as his們 We don't look now for salvation in unblemished, omnipotent heroes. We look for leaders who are complex and dependent and changeable. See, modern, post-modern psychology sees the individual person as more changeable than stable. The idea of a fixed truth and identity is incapacitating. We do not need one dominant authority structure to tell all of our inner voices to shut up. Unquote. Now, what's he saying? He says, back in the old days, we believed in truth. And because we believed in truth, we said, well, there's certain things that are right and wrong. And if my inner voices, if my inner desires, if my heart wants to go another way, we said, shut up. Well, we don't believe in that anymore, he says. We believe that truth is not something out here. It's what you find in your heart. In fact, there is no truth other than what you discover to be fulfilling for you. That's what's true. And you see, what Walter Truitt Anderson is saying is that modern people have not just simply lost the heroes. Modern thought has killed heroes. Because here's what a hero is. A hero is someone who does that very thing. A hero is someone who does tell his or her inner voices to shut up. That's what makes you a hero. Anderson says, we can't do that. Why? Because we don't have a truth outside of our hearts. Maybe you're somebody who really believes this. In fact, you know, recently I saw, just, I was going through channel surfing and I saw a Michael J. Fox movie. I don't even know which movie it was. I just saw it enough to have Michael J. Fox say to a woman, I'm doing what I'm doing because it's right. And you know what she said? There is no right and wrong. There's only feeling and opinion. And then I moved on. And I have no idea, I have no idea what movie it was. I think it was, I don't know, The Secret of My Success or Bright Lights Big City. I have no idea. Anyway, on it went. But you see, the average person in New York believes that absolutely. There is no right and wrong. It's a matter of feeling and opinion only. In fact, if you say, I believe there's a right and a wrong that's a moral order in the universe we have to, you know, you get laughed at. I'm not going to argue against that position for a minute. I'm just going to tell you this. You cannot be a hero and believe that. You can't. You've destroyed even the possibility of heroism because you have nothing greater than your heart. The very nature of heroism is to say to your inner voices, shut up, because your inner voices are saying, run. Your inner voices are saying, don't lose that. Your inner voices are saying, well, who's to say what is true? Don't you see, before the act of any, before any act of cowardice, your inner voices say, all truth is relative. That's what makes you a coward. A hero is somebody who says to the inner voices, shut up. This is right. A hero goes for fidelity to something which is greater than your heart. Now, modern stars, of course, go for appearance over character. And modern stars also talk about fulfilling the self, following the heart, rather than telling the heart to shut up. If you can't tell the heart to shut up, you will never do anything heroic because hearts will not want to sacrifice ever. And you have no basis for sacrifice. You have no basis for heroism. But lastly, heroes, this is what amazed me. Heroes, though they may walk alone, you know, like that particular quote, heroes walk alone, but they don't actually walk alone. They always walk for other people. Heroes are substitutes. A hero goes to the breach. Henry V, once more into the breach. What's the breach? That's the place where it's most lethal. And a hero goes there and how many times, I can't even, I won't even give you an example. How many times have you seen stories where somebody turns to everybody else and says, I'll stay here and I'll fight them off so you can get into the boats and get away? That's the heroic. What's the hero doing? The hero is saying, all the things that should fall upon you will fall upon me. I will stand here. It will fall on me. And in some cases, heroism is a very, very amazing exchange. Like the place, the one that's hard for me to ever forget, the place in The Last of the Mohicans where the British officer and the girl and the guy, you see, the British officer, Duncan, and Clara, the woman, and Hawkeye, you see, the trapper, they're all captured by the Indians. And the Indians say, we're going to burn her to our gods, but you're a British officer, we let you go free. And what does the officer say? Me for her. She's condemned, he's immune, but when he says, me for her, his immunity is transferred to her, and her condemnation is transferred to him. And they say, very well. him. What's going on there? Exchange, substitution, that's the hero. You see, you can't do the substitution unless you believe in a truth that's more important than your heart, and you can't even do that unless you understand the whole idea of character. And there we have it, character, fidelity, substitution. Now, when Peter says archegos, he's hearkening to that entire tradition, and they all know that, but then he turns around and says, Jesus is the archegos. Jesus is the hero. When he says that, by the way, he is saying that there's something that stirs in our hearts whenever we hear any one of these stories about the heroic, whether intellectually you believe in the heroic or not, something stirs in your heart. You know, there's an interesting theory about myths by C.G. Jung. Jung says the myths that continually show up, the knight slaying the dragon, the hero, character, fidelity, substitution, my life, me for her, see, into the breach. The blows that would fall on the rest of them fall on me. Why do these myths keep coming up? He says this isn't, these myths don't come up because somebody made them up. We dream in these myths. These myths enter to something deep in us. Now, why? And the answer is, and it's funny, I, you know, Pascal says the answer is, the greatness of mankind is so evident is even proved by a wretchedness for who is unhappy at not being a king except for by a deposed king. And Christina Kelly, who wrote in that Utney Reader, in that Utney Reader issue, she puts it this way. She writes for Sassy Magazine. She writes about celebrities all the time. And here's what she says. She says, why do we crave celebrities and heroes? She lumps them together. First, they satisfy our demand for something outside our inconsequential little lives. Yes, to be human is to feel inconsequential. It's so dumb. With this stream of perfectly airbrushed, implanted SARS, you have to be a powerhouse of self-esteem not to feel inferior. So we worship them because our lives are inconsequential, but doing it makes us feel even more. She says, but the second reason that we seem to adore celebrities is we worship them because our society is not as religious as it once was. I don't pretend to have all the answers, but it seems like people need something to make them feel consequential. Celebrity worship is a warped and unfulfilling substitute for religion. We make them stars, but then their fame makes us feel insignificant. I'm part of this whole process. No wonder I feel soiled at the end of the day. She's saying the same thing Pascal's saying. What is Pascal saying? What does the Bible say? The reason we want heroes is because we feel insignificant, inconsequential. Pascal says it's because, just what Camelot told us and just what the Garden of Eden told us, for one brief shining moment, we know deep in our souls that we were built not to be mediocre, we were built not to be cowards, we were built not to be mundane, we were built to be heroes. We were built to be great. We were made in the image of God. We were made perfect. We were made to run and not be weary, walk and not faint. We were made to be heroes. But sin has broken us down. And we crave heroes because we crave that. You know, there's some of you who say, intellectually, I don't believe in heaven, hell, the supernatural. But when you, I don't believe in Garden of Eden, Camelot. But when you hear about these heroes, when you hear these stories, your heart knows something stirs in you. Intellectually, you don't believe it, but your heart stirs. Why? You long for the heroic. You yearn for the heroic. Why? Because you know that that's what you were meant for. And Peter says, when the little kid says, Daddy, I wish there was a Hercules. I wish there was a Superman. Peter says, you can turn to the kids and say, there is. There is a real hero who can make us heroic, can bring us back into the heroic that we have lost. Jesus, the ultimate hero. Now, why is he the ultimate hero? Well, look at the three things. First of all, Jesus Christ. Think about his character. Think about his character. You know, one of the books I read on heroism, Thomas Carlyle once said, No man is a hero. his valet. What does that mean? It means, well, you know, a person may look great on the outside, but the ones who live with them, the ones who, the valets, you know, the kids, the wives, the children, they know about the selfishness, they know about the mood swings, they know about all these things. Jesus Christ, who is Peter? We are witnesses. This is the Son of God. James, the author of the book of James, Jesus' brother, this is the Son of God. Jesus is the one guy whose valets think he's a hero. The people who lived with him, the character, the integrity, the love, imagine what it must have been like. Jesus is the ultimate hero because even his valets say he's a hero. But then go beyond that. Jesus Christ is the one person who most told his inner voices to shut up. Do you think Jesus came in saying, I know what I'm going to do? My heart shows me that if I do this, it's filled with love for God, it's filled with love for others, I'm going to do the right thing. No, Jesus says, not my will be done. What is that? His inner voices were saying, get out. His will was going in the other direction. In fact, we're told that God forsook him. And if God forsook him, that means that at that moment, Jesus had the deadest prayer life that anyone has ever had. There wasn't even the sense of God in his heart. There was nothing in his heart telling him to do the right thing. And what did he do? He imposed the truth. He did what was right. And he imposed it on his heart. Not my will, but thine be done. That's ultimate fidelity. But then lastly, you know, the ultimate exchange is this. It's one thing for a champion, our champion, to come on in and slay the dragon for us. Kathy and I just watched a video of Rob Roy, you know, the movie about the 18th century, the novel, 18th century novel about the Scottish hero. And at one point, he stands as champion. This one evil noble, the Duke of Montrose, is after his family and after his people and so on. He comes and says, I will do hand-to-hand combat with your champion. If I win, my debts are paid, and my family and my people are saved. If I lose, my life is forfeit, and so on. Champion, see? The champion is the person who goes in and does it for you, fights for you. You're lost in your champion. If your champion wins, you win. If your champion is a victor, you're a victor. If your champion is filled with glory, you're filled with glory. And he goes in and he beats the champion of the evil Duke. What a man, you know. And is that a picture of Jesus? Yes and no. I'll tell you the best picture of Jesus I've ever seen. Jesus was hung on a tree. See what Peter says? The one you hung on a tree. People who were hung on trees were cursed in the Jewish understanding. People who were crucified on a tree. That was the most ignominious of all deaths. It was the death for losers. Jesus was not, did not look heroic when he went before all those people who were accusing him. He kept his mouth shut. He looked like a wimp. He was like a lamb, not like a lion. In Angels with Dirty Faces, Jimmy Cagney is a criminal, and he's on death row, and he's going to the electric chair. But all of these kids back in the old neighborhood think of him as a hero. And Patrick O'Brien, the priest, knows that these kids are on their way to a terrible life. He comes to see Jimmy Cagney. He says, I want you to do something. Before you get to the electric chair, I want you to scream and cry and become a coward. These kids think you're a hero. I want you to become unheroic. These kids think that you're a hero. I want you to become weak. I want you to become unheroic. I want you to become a lamb before the slaughter. I want you to cry out. And Jimmy Cagney looks at Patrick O'Brien and says, what? This is all I've got left. I'm going to spit in their eye. I'm going to get in there. Patrick O'Brien says, you do that, and these kids' lives are ruined. No, I'm never going to do that. Always gets goosebumps. I always get goosebumps whenever I see him. They don't show them. They just show the shadows on the walls like those 1940 movies. And just before they put him into the chair, what does he do? He starts to scream. He starts to yell. He starts to say, no, no, no, don't. I don't want to die. And then they throw the switch. And he's given away the only thing he had, his heroism. But that's real heroism. strength than to be weak when you can be strong. But the exchange still happens. Why? When the kids hear about it, they're disillusioned, and they follow the priest. And his strength is transferred to them. Their weakness is transferred to him. Now, my dear friends, on the cross, Jesus was not heroic, and yet he was utterly heroic. We're the cowards. We're the people who will not say no to the inner voices. We will not say shut up. Again and again we give in. How will we stand before a holy God on the last day? We can't. But Jesus took our weakness. Jesus took all our unheroicness. And on the cross, he was weak when he could have been strong. Remember he says to Peter, Peter, I could call for the angels, but then how will the scripture be fulfilled? And his weakness becomes our strength. Our weakness goes to him. His strength comes to us. The ultimate hero. I want you to think about something for a moment. As we go to the Lord's Supper, that is a symbol of his heroicness. He becomes weak. We can break him into pieces. He can be poured out. And just like food is broken into little pieces in order to make you strong. So Jesus' unheroicness can make you heroes. There's, let me apply it this way. If you want to become a hero, you have to be willing to admit you're a coward. You have to be willing to admit you're a sinner. This hero gives repentance to us. You see this? Prince and Savior who grants repentance. And if you're going to be a hero, you've got to do the very first heroic act, which is to admit you're a sinner. That takes tremendous courage. In some ways, I hate to refer to any one individual, but we just heard Ellie up here. What was she saying? It took terrific courage to admit, I need to be a Christian. I'm a sinner. And that's the first heroic act, to admit you're not a hero. When that happens, the doors are open. Listen, when in the end of that funny science fiction movie, which is still well done, The Last Starfighter, Max and Alex are two kids. They live in a trailer court. And they always dream about getting out of their little mediocre lives and going to L.A. Well, Alex gets taken up into the interplanetary world and he saves the universe. Yes, he defends the frontier against Zor and the Kordan Amada. And he comes back in this incredible spaceship. And he lands and he goes over to Maggie and he says, Maggie, I've saved the world. I want to take you back up there. I've saved the universe. I want to take you back up there. Maggie says, what? Leave what? And he says, you always said you wanted to get out of here. And she says, yeah, L.A. Jesus is like that. You listen to these stories about heroes and you go, oh, I would love to do that. You look at your mediocrity and you look at your mundaneness and you year for the heroic. But when Jesus actually shows up and he says, I have won the world. I have saved the universe and you. And now I want to take you to the stars. I want to take you completely out of your realm. You say, well, this is too much for me. I wanted to go to L.A., but not this. Not give my whole life over. Don't you understand? Heroism, the real heroic, Jesus is actually saying, I will literally take you to the stars. I will. You will run and not be weary. A billion years from now, you'll still be part of what I'm doing in the universe. Christianity, this is more incredible than those stories. This is more incredible than the fairy tales. Jesus shows up and says, if you will take that first step of repentance and then if you will fix your eyes on me as the hero of your faith, remembering what I've done for you, remembering how in me now you're a champion in God's eyes because my glory comes to you. I've won for you. If you can remember who I am and what I've done for you, and if you can remember who you are now in me, bit by bit, you won't be afraid to stand up and say, we are witnesses to these things. You won't be afraid to repent, which is the most heroic thing of all. You won't be afraid to stand up and say, I'm a Christian, which is also a heroic thing. You won't be afraid to obey even when nobody's looking. And eventually, you'll be at my side at the stars. I took all your unheroism so that you could become heroes. me. And she says, I don't want to. Jesus lands and says, come with me. Go with him. Let's pray. Our Father, thank you for the story of Jesus Christ, our champion. Enable us now as we pick up the broken champion, broken for us, stood in the breach for us. Help us to see that as his brokenness leads to our life, even as we eat this physical bread and wine, we pray that so his sacrifice will become our heroism as we fix our eyes on him. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
