TITLE: Jesus Our Defense
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 1:8-2:2
TOPICS: Sin Atonement
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/jesus-our-defense-2/

============================================================

themselves. It's only for people who see themselves as a moral failure. Only people who see that they do not, they're not worthy to go in, that they need somebody to go in for them. If you don't see that, if you don't see that you're so sinful that you don't have the right to just go to God and speak to him, you haven't gotten the first point and you will never have, you're not able to have the experience of intimacy with the Father. Now, having said that, I immediately realized that you're going to fall into two categories here. As I just said, that John says, you have to see that you're a sinner, such a sinner and so morally inadequate that you don't even have the right to go in before God. And as a, you know, as a pastor for almost 20 years now, I've talked to people a great deal over the years and I've heard people's reaction to this particular teaching of the Bible. And in general, the teaching divides people. I find that people either fall into one or the other category. Either they really don't, they have a lot of trouble with this and they really don't have that sensation at all. They don't sense, they don't feel that they're morally a failure. They don't feel that they're that bad. They don't think that they're that wicked. They don't have this sense and they don't see any reason why they can't go to God and pray and talk to him. They feel like, you know, I've tried my best. I do pretty good. I'm not perfect, but I certainly have the right to go in. So some of you just don't have nearly enough of this sense, according to the guy, according to the writer here. And then others of you have an overwhelming sense of it, that you're just crushed under it. You can hardly look at him. You don't want to have anything to do with him. Everybody goes into one side or the other. So let me say something to both of you. First, because it's New York, maybe it's wrong to say that I would think that more of you, maybe not, more of you would tend to be in the first category, that you would say, I don't feel that way. I don't feel like I'm such a rotten sinner. I know the Bible teaches this, and I know conservative churches still teach this, but basically that's an outmoded doctrine. We don't believe that anymore. I don't sense that at all. I don't feel that way. I don't see it. That way. But John says, look at, see in verse 8, if we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves. John says, beware, you will not want to admit it. It is natural to deceive yourself on this. It's natural to say what you're saying. You will hide from yourself how self-centered you are. You will hide from yourself how, you know, how much evil there really is in there. You won't see it. You'll repress it. You know, everybody's talking, I might as well do something about it. Everybody's talking about Union South Carolina, aren't they? And the one thing that's so interesting, since my wife and I, you know, ministered, we had a church in a town just like Union South Carolina. Similar size, similar kinds of people. It's amazing. Same accent, same phrases. And, you know, after it was discovered that the woman actually had killed her two children, you know, the quotes that you saw in the paper from one of their friends, they basically ran like this. They said, she came from a good family. I knew her people. I sat with her in church. She praised the Lord. How could she do such a thing? I can't believe it. But what they mean is, she's just like me. See, she's my kind of people. I went to school with her. I went to church with her. She's like me, and I don't believe that I could do that. And the reason they're so shattered and the reason they're so disillusioned, the reason they're amazed is because of bad theology. They didn't believe what, you know, they may be religious. They may go to churches. They may even consider themselves conservative Christians, but they're not reading their Bible. And as a result, they're so shattered and disillusioned. We are capable of all sorts of things. Now, people, see, I think a lot of folks say, yeah, okay, this is a dirty pool. You shouldn't pull this on us. I feel like that person must be sick. To be capable of evil and wickedness, certain people are, but I just don't feel like I'm that bad a sinner. And all I can tell you is there's nobody who's ever done a better job of explaining this than Charles Spurgeon. I've often, he's a Baptist minister, and he has this great illustration, which I've often had recourse to. He says, look at an acorn. He says, what do you see in the acorn? He says, I know it's counterintuitive. I know it doesn't really make sense. It doesn't seem to be true, but if you think about it, you realize it's true. When you look into an acorn, you see in there an ocean of wood. And he says, let me describe, let me show you that. He says, first of all, inside the acorn is a tree, a huge tree. And every single bit of that huge tree is in that acorn, all scrunched up, you know, teeny-weeny little tree, but it's all in there. In other words, there's not one thing on this huge tree that's going to come out of the acorn that's not in there. but on the tree which is in there are thousands of other acorns, and each acorn is another tree, which means that inside that acorn is not only a tree, but a thousand other trees, and each one of them is a thousand other trees, and he says one acorn has the power to cover the entire world with an ocean of wood. That's how much power is in there, but if that acorn falls on the pavement, within a couple days it rots. All of its power goes to nothing. It doesn't mean the power is not there. It has to actually have to see the power, to understand the power. It has to fall into soil. It has to get watered and so on, and Spurgeon would turn around. He says, what do you think murder is? What do you think it starts with? Murder has to start with a thought that says, I wish that person weren't here. I don't like that person. It starts with a grudge. It starts with selfishness. It starts with pride. It starts with self-centeredness. He says, what do you think that is? He says, in your heart, the acorn cup of your heart, there is an ocean of evil, and if you just happen, by God's grace, to a fallen pavement, if you have happened, by God's grace, not to be in a situation where that evil is really being fertilized, if by God's grace you can't see how much evil is in there, it doesn't mean that it's not there. Now, if you still, considering all that, say, I just don't see myself as that wicked or evil. I don't see myself as capable as murder and extortion. I don't see myself as capable of any of those things. Then I'll just say, okay, fine, I'm done. I've got to move on. File what I'm saying, would you please? Because the great hymn writer John Newton once said in a letter, nobody ever learned, you never learn you're a sinner by being told. You only ever learn that you're a sinner by being shown. And I suggest to you that someday, some place, you will find yourself in a situation in which the only way to explain the way you are acting or the way you are relating or the way you are being treated is by recourse to the doctrine of sin. As Pascal says, you know, he was not a stupid person. Certainly nothing offends us more rudely than this doctrine of original sin, yet without this mystery, the most incomprehensible of all. We are incomprehensible to ourselves. And if you're not incomprehensible yet to yourself, unless you believe in the doctrine of the radical depravity of the human heart, just wait. Just file what I'm saying, all right? On the other hand, a lot of you are the opposite. You're kind of crushed under the whole idea. In other words, when you read this and you see, you know, John saying, you need somebody to go and speak on your behalf. You don't have the right to go in. You're not worthy to go to God. Right away, you immediately know that's true. But you've been crushed. And you know, even if you're a Christian, John is writing to Christians here and he knows something. He knows that in the lives of certain people, there's a voice that has them nailed to a wall. I've met people, Christians, they haven't stopped going to church necessarily, but they have, they've done something in their past that maybe the world calls a great sin. And as a result, this voice comes to them and it says things like, how could you have done that? All the sermons you've heard, all the promises you've made, all the things you've said, all that you know, and you've done this? How can you go to God? How could, how do you expect God to listen to your prayers? How in the world could you even think of yourself as a Christian? You're not worthy to go before him. And that voice has you nailed to the wall. And it's had you there for years. Maybe you haven't given up on your profession of faith. Some of you have. You've completely given up on Christianity. When you get near it, the voice just comes at you. And you've decided it's Christianity doing that. And it's all of its guilt trips. But some of you stayed in and you're just crushed. You're bound in shallows and miseries. Well, what John has to say is especially for you. So the first thing you have to see is you're not worthy to go in. The second thing you have to see is we have an advocate with the Father. Notice this. Now in chapter two, verse one, if anybody does sin, we have one who speaks to the Father in our defense, Jesus Christ, the righteous one. He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins. Now what is this teaching? First, let's ask it three questions. Number one, what is an advocate? Now you say, where's the word advocate? I don't see it. And you see, the real problem with this is that there is a Greek word here. It literally says we have, when you sin, a paraclete with the father. But in this... this whole idea across with one English word. So the translators actually take this and open it up, and they're taking one English word and they're translating it, one who speaks to the Father in our defense. But the word here could be translated an advocate. Maybe that's the best way to put it. What is an advocate? What is this person? An advocate is someone who has an official relationship with you so that whatever the advocate achieves, you achieve, and whatever the advocate loses, you lose. An advocate is a legal proxy. An advocate is a legal representative. In philosophical language and theological language, an advocate is a federal head. From the Latin word fetus, meaning covenant. It means you've entered into a relationship with this person so that this person represents you, so that what that person does is transferred to you. There's some examples. They're all over the place, actually. In the area of negotiations, you know, in most countries, in fact, I guess in all countries, the national leaders can declare war and also surrender and achieve peace. You don't have a referendum on war, right? We don't have a popular election to decide if we're going to war or not, or decide whether we're going to surrender or not. You have a relationship with the national leaders so that they have the right to do that. And, of course, if they make a bad move, we're all involved. If they make a good move, we're all involved. Let me give you an illustration that's a little more clear than that. In ancient times, you had the idea of a champion. Here were two great armies coming together, and sometimes, rather than have the battle and have lots and lots of people killed, each army would put forth a champion. In the old days, they even had a Greek word for this. In the ancient Greek, an archegos. What a great word, an archegos. And the champion would stand forth and would represent the army and the country and would battle against the champion of the other country, the other army. And, of course, what that would mean, the agreement is when you did that, it meant that if your champion was skillful, you were skillful. If your champion was foolish, you were foolish. If your champion had victory, you were treated as if you were the victors. If your champion was defeated, you were treated as if you were defeated. And, of course, the one that we often use the most nowadays is the whole idea of a lawyer, a legal proxy, especially a lawyer who has what we call today power of attorney. And in that case, the lawyer stands in and represents the client so that what the lawyer achieves, the client achieves, and what the lawyer loses, the client loses. It's all transferred. Charles Hodge, one of the, a hundred years ago, was a Presbyterian theologian. He put it this way. He said, the relationship of a legal advocate to his people, pardon me, the relationship of Christ to his people is that of a legal advocate to a client. The former personates the latter. The lawyer stands in the client's place. It is, while at last, the most intimate of relationships. You may not even have to appear in court. You are not heard. You are not regarded. You are lost in your advocate, who for the time being is your representative. The advocate, not you, is seen. The advocate, not you, is heard. The advocate, not you, is regarded. Now, what's this advocate? If Jesus is our advocate, what's he doing up there? What's he do? That's the second question. He's speaking. He's talking. And if, if we stick with the lawyer illustration, everybody knows why, because that's the job of a lawyer. You hire the lawyer to talk for you. You hire the lawyer because you say the lawyer can talk. The lawyer knows what to say, and the lawyer can make a case in a way that I couldn't. Now, when I first became a Christian, and I probably alluded to this last time, but it's very important to say again. When I first became a Christian, I heard about this idea that Jesus Christ was before the Father. There's a number of words in the Bible for this. In the book of Hebrews, it says, Jesus Christ stands as our high priest before the Father. It means he stands as our representative, speaking on our behalf, our legal proxy, you see, our advocate, and that he's up there pleading before the throne for our sake. And over the, you know, when I first heard about this, it seemed at best foolish and at worst very nerve-wracking. At best, it seemed kind of silly, like, you know, why are you arguing with the Father? But at worst nerve-wracking, because I would think, well, this, what this means is when I sin, right, Jesus says, oh, Father, please. don't wipe him out. And this is what I pictured it as, and I saw that I would sin again, and the Father would say, I can't believe that Tim Keller did that again. And Jesus says, I know, but wait a minute. You know, this is my idea. You know, Jesus gets in front of the Father and says, one more time, just give him one more chance, please. For my sake, Father, would you please? And then I see the Father looking down at Jesus saying, well, okay, for your sake. All right, one more time. Now, you see, that's a very nerve-wracking metaphor, you know? I mean, you sit there and you say, when does the Father finally say, I've had it? When does the Father finally say, forget it? But you see, it doesn't say the advocate is standing there, Jesus Christ the merciful. It also doesn't say Jesus Christ the persuasive. It says Jesus Christ the righteous one, and it says what he's saying. See, a real good lawyer doesn't just play on the emotions of the court. A good lawyer has a case, and what Jesus' case is, atoning sacrifice. And therefore, the teaching of this passage, which is so absolutely startling and which is absolutely unparalleled in any other religion, is Jesus Christ is not up there just asking for forgiveness. No. And he's not up there asking for mercy. Absolutely not. Jesus Christ is telling the Father what the law is. Now, it's unworthy to think of Jesus as having to persuade the Father. You have to remember that the advocacy of Jesus Christ was the Father's idea. We read in 2 Corinthians 5, it says, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. So, you have to understand what this is about. What this is about is this. Jesus Christ stands before the Father, before the justice of God, in other words. And relentlessly and continually, he says something like this. Father, yes, Tim did do it again. But I have died the death he should have died, and I have lived the life he should have lived in his place. I am his advocate. He is lost in me. When you look at him, you have to see me. You have to see all that I've done. You have to see all that I am. And therefore, Father, it would be unjust for you to take two payments for this sin. I've already paid for it. Therefore, Father, I do not ask for mercy. I demand justice. And if you think that what I just said, and I mentioned this at the very, when I was going through this three weeks ago, some people afterwards says, come on, where does it say that? It says that in chapter 1, verse 8. If we claim to be without sin, we deceive ourselves in verse 9. I'm sorry. If we confess our sins, it doesn't say he is faithful and merciful to forgive us our sins. It doesn't say he's faithful and loving. He is, of course, faithful and loving. He is faithful and merciful. I'm not saying he's not. But it says, when we confess our sins because we have an advocate with the Father, God forgives our sins because he's just. Listen, justice has to be stronger than mercy. If you ever have a judge, a judge, and if that judge's son or daughter would come to trial, no judge anywhere would be allowed or would allow him or herself to sit and preside over trial of their own kid. Why? Because justice has to triumph over mercy. Because justice has to prevail or you can't have a civil order. But incredibly, we have a situation in which the justice and the love of God demand that he accepts us. There is nothing beyond this. Nothing at all. Father, he says, I don't ask for mercy. I demand justice. And there is no greater case than that. The justice of God on the scales, you know, the thing that we always worry about. Have you ever heard of the scales? The scales, you know, the scales. And here's my deeds, and here's my record, and here's the justice of the law. And of course, my deeds and my records, of course, can't possibly, you know, outweigh the deeds of the law. And so, the idea of blind justice is a frightening thing, unless you understand this. We have the law of God not on the other side. We don't have the law of God on the other side against us. We have the law of God completely for us. We have the justice of God completely for us. There is no such thing as this anywhere else. In any, no other religion says this. This is far more than forgiveness. Most people seem to think that what it means that Jesus died for you, and you go and ask for forgiveness, is that God now wipes off better do a good job. Jesus Christ has gone through the probation for us. He puts us beyond probation. Jesus Christ has not just given us forgiveness for our sins, but he's accomplished righteousness for us. He's not just the one who pays our penalty, but he's our advocate. He's the one who stands in for us. He's the archegos. It says that in Hebrews 2. He's our champion. He is the author and finisher of our faith. And you know what that word is, author? Archegos. That's in Hebrews chapter 12, verse 2. He is the one who accomplishes it for us. How does that change your life? That's the last thing we just talk about, but I'll just tick it off. Number one, finally you can deal with your guilt. Finally. Most people cannot deal with their guilt. The person who's got that voice nailing them down, but I've done something wrong, but I've done something wrong. But you see, God hasn't just given you forgiveness. People who think that that's all that we get. The reason you're dealing with your guilt and you can't deal with your guilt, excuse me, is because you believe that God is simply merciful. Well, he is very merciful. It was his mercy that brought forth the whole idea of Jesus dying on the cross and standing in for us. But you must understand something else. That not only the mercy of God demands that he love and accept you and shower you with blessings and treat you as if he was your son, as if you were his son, and had done everything that Jesus had ever done, it's his justice that demands it too. Don't you see the reason why there's... Don't you see the reason why Paul can say, now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus? Don't you see why Paul will break in in that same chapter? He'll say, who shall bring a charge against God's elect? See? It is Christ who died, yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of the Father. Father, okay? What shall separate us from the love of Christ? See, what is he doing at the end of chapter 8? He's going on and on. He's saying, this is not just forgiveness. This is righteousness. God's righteousness has come to us, and it showers us, and we're living in it. This is the end of the voice. You know, when the voice comes to you and says, you call yourself a Christian, look at what you've done. And, of course, that great hymn. Well may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all in thousands more. Jehovah knoweth none. And if you don't know the hymn, you have to be able to turn to the voice and say, Jesus Christ is my advocate. Of course I've done these things. God knows that. But when he sees me, he sees me in my advocate. I'm lost in my advocate, and all he sees is a beauty. Do you know how to do that? If you say, I'm a Christian, but I can't deal with my guilt. If you say, I'm a Christian, but I don't feel worthy to go before God, you don't get this yet. But here's hope. Keep reading it. Keep thinking about it. Keep talking to somebody. Keep figuring it out. Because when it dawns on you, wait till you see. But on the other hand, what else does it bring you? It also is the only way to deal with disappointment. Because I've come to the conclusion that most people get in despondency not over guilt necessarily, but over the loss of a hope. Something in their life that's so important to them. Something in their life that's so valuable. Something in their life that means so much. And you get despondent. You know why? Most of your deepest yearnings for success are actually efforts to be what only Christ should be for you. These things that you get so despondent when you lose, they are your case, your arguments before God. They're the things that you look to and say, see, I am worthy. And when one of them falls through, this person doesn't love me, this job hasn't worked out, my career hasn't worked out, why are you so despondent? Because you don't know the hiddenness. Let me close with this. When Stephen, the great first martyr, he was a great preacher, and you read about him in the book of Acts, Acts chapter 6 and 7. When he was preaching, and he was brought into court, and of course the people were very upset, the religious authorities were very upset that Christianity was spreading as it was. They looked at him, and they said, we're going to execute you. Especially after he explained the gospel to them, and they told him they were wicked sinners, didn't go over very well. You know, the first part of the sermon tonight, fortunately most of you probably won't try to execute me, but some of you might be unhappy, but in this case, Stephen was preaching to people who had the power to execute them, so he did. And so they took him out, and they began to stone him, but just before they began to kill him, God gave him something. He looked to the heavens, and he says, I see the Father, and I see Jesus... at the right hand of God. What did he see? He saw his advocate. And the thing that's so amazing is, when on earth he was getting condemned, he was being called a loser, he was being called a traitor, he was being called a cult leader, he was being called a liar. Everything that he would want, he would want acclaim, he would want popularity, he would want success, he would want a good name, he would want a good reputation, was all being stripped away from him. What did he do in response? When he saw Jesus Christ as advocate standing up there, his face got radiant, it said. He says, I see the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. In other words, to know that his advocate in heaven and his Father in heaven loved him, acclaimed him, commended him, and accepted him meant that all of the rejection and even an execution here on earth. He got so excited, he almost seemed to forget, if you read the text, that he was about to be executed. To the degree that you grasp the fact that you have an advocate with the Father, you'll be able to take criticism. This guy could take an execution. You'll be able to take criticism. You'll be able to take rejection. You'll be able to take sin and guilt. You'll be able to take the things that right now weigh you down. You'll have the fullness of the Spirit to the degree that you grasp that when we sin, we have one who speaks to the Father in our defense. Jesus Christ, the righteous one, he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins. Let's pray. Give us grace, Father, to see what Stephen saw. Give us grace, O Lord God, to understand that we are sinners, but to understand that we have one that stands before us, stands before you. And when you look at us, you see him. Father, help us to see what a radically different self-image that brings to us. Help us to see what a radically different approach to life that brings to us. Help us see what a radically different analysis of our discouragements and our difficulties and our anxieties and our depressions that brings to us. Help us to see everything in terms of this wonderful truth that we might have eternity in our hearts and know the joy that you know, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in communion with one another and in yourself. He was being called a, you know, a cult leader. He was being called a liar. Everything that he would want, he would want acclaim. He would want popularity. He would want success. He would want a good name. He would want a good reputation. It was all being stripped away from him. What did he do in response? When he saw Jesus Christ as advocate standing up there, his face got radiant, it said. He says, I see the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. In other words, to know that his advocate in heaven and his Father in heaven loved him, acclaimed him, commended him, and accepted him meant that all of the rejection and even an execution here on earth. He got so excited, he almost seemed to forget, if you read the text, that he was about to be executed. To the degree that you grasp the fact that you have an advocate with the Father, you'll be able to take criticism. This guy could take an execution. You'll be able to take criticism. You'll be able to take rejection. You'll be able to take sin and guilt. You'll be able to take the things that right now weigh you down. You'll have the fullness of the Spirit to the degree that you grasp that when we sin, we have one who speaks to the Father in our defense. Jesus Christ, the righteous one, he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins. Let's pray. Give us grace, Father, to see what Stephen saw. Give us grace, O Lord God, to understand that we are sinners, but to understand that we have one that stands before us, stands before you, and when you look at us, you see him. Father, help us to see what a radically different self-image that brings to us. Help us to see what a radically different approach to life that brings to us. Help us to see what a radically different analysis of our discouragements and our difficulties and our anxieties and our depressions that brings to us. Help us to see everything in terms of this wonderful truth that we might have eternity in our hearts and know the joy that you know, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, in communion with one another and in yourself.
