TITLE: Joy in God’s Plan
SCRIPTURE: Philippians 1:12-26
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling Doctrine Sanctification
SERIES: Philippians
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/joy-in-gods-plan/

============================================================

This summer, we're going through the book of Philippians, a very happy book, and yet a very realistic book. Let me read from Philippians chapter 1, verses 12 to 26. This is Paul speaking to a church of people he loves very much, and he begins, Now I want you to know, brothers, what has happened to me has really served to advance the gospel. As a result, it has become clear throughout the whole palace guard and to everyone else that I'm in chains for Christ. Because of my chains, most of the brothers in the Lord have been encouraged to speak the word of God more courageously and fearlessly. It's true that some preach Christ out of envy and rivalry, but others out of goodwill. The latter do so in love, knowing that I am put here for the defense of the gospel. The former preach Christ out of selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing that they can stir up trouble for me while I'm in chains. But what does it matter? The important thing is that in every way, whether from false motives or true, Christ is preached, and because of this I rejoice. Yes, and I will continue to rejoice, for I know that through your prayers and the help given by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, what has happened to me will turn out for my deliverance. I eagerly expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed, but will have sufficient courage so that now, as always, Christ will be exalted in my body, whether by life or by death. For to me, to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If I'm to go on living in the body, this will mean fruitful labor for me, yet what shall I choose? I do not know. I am torn between the two. I desire to depart and be with Christ, which is better by far, but it's more necessary for you that I remain in the body. Convinced of this, I know that I will remain and will continue with all of you for your progress and joy in the faith, so that through my being with you again, your joy in Christ Jesus will overflow on account of me. This is God's Word. And there's much to say about this, but we're going to confine ourselves to one point, and that is this. Paul is facing a terrible trial. Paul is in chains. And you know what that means, literally? He was chained to a member of the Praetorian Guard at all hours of the day, on shifts. They would work on shifts. They would come in for a certain shift, but he was always chained. He wasn't just in prison. He was chained in prison to an individual guard. He couldn't go to the bathroom in privacy. He couldn't sleep in privacy. Sort of a Jean-Paul Sartre kind of hell, isn't it? You know, without eyelids, in a sense. You know, hell is other people, and there we are. Paul is not only in a very demeaning and demoralizing and dehumanizing situation, but really, his career was to plant churches. And now, he was not only in prison, but he was facing possible execution, a trial and execution. And yet, he says, it doesn't matter to me whether I live or die. It's a small thing. He's triumphed in there. He's not discouraged. He's not in despair. Paul is teaching in this passage that it's not the circumstances of your life. It's not whether things go well for you or go ill for you. It's not the circumstances of your life, but it's the way you define life that will determine whether you stand or fall in this world. What is your definition of life? What are you living for? What is the most important thing for you? Therefore, what is that thing which will make your life worth living, regardless of what else happens? What is life? Most of us don't even stop to ask the question, what is life? What is life about? How do I define life? What am I living for? We usually don't even ask that question until terrible things happen to us. Well, something terrible has happened to Paul, but it wasn't the first time. He has worked out a definition of life that enables them to face anything. Now, there's nothing more practical than that. Let's take a look. What is he teaching the Philippians? He's writing them to tell them, don't worry, I'm not discouraged, even though I might die. It's very, very possible. I might live another 20 years. I might die tomorrow. It doesn't matter. It is not actually harming my life. That which I live for isn't touched by it. Don't worry for me. So, if we see how Paul has triumphed, we'll see how we can triumph. And Paul shows us four things about life. It's not the circumstance of life. It's your definition. Four things. then move through them. He shows us the hardness of life, the alchemy of life, yes, the definition of life, and the dynamic of life. He points out to us the hardness of life, the alchemy of life, the definition of life, and the dynamic of life. And because he sees all these things, because he grasps them all, he's able to face anything. Let me show you. First of all, the hardness of life. I'll be brief on this, but he takes in stride the fact that life is hard. If you look at the top of the verse, the top of the passage, in verse 12, he says, I want you to know, brothers, that what's happened to me has really… Now, before we get into what he says, see his concern? The Philippians are in danger of being discouraged. His friends are in danger of being tremendously discouraged. And he's trying to show them, look, it's… You don't have to be discouraged. Now, why are they discouraged? They're discouraged because of him. Paul was… And we forget this sometimes, because a lot of us get irked about… We either love what Paul teaches or people hate what Paul teaches, but everybody looks at Paul as a teacher and we forget something. Paul was the main architect of the greatest movement, the greatest faith, the greatest religion in the history of the world. He was the essential architect of the Christian church, the largest faith on the face of the earth today. His leadership skills were unparalleled. He could go in to any major metropolitan, cosmopolitan, sophisticated city in the Greco-Roman world and he could set up shop and he'd publicly debate. And after a while, there were so many converts that he could leave a church there. He did that all over the Mediterranean. He really is the architect. He was an incredible leader. But the Philippians are discouraged because they see that it looks like his life is about to be snuffed out. Here he is in the middle of the career. Think of all the great things he could do. And yet, he's chained so he can't do his work. And not only that, he's in danger of having his life snuffed out. Now, you see, in some ways, the problem of injustice and suffering is more a problem for Christians than for anybody else. That's the first point. I want to make it in passing, but I do want to make it. Christians have got more struggles with the hardness of life than anybody. See, all people will say, boy, why does God allow such awful things to happen? Look, why did my sister die? Why did I lose all my money? Why did my marriage fall apart? Now, those are hard questions to answer. But Christians actually, believe it or not, have even harder things to deal with. Because Christians see people who have made sacrifices for the church. They've made sacrifices for the gospel. They've made sacrifices. They've given up money. They've given up career. They've given up a lot of comforts. And they decide, we're going to plant churches or we're going to spread the gospel. We're going to work amongst the poor. And then we see horrible things happen to people like that. We see things happening to the church, to the gospel, to the cause of the gospel. And we start to ask ourselves, wait a minute. You know, general suffering and evil is bad enough. But it sometimes seems like God finds the most strategic way to scuttle his own cause. And it makes you start to wonder, is this his cause? Is this his gospel? Is this his church? Are we doing his work? Christians actually have an additional problem with evil. Some years ago, there was a young man, an African American Christian leader named Lem Tucker. Probably hardly any of you even have ever heard of him. But he was, the people who knew him, he had a once-in-a-lifetime constellation of leadership gifts. He was equally connected to black and white, to poor and the powerful. And yet he was cut down by cancer right in his mid-30s, taken away from not only his ministry but from the church and from his wife and his little kids. And everybody looks and says, God, what are you doing? Something. Some years ago, Elizabeth Elliott, who is a missionary, wrote a novel called No Graven Image. And the novel is about a lady who goes into the darkest jungles, I guess, of South America and commits her life to the spiritual and physical betterment of a tribe of very, very primitive native people. And during the novel, she commits her entire life to this. But at one point, she accidentally kills the only person in the world who knows Spanish, English, and this Indian language. And as a result, everything in her life, her entire life's work is down the drain, literally down the Amazon. And when that book came out, Christians were furious and they said, God would never allow such a thing to happen. And yet, Elizabeth Elliott, as an author, told a number of people that... very often find just what the Philippians found. Not only does God allow evil in general, but sometimes it seems like God allows evil and injustice to happen to the most strategic thing that God, you'd think, would possibly want to happen. Now, as I said, as I move on, let me just say this is fascinating to me. The problem of evil and the problem of injustice and the problem of suffering is an acute problem for Christians. But I'll tell you something, it's more a problem for us than anybody else. I want you to remember this. If you are outside of faith in God, you really don't have a right to talk about the problem of evil. It's for us inside that it's a real problem. You see, if somebody says, I don't believe there is such a, I don't believe in God because why would God allow such evil and suffering? That's why I don't believe in God because there's so much evil in the world. But as soon as you say that, you know what you've just done? If there is no God and if this world is all there is, then we're to Marquis de Sade who said, whatever is must be right. If there is no God, this world is all there is and evil is just a matter of opinion. If this world is all there is and there is no God, it means, for example, that you see the strong eating the weak. What's wrong with that? That's all there is. Christians know evil is a problem because we believe in absolute moral objective values. Because we know that there is a standard of evil outside of the world, standard of good and evil. There's objective moral values outside of the world by which we judge the world. We know that evil is a problem. Why would God allow it? But as soon as you get rid of God, you don't have a problem anymore. Don't you see? The further you get away from God, you cut out from under yourself the very ability to complain. You don't have a right, if you don't believe in God, to complain about the evil of this world. Because in this world, that's just the way it is. You have no way of defining it or complaining it. But the closer you get to God, the more acute you have to ask yourself, the more acute becomes the question, why in the world? But Paul has solved it. And here's how he solved it, at least for himself. First of all, he sees the, yes, the alchemy of life. Now, where did I get that term? Why? Well, look at verse 12. He says, I want you to see that what looked horrible has really turned out for the spread of the gospel. That's in verse 12. Then look down at verse 19. He says, I want you to see that what has happened, again, the evil, terrible things that have happened to me will turn out for my deliverance. You know what he's saying? He is saying, I know that as bad as this is, it's working both historical good and personal good. Now, here's what I mean. Here's what he means. Verse 12, he says, I want you to see that what actually happened, it looked bad, but it's turned out for good. Why? He says, the whole praetorian guard knows about the gospel. Now, Paul wants to plant churches, and he would never have planned to do, unless God had brought him into this situation, a mission to the praetorian guard. But you know, he's got a captive audience now to his evangelism. Two or three times a day, some hard-bitten, awful, mean-spirited, pagan praetorian guard is chained to the most persuasive evangelist that's ever lived in the history of the world. And one by one by one, they're getting converted. And Paul's saying, you know what, I wouldn't have planned this. Now, Matthew Henry is a commentator, and Matthew Henry, back in the late 1600s, wrote a commentary on the Bible. And if you read his commentary on this little verse, where Paul says, what happened has really turned out for the spread of the gospel, Matthew Henry says, Paul is claiming that God is the only alchemist. And remember what alchemy was? Back in the Middle Ages, alchemists were people who were trying to find the secret for turning lead into gold. Lead, they thought, was a base, worthless, useless thing. But could we find a process by which we could turn a base, useless, worthless thing into something exquisite and beautiful? It would be gold. Well, nobody ever found it. But, Matthew Henry says, Paul is saying that God does that all the time with the circumstances of your life. Here's Joseph. Remember Joseph, back in the book of Genesis? His brothers sell him into slavery to get rid of him, and they say, finally, that's the last we'll ever see of him. And, of course, Joseph was, he prayed to God, God, why are you letting this happen? Why are you letting this happen? But God turned lead to gold. And in the end, he becomes prime minister of Egypt and saves his brothers. Here's Paul. comes into a situation, he actually starts by saying, I wonder how God is going to turn this base and worthless situation into gold. Now, be careful. I don't believe Paul thinks that this little, the fact that he is winning the praetorian guard to Christ is a sufficient reason for why he should be taken away from his career and why he should be executed. That's not a sufficient reason for the whole collapse of his career and the untimely execution. But what Paul does is he doesn't expect to see the whole picture. He comes into a situation like this of difficulty and tragedy, and he says, I wonder how God's turning this into gold. I hope I can just get a glimpse. I hope I can just see a corner. That's all he's looking for. And he sees a little corner. He doesn't think that's the whole picture. He doesn't expect that that's the whole thing. That's not worth dying for, frankly. If he's going to die, justice saves on the praetorian guard. But he says, I can see a picture of it. If you go into difficulties of life knowing that God turns lead into gold, if you go and say, I wonder how he's doing it now, in a sense, you're on top. It's not going to knock you down. It's not going to destroy you. But Paul doesn't stop there, and we can't stop there either. Because most of the time, when we come into times of tragedy and suffering and injustice, we don't see the alchemy. We don't see how God is turning this circumstance really into something good. We very often don't see it. But Paul doesn't stop there. He goes on, and down in verse 19 he says, now here's how it's translated. He says, for I know that through your prayers and help given by the Spirit of Christ, what has happened to me, the injustice and difficulty, will turn out for my deliverance. Now, that's not a tremendously great translation. Let me tell you what it literally says. You can see it there. In the Greek, the way it was written, it says, what has happened will result in my salvation. Now, peep, that's the word salvation. Everywhere else in the New Testament, it's translated salvation. But it's so confusing that the translators better put it deliverance. And you know, what's the impression you get? When you read that, it looks like he's saying, I am sure that I'm going to get out. I'm sure that I'm not going to be executed. I'm sure I'll be gone soon. And if you get down near the end of the paragraph, it looks like that might be what he's saying. But it's not true. That's not what he's saying. Because literally, what the grammar says is, he doesn't say, in spite of what happens to me, I will be saved. He says, I will be saved because of this horrible thing. And in a minute, he says, whether I live or die. See, notice that in verse 21. He says, I may live, I may die. It doesn't matter. What Paul's talking about, and this is advanced stuff. This is advanced Christianity. He doesn't just come into a situation of tragedy and say, in what way is God turning base circumstances into beautiful? In what way is he turning lead into gold? You say, well, what's the word salvation? You mean Paul doesn't think he's saved? Well, don't forget, but we always do, that the word salvation in the New Testament is used in different tenses. Sometimes, the word saved is used in the past tense, which means we're saved from the penalty of sin. Our sins are forgiven. But sometimes the Bible in the New Testament uses the word salvation in the present tense. Because a Christian has been saved from the penalty of sin, but is being saved now from the power and the effects of sin in our lives. And eventually, we will be saved from the very presence of sin. And this is what Paul's saying. Paul is saying, I rejoice because I know that the suffering and tragedy, whether I end up facing execution or not, it's saving me. It's making me the man I want to be. It's refining me. It's making me more like the person I want to be. It's making me more like my Savior, more a man of love, more a man of humility. It's not just that Paul says, God can turn my base circumstances into gold. He says, he's going to turn me into gold through this. Paul actually is saying, I need this. Now, this is advanced Christianity. The reason I keep saying that is because this is not the sort of thing that you can say, oh, so that's how I can deal with the tragedies going on in my life. I'll start tomorrow. This is not an easy thing. This is advanced. I'm just showing you what a great man, a man who could face anything, a man who was a world leader, I mean, if you want to see what greatness looks like, here it is. When he gets into a troubled situation, he is not overthrown. He is not cast down. he doesn't struggle, but this is what he does. What he does is he says, first of all, God is turning this into gold and God is turning me into gold. I need this. This will ripen me. This will make me more like my Savior. Through this happening, I am being saved. But does that mean that automatically when bad things happen to a Christian, that automatically means that it's purifying you? Haven't you ever seen people, haven't you even seen Christians who when tragedies strike, it doesn't sweeten them, it doesn't warm them, it freezes them? Haven't you seen that? Maybe it happened to some of you. So it's not automatic. When Paul says, I see the alchemy of life, I see that even when hard things happen, God is turning lead into gold, he then turns around and says, but here's how. And this is the secret. Paul says, whether or not hard things refine you and turn you to gold depends on your definition of life. And the whole secret is in this little word for. Notice here at the beginning of 19 and 20, Paul says, I expect and hope that I will in no way be ashamed. I expect, you know, and hope that what has happened to me will turn out for my salvation. Okay, why? For, verse 21, because, here it is, he's about to tell you how it's possible that bad things can save you, purify you. He's about to tell you how bad things, in spite of them, you can face them. Because for me to live is Christ. That's the definition of life. If you have a proper definition of life, you'll be able to face anything. If you don't have a proper definition of life, you won't. Well, what do we mean? He gives you a definition of life. For me to live means this is the thing that makes life life for me. This is my bottom line. This is the most important thing to me. If I have this, I'm living, regardless of what else is taken from me. Now, let me show you some alternatives. Let me just show you a couple. There's the Epicurean approach. For me to live is to have fun, to have pleasure. The Epicurean is a person who might have a good job and might make a lot of money and work hard, but that's not the meaning of life. You know, the Epicurean says, work, schmerk. I want money. I want fun. That's the important thing. Okay. I just have this job because it makes enough money so that I can do the things that really make life meaning. Recreation, pleasure. See? The Epicurean says, for me to live is pleasure. Take away the pleasure? No life. Okay? Put it this way. Let me give you the stoic approach. Now, a stoic person is someone who says, to me, to live is to be strong and tough and to be in control. Now, you want a great example of that? James Cagney in the movie Angels with Dirty Faces. He was a gangster. The important thing is, you don't let him just make you, you don't, you never look like you're sweating. You're always tough in your control. And of course, all the street kids of the city were really, they worshiped Jimmy Cagney. They worshiped this gangster, even though he was on death row. The important thing was, when he went to the chair, he wasn't going to die yellow. He was going to die with a snarl, a smirk, as only Jimmy Cagney could give you at the electric chair. But when Patrick O'Brien comes to Jimmy Cagney, the priest, Patrick O'Brien, comes to Jimmy Cagney and he says, I want you to do something. The only way to save these kids from a life of crime is to dissolution them about you, or they're all going to be in the life of crime. Do you want that? No, Jimmy Cagney said, no, I don't. Okay, the only thing, this is one thing I'm asking you, when you go to the chair, I want you to shriek, I want you to scream, I want you to panic, I want you to die yellow. And Jimmy Cagney says, that's all that I've got left. And Patrick O'Brien says, yes, it's the only way that you can save these kids. And at the end of the movie, just as he gets to the chair, voluntarily, of course, he shrieks, he cries, and then they get him. And of course, all the kids are saved because they're disillusioned. You know what happened there? See, if you understand what Paul's saying, you know that Jimmy Cagney was converted. Because when somebody says, you've got to get rid of your bottom line, and the thing that made life for him was to be strong, he had to find a different bottom line. He had to find something higher to live for, or he couldn't handle that test. But he did. Let me show you another thing. Some people say, for me to live is to be moral, to be a good person, to know that I'm a good person. kill himself? You know why? He can't stand the idea that a criminal like Valjean is better than he is. He can't stand the idea that he needs forgiveness. He can't stand the idea that he needs grace. He too is being faced with a circumstance that says you either change your bottom line or you die. Tragedies and troubles come to us and they take away that which makes our life worth living. And unless you change your definition of life, you collapse. Cagney, at the end of his life, his character, changes his definition of life. And so he makes it. Javert will not. He will not accept grace. What makes his life meaningful is to know that he's better than other people. He's morally superior. He's a good person. He's a religious man. And as a result, he dies. Most of us aren't that coherent. Most of us aren't Epicureans. Most of us are not Stoics. Most of us are not even that big on moral virtue. Most of us have chosen something else. Our family, our friends, our career, our spouse, our children. And we say, to me, to live is to have that. But when the circumstances, the tragedies of life come and go after your bottom lines, you utterly collapse or you have to convert. Paul says there is only one definition of life. There is only one bottom line. There is only one most important thing that will stand up to anything. He gives it to you. To me, to live is Christ. You know what that means? It means Paul's career is kaput. Right? Paul can't plant churches anymore. But his career is not his life. And so he says, so what? I may live. I may die. It doesn't matter. It hasn't touched my life. If your career is collapsing and your whole life is collapsing, the problem is not the circumstance of your life, it's the definition of your life. Do you see that? If your life's collapsing because your career is collapsing, it's because your career is your life. Convert. Or here's Paul. Paul loves his friends. He loves the Philippians. He loves them. He says so if you read the whole chapter. But now he's separated from his friends. He's locked in with smelly praetorian guards. He doesn't see anybody. But his friends are not his life. You know, there's a lot of people who live for their children. They live for their spouse. They live for their family. They live for their friends. That's a lot more noble than living for your career. But what are you going to do when they die? What are you going to do when your life is laying there in a casket? Paul's friends were not his life. If your life collapses when your loves collapse, it means your loves were your life and your problem is not your circumstances. It's your definition of life. Convert. These things will come. Now, lastly, Paul saw the hardness of life didn't faze him because he saw the alchemy of life. But just because God can turn you into pure gold through the trials of life, it only happens if you have the proper definition. If you say, for me to live is Christ. Paul was in love with Jesus Christ. He was dominated by his love for Jesus Christ. He controlled everything about him. As a result, he could face anything. But how can anybody get their heart fixed into that? Well, I only have a minute to tell you, but here's how it is. The dynamic of life can't even get into the text. I'll just put it to you this way. In John chapter 17, verse 19, Jesus says to his disciples, in front of his disciples, as he's praying to the Father, he says, for their sake I consecrate myself, that they may be consecrated. It's sometimes translated, for their sake I sanctify myself, that they might be sanctified. You know what that means? Jesus Christ is saying, I live for them. I sanctify myself means I set myself apart just to see them sanctified and holy. When a person goes out for the Olympics, they say, I'm in a year from now, I want to go to the Olympics. Everything in your life is made subservient to that goal. Everything. You'd like to be married? Sorry, I can't get married to you, honey. I've got to train for the Olympics. Your career goes on hold. Everything about your life, your career, your schedule, your priorities, everything is made subservient to that one goal. reason I was incarnate, I left my Godhead to become a human being, the reason I died, everything I'm doing now in heaven, everything is subservient to one goal, your perfection and happiness. For their sakes, he says to the Father, I sanctify myself. I'm set apart for them. Everything about me is wholly subservient. You know what this means? The Bible says something. Just lay this on your heart. The Bible, Jesus Christ says, if you understand what I've done for you, if you look at me dying on the cross, for me to live is you. Jesus Christ, second person of the Trinity, eternal God says, for me to live is you. My life is to see you holy and happy. My life is to see you sanctified. Everything I do is subservient to that goal. What does this mean when you see me up on the cross, says Jesus? What does it mean? I'll tell you what it means. It means I'm willing to do anything to have you with me now. I'm willing to do anything to have me. For me to live is you now. You know what a Christian says in response to that? You look at that and you look at that and you look at that and you think about that and you think about that and you think about that. And after a while, it just, it just changes you. You know why? Because you look and you say, Jesus Christ, my brother, my friend, my shepherd, my high king, my prince, my savior. If for you to live is me, well, then for me to live is you. And if for you to live is him, then you can say, you've got nothing that can take away from me what is life. And you can smirk at the electric chair for real. Because Paul is. For me to live is Christ. Do you have the definition? Convert. Don't wait to the end. Who knows whether you'll be Jimmy Cagney or Javert. Let's pray. Our Father, I thank you that you've made this great wisdom available to us. I pray that nobody here will wait to the end to change their definition of life, to change their bottom line. I pray that you would help us all to see that for us to live should be Christ because for him to live is us. We thank you for that. In Jesus' name, amen.
