TITLE: Justice and Mercy
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel-Transformed World (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/justice-and-mercy/

============================================================

If you'll turn to page three, what we're going to do, as we always start to do, is give you a little bit of a biblical theological overview of why we do justice and mercy at Redeemer, why that's part of what we do. Let me first, and I will follow in the handout, on page three where it says the balance, let me put this in perspective for you. We have often said we have four ministry fronts at Redeemer and a fifth. The reason you say four and a fifth is the fifth is church planting. We plant churches in New York and other cities of the world that do these four things. So in a sense, there's four and a fifth. But the four are, we talk about evangelism and worship, which connects people to God. There is community and discipleship, which connects people to each other. There is justice and mercy, which connects us to the city. And then there's faith and work, which connects us to the culture and the public society. And when you put it like that, you'll see there's no real, they're complementary. None of them is doing what the other ones are doing. In reality, of course, they intertwine. You can't do any one of them without the other three also happening. They're interdependent. But they also don't really clash, especially when you put it like that, connecting people to God, to each other, to the city, and to the culture. However, it's been one of the marks of Redeemer from the very beginning that we have had a pretty good balance of these four things. It's also true that it is a difficult balance to maintain in most churches. I think if the church has been going for a number of years, or many years, and you try to incorporate a new ministry front in, it's very, very difficult. And I've been in churches over the years where the evangelist people and the mercy justice people were almost at each other's throats over getting money, over, you might say, air time from the pastor and that sort of thing. As far as I know, that's never been the case. There are always, of course, in our church, there's, you know, everybody says, here's what I need, and we talk to each other about who's getting what, but there's no partisan, there hasn't been any partisan bickering at Redeemer over the years. And there is a pretty good integration, and I'm very, very encouraged by that, I always have been, that the people who are working in one of those ministry fronts have high regard and appreciation for the other ministry fronts. They don't mock them or make light of them in any way. Okay, so there's the four, important to see how they interrelate, how they do not, in a sense, on the other hand, get in each other's ways. Extremely important for any urban church, I believe. I actually think that outside of cities, churches without all four fronts can still thrive. I don't think in cities they can thrive without all four fronts. Having said that, we're going to, I just took three minutes out of Justice and Mercy, but I want you to put it in context. Justice and Mercy itself, what is it? If you go to the bottom of the page, theologically, because God created both body and soul, and we're told that he's going to redeem both body and soul. We're not just going to heaven, our bodies are resurrected. Therefore, we know that God not only cares about the forgiveness of sin of the soul, but he also cares about healing the results of sin in the body, which are things like poverty and hunger and suffering and sickness and death. And he will eventually heal it all. And this is why, and here let me, actually, I think I'm going to ask you to let me read this last paragraph on page three. Why it's so important to have a balance, why we should always be rabidly evangelistic. We should always be calling people to faith. We should be pressing the importance of conversion. We shouldn't be downplaying that or muting that in any way, and yet we should be just as rabid about justice, justice in society, caring for the poor. And it's very hard to get those two together, but we have to. I said here, secular people have a very strong belief that religion is really just about social power. There's a need, therefore, to place every church along an ideological spectrum from liberal to conservative. Conservatives are very concerned about spiritual and conversion, and liberals are very concerned about caring for the poor and social justice. And what I'm saying in here is that the only way for a church... I went to the church. every church to either basically being Democrat or Republican. I mean, when you see the New York Times ever talk about any kind of church, any kind of faith, you can just see the subtext. Sometimes it's not even a subtext, it's text. And the question is, here's the way this church works, and here's how this operates. And the bottom line is, what really we have to find out is, who are these people most likely to vote for? See, for many folks, that's the bottom line. Religion is only functional if it gets you to vote for the right people. And therefore, everybody gets put in a box. We must, by being rabidly evangelistic and rabidly concerned for mercy and justice, completely confound that. Burst the banks of those categories. Smash through the categories. And we're God's people. It's the gospel animating us, not a particular view of social power. Now, if you're going to try to get over into a page. Now, let's get practical quick. That's my theology. At the very bottom, at the very top, it says, in general, what we mean by mercy and justice ministry, sometimes called holistic, which is word and deed ministry, within the church community, there must be a radical sharing of economic resources. See, one aspect of mercy and justice means that inside the church, we should be caring for each other's practical needs, economic, social, physical, medical, emotional, with the utmost generosity and care. Actually, if we're the kind of community we ought to be, then in a sense, this kind of economic sharing, this mercy and justice ministry inside the church should very often happen very organically. It should happen through friendships. It should happen through small groups. But of course, it also happens through the work of our diaconate. But the diaconate is always trying to push it down, push it down, to make sure that people are just doing it as part of what it means to be Christian friends and Christian brothers and sisters. The second aspect of holistic ministry is within the immediate neighborhood, a church should show sacrificial love by meeting practical needs of people, whether they believe as we do or not. Here, you've got to learn from the Jewish community, especially in a place like New York. In almost every neighborhood that I know, and we've been here 22 years, the Jewish folks in these neighborhoods are tremendously civic-minded. They are really concerned about everything. They're concerned about the safety of the street. They're concerned about the schools. They're concerned about what's actually the fabric, the social fabric. They're involved. They're the only ones sometimes that come to any kind of local neighborhood, you know, neighbors' meetings. It's very clear whether they, you know, are, you know, even whether they're so-called, what we call practicing Judaism or not. It's part of their lifeblood. It's part of their DNA. You love your neighbor. You're concerned. And that's one of the things, especially as we go from one large church, which draws people from all over, to numbers of congregations. They're going to know whether we care. They're going to know whether it, whether, whether Redeemer cares about the, how life, how well life is lived in the particular neighborhoods. And then number three, throughout the whole city, the church should disciple Christians to band together into prophets and nonprofits and ministries that serve and lift up, especially the neediest of the whole city. It's crucial you don't get lost in your local neighborhood. In most cases, at Redeemer, it doesn't mean you're, most, most of us are not living in real poor neighborhoods at all. And we have to be, we, we are citizens of the whole city and we are, and therefore it's crucial that we be involved to what degree we can in ameliorating the, the, the misery of the people who are the neediest in the city. So there's one, two, three. Now to understand what the Bible says about mercy and justice, I put here, and I'm not going through them, four key phrases, four key terms. There's what we call service. It's the Greek word diakonia, for which we get our word deacon. It means to serve practical needs. The second word is neighbors. You need to drill down into that and see what it means to love your neighbor, Good Samaritan parable. The third word is mercy. In the Bible, the word mercy can mean just being compassionate in general, but often it has the technical meaning of caring for people's physical and, and financial and social needs. And that's the reason why at the very end of the Good Samaritan parable, when Jesus asked the law expert, who was the neighbor after telling the Good Samaritan parable, remember what the Samaritan did? Rescued the guy, medical care, financial aid. And at the end, the law expert said the one who showed mercy. So you could use the word mercy to describe what we would call, you know, social action, or what we would call mercy and justice. It's called mercy. So very often the Bible talks about the importance of mercy. James chapter 2, it says that any person who really is justified by faith will be marked by mercy, and by that it means any Christian who's really been born again will have compassion for the poor, and I try to make a case in here. Now last of all, let me just talk to you about the word justice briefly. You have to turn to page 7. Some people say, well, what is mercy and what is justice? Probably the best answer for that is mercy is the motivation and justice is the action. According to the Bible, justice means giving people their due as creatures in the image of God. Because every human being is a creature in the image of God, they come into your presence with claim rights, as it were. They come into your presence having the right not to be exploited, having the right to be helped, having the right to be treated humanely because they're human. And I mentioned some examples down here. But if you go to, for example, Job 29 and Job 31, this is probably the most important thing to say under this heading. When you go to the Old Testament, you'll see where Job says, he says, I had justice for my turban. I had righteousness for my girdle, which is my belt. And then he describes what it means to live a just life. And he says, if I did not share my food and my gold with the poor, I would be guilty of injustice. And, you know, many people, especially many Americans, say, if I give to the poor, that's charity, but I don't owe them anything. But that's not how the Bible sees it. The Bible sees that if you are a middle-class person, no matter how hard you worked, and now you've got some money, that's a gift from God. And there's a whole lot of people that didn't have your opportunities. And therefore, if you are not sharing what you've got with those who have less, you're not just being unmerciful. You're really not being just. Last thing, and this is the last thing. Redeemer does its justice and mercy ministry largely through two agencies. One is our deacons and deaconesses, our deaconate, and they work inside. Yeah, that's, this is, I'm just giving you very top level because my time's up. They work inside the congregation or, you know, right on the edges of it. You know, there's people who are coming in, you know, and so they work with members and they work with people who are coming in. So they work inside and right around the edges of our congregation. When it comes to helping the neediest in the city and going out there into the rest of the city, we deploy our gifts and our talents through Hope for New York. Hope for New York is a 501c3. It is not under Redeemer's elders. It's got its own board. That's actually on purpose, and this is my last point. I should also mention the Entrepreneurship Initiative, which every year tries to create non-profits, bands of people banding together who are Christians to try to help the needy in this, in the city. I think there's a balance that's really important to see. When I say God is equally interested in word and deed ministry, he's equally interested in helping and dealing with the effects of sin on the soul and on the body. It's also true, however, that there needs to be a kind of, how do I say, an asymmetrical balance in how the church does this. The church's job is basically, when people come in the door, my main job is to say to them, please believe in Jesus and disciple them. And then as the church disciples them, it sends people out in the world to do both ministry and word and deed. I say in here, for example, we want to disciple filmmakers to be Christian filmmakers. But the church probably shouldn't start its own film company. Why? Because it has to do what it does best, which is evangelize and disciple people. And what it does is it disciples people to get on out there. And therefore, my idea, our idea, and this comes from a lot of theological reflection over the years, and I particularly point to a guy named Abraham Kuyper, who was a Dutch Reformed Presbyterian theologian at the turn of the century. And what he would say is that the more Christians band together to try to change society, the more they band together to do major kind of social justice initiatives, the more they should probably come out from under the congregation, and they should form associations and band together to do it that way. That way, the whole body of Christ is meeting all the needs. the way, in most inner cities over the years, a church that's trying to really help the poor often has a church and a community development corporation with its own board, because it's very, very difficult for a church to do both evangelizing, discipling, and preaching the word, and running housing rehabilitation programs and everything all at once. Nobody can do everything. So what you want to do is you want to have a symbiotic relationship between nonprofits and Christians who band together to really target needs. We want to disciple people to do it. We want to support people in doing it. But in many cases, they should be doing it under their own boards, rather than assuming the local church should run all the programs, which actually doesn't work. And that's the reason why we actually have this balance between the diaconate, which is under the church, is part of the church. They're officers of the church. On the other hand, we have Hope for New York and other nonprofits that Redeemer works with. They're filled with Redeemerites that are out there doing the ministry under their own boards. And that is what we do and why we do it and a little bit on how we do it. So now we're going to, I'm going to do what we've been doing the last couple of times, which is ask the lead pastors to come up here, and I'm going to kind of moderate a little discussion group in which we can talk about mercy and justice. I should probably get this out of the way. Now, last time they let me sit down, but I guess they didn't think I was doing as good a job. So, okay. And here's the other thing. When I found out that Leo was leading worship from an iPad, I decided that, so, you know, being an older gentleman, I didn't want to fall behind, so I'm going to conduct this interview for my BlackBerry. I am. So, I'm paperless. I'm not, you know, I'm with it. I'm with it. I'm trying. Okay. I got two questions, and I want everybody to answer them. And so, each of you take a couple minutes. The first question actually has to do with your own personal involvement. I get this whenever I get it everywhere else. I'm glad to ask you. What has your own personal involvement been in mercy and justice ministry? How has a commitment to mercy and justice made a difference in how you conduct your time or how your family lives? And the other, and how would you advise families to respond? So, we're not talking about the church and about the programs. We're talking about you personally and your family. What have you done, and how would you advise other families to go about coming up with a family approach to justice and mercy, Christian family approach? Who wants to go first? I think your BlackBerry is not working. I'm not sure. That wasn't the question. I'm sorry. That was one of the questions that I was given. I'm just kidding. Actually, I'm not kidding. I think for us, for Alice and me, we have two children. Mary Claire is six and a half, and she has recently wrestled with the justice issue of why does somebody have something that I don't have? And of course, in New York City, that'll just crush you, because there are always people who have more than you have. So, our response from a mercy and justice standpoint was a little girl named Priyanshu, who is four years old and lives in India, because we felt like one of the things we needed to do was to expose her and us to people outside of our community who have far less. And so, I'm not saying this is a panacea, but for Mary Claire and for us, it has given us an opportunity to talk about those people in the world who have far less than what we have living in 21st century Manhattan. And one of the ways that I bribe my daughter to pray is I put her on my shoulders on the way to school. So, this morning, she prayed for Priyanshu that she would be healthy and have enough food and that her home would be safe. So, I think for us, for Alice and I, trying to find practical ways to help all of us, particularly our children growing up with so much, to be aware. And that was through World Vision for $35 a month. It's been a helpful touchpoint for us to talk about. So, okay. Leo? Somebody, whoever? Well, I'm new to New York. And so, one of the things that I know is a great educational device of simply living here is you can't escape the need because you bump into the need everywhere you go. I think in so many other places, it's easy to, you know, to segment your life and fragment things in such a way where in our church in Houston, where I've been for the last 14 years, you know, we used a lot of the Redeemer lingo and vision, church in the city for the city, but it was harder to make your life thoroughly integrated with the need around you, you know. And so one of the things that we did that I think was helpful, it's certainly helpful to my family and me, is every summer our church would have a, you know, a week-long inner city mission trip. And what we would do is, I mean, you'd stay in a church that was thoroughly embedded in one of the most poverty-stricken parts of Houston, and then each day we would take tours. It was a survey week, really. We'd tour, so in the morning, you know, you'd be in a homeless shelter, lunchtime you'd be serving, you know, in a food pantry, and those kinds of things. And it gave us the flyover of the needs around us. The other thing that it did from a standpoint of our church was there ended up being, over time, different links. So, for instance, one of the groups that the very first year our church did this met with was a place called the Refugee Development Center. And relationships started developing with this group of refugees from Liberia fleeing the Civil War there. And, you know, so probably eight years later now, there's probably 80, 90 Liberian refugees that are members of Christ the King. And that's just one of the more beautiful things is I look back over my shoulder at that. So, I could ramble forever. I'll let John talk now. So, you'll let me ramble? So, I have to admit that this is a little bit of a hard question to answer. And part of it's because, you know, I mean, I got the question actually a little a while ago. And I feel it's like a little bit strange or maybe somehow maybe like tainted to sort of talk about your works of mercy, but I'll do it since you've asked. You know, like one of the things actually that my wife and I have actually noticed is that, you know, the ways that we've expressed mercy and have cared for, you know, matters of justice have actually changed a lot, like through various stages of our lives. So, I mean, there was a time, for instance, when, you know, when we were both single, like volunteerism was something that we both had done. You know, I had done some soup kitchens. My wife had actually volunteered a fair bit with the Midtown Pregnancy Support Center. And, you know, as we kind of, I mean, as we went, got married and went through various stages of our lives, we actually continued to sort of carry on some of these practices and some of these things, albeit in a slightly different form. So, for instance, when we got married, we actually, as it turns out, like we had, my wife had actually had like a full complement of like dishes and like housewares and stuff like that. So, actually, when we got married, we asked people to give to Hope for New York as part of a registry. And we actually didn't even, I mean, people gave us like stuff anyway, but like we actually encouraged people and said, like, you know, the truth of the matter is like we have the dishes that we need. And in fact, like there are a lot of people who could use dishes that, you know, like, you know, I mean, there are a lot of people who are in greater need than we are just to get like nicer dishes. And so, we basically, I mean, that's one of the things that we had done. I mean, I think like now that we're at different stages of our lives, it's sort of expressed, like, you know, mercy sort of expresses itself in slightly different ways. I mean, I, for instance, I'm on, I'm on the advisory board for Hope for New York. My wife is, she is, she does a fair bit of pro bono work as part of her legal practice. She actually does work for people who are seeking asylum in the United States. So, that's like a significant part of her pro bono practice. And she also, she's also on the women's committee at her law firm, which is actually a very significant area of sort of like workplace justice. And she's also, she's also on the diversity committee at her, at her workplace. It's also a very sort of important thing. And I think one of the things we realized living in New York is that, I mean, New York is such a sort of like services-based place where you actually spend a lot of money sort of like buying services and things like that. And so, because there's so much money that like goes around to like, for instance, like go to the dry cleaner or wherever, we started to really sort of keep tabs of like where we're spending our money and what that money actually did. So, for instance, we had read an article recently about if you actually like, if you order takeout and you put your tip on the credit card, there are a lot of actually like sort of unsavory restaurants that actually will sort of deprive the workers of those tips. And so, like a very simple thing is we actually started tipping in cash. And so, partly because we just wanted to say like, you know, this is for the work that you have done that we want to recognize and not for greedy store owner to actually like take. I mean, the other thing that we do from time to time is we'd actually, I mean, we've read... were actually doing fairly unsavory kinds of things in their restaurant practice, and we just stopped going to those restaurants, and we just said, we're just boycotting these restaurants. I mean, and I don't know how much of a significant difference, I mean, I don't know how much of a difference that really makes sort of, like, ultimately, but, you know, I think that was one of the things we wanted to do sort of, like, on a very regular basis to see that, you know, the decisions that we make and even, like, whether we tip in cash or with a credit card or whether we go to this restaurant or that restaurant, I mean, it has a very significant impact on the way that, you know, the way the city operates, and so, I mean, I guess, like, part of, I guess one part of the question was what would I advise people or how would I sort of, like, counsel people, and I think the important thing about justice is justice is, in some respects, like, a very kind of, like, normal thing that you do in the way that you treat people every single day, and it's not always sort of crusading for a very specific cause. Sometimes it's just, again, like, you tip this way or you tip that way or whatever you do. I mean, I think that there's a very sort of, like, normal part of the practice of justice, and so it's one of the things we've tried to do. That's one of the things that sounded like 15. You guys are amazing. So we're, you know, like the Schusters, we're actually relatively new to the city, and so we're honestly still learning. So for that reason, this is a little bit of an awkward question, but because of a lack of urban experience compared to the likes of this guy right here. But nonetheless, we've tried, one of the reasons why we moved our family back to the question of families to the city was so that we would be able to encounter poverty in person rather than on the television or in magazines. We felt like that was an inadequate way to do our part in the world. We felt like we needed direct exposure, and I guess there are just a few things that Patty and I are still sort of working through in terms of how we respond when we encounter those in need in particular, but one of which is just to use each occasion as a teachable moment, first for ourselves but also for our daughters. And we essentially have a couple of things that we intentionally meditate on as a family every time that we have an encounter with poverty and need, and that is to meditate just theologically together out loud on two things. One, the kind of company that Jesus kept, you know, which included especially the messy and the damaged children, people with diseases, you know, people with a broken history, people who were economically and socially disadvantaged. And we also try to meditate together about the kind of life that Jesus chose, the way that he entered the world was in poverty, in a mess, in a room, you know, full of pig slop. And the life that he chose, you know, there were certain points in his life where he had no place to lay his head, he was actually a homeless man himself, and the way that he chose to exit the world, which we all are aware of. And so we just try to keep bringing ourselves and our kids back to the notion that if our Savior, if these things are true of our Savior, then we really have to be proactive as individuals and as a little family community about giving people in need a place of honor in our hearts. So that's the first, that's sort of the starting point. But then that should translate into action. And, you know, one of the things that we try to do when we're out, particularly with our girls, and, you know, you're either on the streets or you're on the subway, and you encounter, well, let's just confine it to the subway car. You walk in the car, there's a stench, you know, there's a very strong odor, and everybody's breaking eye contact, plugging their noses, you know, leaving the car to get onto another car to wait for another train. And we've essentially told our girls we're not going to do that. This is one of the ways that we're going to be countercultural, is we're going to stay put. And we're going to momentarily just be incarnational, even if we don't have any personal interaction. We're not going to leave. And we're going to seek to be countercultural with our body language and not join in what typically happens when messiness is there. We're not going to leave. We're not going to leave. Thank you. to seek to be countercultural with our body language and not join in what typically happens when messiness is there. And I think, you know, the other thing that we've tried to do is just to ask ourselves and to put the question in front of our kids fairly regularly as well, you know, what two things besides money do the poor not have in general? The poor do not have community. They don't have friends in general, and they don't have choice. And so what does it mean for us as residents of the city, as people who are part of a great church-like Redeemer to participate in reversing that narrative in the small ways that we can of a lack of friendship and a lack of choice? And, you know, we just try to talk a lot with our kids, probably not as much as we should, about, you know, what it would be like to have all of the decisions pertaining to your life made for you, what you eat, whether you're going to eat, what you wear, you know, even in some respects where you're going to sleep. All of these decisions for a lot of people in the city are being made for them by other people with resources. And, you know, one of these stark examples that was a real eye-opener for me, I've shared it in a sermon, so if you've heard it before, sorry. But, you know, I was, you know, walking to the subway one day, and there's a woman sitting outside of a, you know, belly, and, you know, she's asking for food, and, you know, occasionally I'll stop, and I'll, if there's a restaurant nearby, I'll say, you know, can I get you something to eat? And I asked the woman, can I get you a bagel? And she says, well, I don't want a bagel. I'd actually rather have some egg salad. And, you know, I went into the shop, and I said, sure. And then I was a little bit annoyed because the bagel was 85 cents, and the egg salad was almost seven dollars. And so, you know, I sort of begrudgingly, you know, bought the egg salad, brought it out to her, handed it to her, and she says, you know, I'm sorry. I know that this egg salad costs a lot more than the bagel does, but my teeth are so weak and fragile that they can't sink through a bagel. And, you know, for me, that was a real eye-opener, both to the coldness of my own heart, also to the ignorance, to my own ignorance about, you know, the condition of poverty, that it's a lot more than economic. It's a lack of power. That's really what a lack of money represents, is a lack of power and a lack of choice. And so, I guess, what are we doing about that? I don't know. Hoping that we can eventually do something about that. But, I'm trying to say. Yeah, that's a great, well, that's a great diversity. I'll tell you what, let's go back through. One other question. It's on my BlackBerry, but I'm not, I've already looked at it. Briefly, could each of you name one mercy or justice ministry, one holistic ministry you've seen, not in our diaconate, not Hope for New York, outside? One that you've seen, you either have, you know about, or you've been involved in, it could be here, it could be somewhere else, that is very impressive, just as an example of the range of ministries. Let's go back the same direction. David, which one? Well, two things. One is, to circle back around to the first question, just in terms of advice, I know for me, having been here for 20-some years, it's very easy to have my greed or my self-centeredness masked as pragmatism, and you say, well, I'm not going to give this person money, because they're just going to use it on various things. But, so I think that mercy and justice is a spiritual discipline, so I think it's, for my own heart, so that it doesn't, isn't perceived as charity, my own awareness of my need for grace, my own awareness of how much God has given me, to not, to just give money to people from time to time, because whatever the circumstances, they're far worse off than I am. And so I think for my own heart, and for the hearts of, to see it as a spiritual discipline is important, because it's too easy for our pragmatism to mask other reasons why we may not give. Secondly, in terms of other ministries, when I was, when I first came to the city, Glenn and Carol probably remember the Lambs Church, it was on 44th Street, it was there for several years, they had a kitchen. And for two years, I would go there every Tuesday morning and serve breakfast to people who were homeless when I was in grad school. And it really, there was this small little struggling congregation, Church of the Nazarene, but it really energized their sense of mission in the city, because they were right in Times Square, they didn't really have a traditional neighborhood. So, and they were very small, but it really gave them a sense of kingdom and you got to know the same faces every Tuesday morning, and it was great for my own life, and it was a powerful and effective ministry right in the heart of Times Square. And of course, the city was much different then, but there's still that need today. Leo, one ministry? One. Yeah. The first thing that comes to mind is my family and I got to go on another one of these survey trips to South Africa two years ago, and the focus was the extreme poverty together with the AIDS pandemic, and specifically the orphaned children as a result. And so we got to go to several different places, one in Cape Town and one in the Joburg area. But it's the Cape Town one that sticks in my mind. And to get to hold these babies that were, I mean, we held one that had been left in a dumpster. And that apparently was not atypical. So I think for me, it's something like that where it's, again, forcing me to come face-to-face with the people in the most extreme situations of need. And for me as a leader, that's important. I mean, I'm going to be on the Upper East Side, some of the highest income and net worth zip codes in the country. But we're not very far from the South Bronx. We're not very far from Spanish Harlem or the Lower East Side. So it's important to stay close to those areas of obvious need so that we who are blessed and who much has been given, we bridge into those pockets of need. John, the ministry and why? So I'm going to actually cheat, and I'm going to answer with a ministry, actually, that we support. I actually ran this by Jenny Chang, and she said I was okay with it. And actually, like, well, I mean, actually, the truth of the matter is, you know, I spend most of my ministry career here in New York. And so my area of exposure is actually mostly to New York. But I will say, actually, that, I mean, this is something I had experienced prior to coming to New York, but it was a Hope for New York affiliate. But prior to coming to New York, I'd actually gotten to know Chinese Christian Harold Crusade. Yeah, that's right. And what Chinese Christian Harold Crusade does is they provide a lot of sort of services to the Chinatown population in areas that are sort of underserved. So, for instance, like, the very simple task of completing your taxes, if you don't speak the language, it is incredibly hard to do that. Or, for instance, like, I mean, you know, I'm like a college-educated person, and I have like an advanced degree in, like, theology, and I have a very difficult time just filling out, like, like dealing with all the insurance forms that come in for, like, health insurance and stuff like that. I mean, and I can read that stuff, like, very, very easily, you know. And, you know, just those very, very simple tasks, I think that's like an area of sort of, like, I mean, I guess I would call it an area of sort of, like, rectifying injustice, but it's a very, very simple task, like a very simple skill you can actually provide, namely, like, native English speaking. And to be able to sort of translate and say, like, oh, yes, this is where you fill in, like, that number, or this is where you fill in that number, or this is what you, this is the document that you need to sort of verify this particular piece of information, I think is actually a very, very important thing. And it's actually something that's very, very easily forgotten, because, I mean, many of us are actually, like, primary English speakers. And so it's, I mean, my parents actually were immigrants, and so I sort of understood, like, I translated for them for a lot of things, and I understood what it was like. And so, you know, I think that that's, I mean, it's a very, very small thing, and yet it's a very, very critical thing. And you feel very, very lost, actually, if you can't fill out basic forms, like, you know, like any kind of form. It's very, very challenging. And so that was one of the things that really gripped me early on. Okay. I think that we call that primary justice, because if you just share your, if you just share your time with somebody so they don't fall through the net and need some kind of more serious aid later. Scott. Yeah, I think this isn't actually a formal ministry, but it's more of an example of organic mercy and justice happening spontaneously, because some people in the Redeemer community had their eyes open. Good. There's a particular public school here on the Upper West Side, actually not too far from here, and one of the students at that school, I can't remember what grade he is, and he's young. He's probably eight, nine years old. And he was diagnosed with a terminal disease. He's going to die. And his mother is a single mom. He's going to die. He got a problem. rent, food, and that sort of thing on a monthly basis, and providentially, the president of the PTA at that particular school is also a member of Redeemer, and that person called us in the fellowship group department and asked, you know, what we thought about mobilizing a handful of fellowship groups to, particularly that met near the school, to serve this family in ways that they're able to, and there were actually, I want to say maybe one or two fellowship groups that responded to that positively and have, you know, done several things, you know, from, you know, providing meals to, you know, child care just so the mom can get out of the house and restore some sanity to, you know, whatever, and they've actively served, not with any sort of, you know, covert agenda to hook people in or anything, but just because it's right, it's the right thing to do, it's a just thing to do, and so that was really encouraging to me to just see that sort of thing happen non-programmatically, which is, I think, really at the heart of a lot of what we talked about in Renew, is that people would respond to the spirit in that way and bless the city on a more local level as they see the needs around them because their eyes are open, so. That's a great example. Look, everybody, let me wrap up. The thing that impressed me as I was listening to the guys is what an astonishing diversity of ways there are to do justice. I made a reference, it's in the material, primary justice is where you're just spending your time with people and reaching out to them and being really good neighbors. I mean, when long time, you know, Chinese Americans help new Chinese immigrants in the ways that we're talking about, pretty simple ways, that primary justice means just simply sharing your life and relating to people so that they don't develop more serious problems and need much more what we would call rectifying justice, which is much more drastic intervention. So, I'm amazed at all the diversity there is. It does remind me, by the way, everybody, of my favorite place in the Nochka, which is a 1939 movie starring Greta Garbo, and she is a communist, Soviet, Russian communist emissary to Paris, and she gets off the train, and up comes a porter and grabs her bags, and she looks at him and says, you should not be carrying my bags, comrade. Isn't that social injustice? And he said, it depends upon the tip. So, there's many ways to do justice and mercy. Okay, thanks, guys. Have a seat. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
