TITLE: Knowledge and the Love of God
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 3:14-21
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit God's Love
SERIES: Ephesians – God’s New Society
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/knowledge-and-the-love-of-god/

============================================================

We're going through the book of Ephesians in the summer, and we come to the passage that's printed in your bulletin, Ephesians 3, 14 to 21. It's Paul's second great prayer for the people he's writing to. For this reason, I kneel before the Father, from whom his whole family in heaven and on earth derives its name. I pray that out of his glorious riches, he may strengthen you with power, through his Spirit, in your inner being, so that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith. And I pray that you, being rooted and established in love, may have power, together with all the saints, to grasp how high, how wide and long and high and deep is the love of Christ. And to know this love that surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled to the measure of all the fullness of God. Now to him who is able to do immeasurably more than all we ask or imagine, according to his power that is at work within us, to him be glory in the church and in Christ Jesus throughout all generations, forever and ever. Amen. Now, I was listening to a man speak not too long ago who's a pastor of a church in Seattle. And his church is growing very fast. There's hundreds of people in it, even though it's only a couple of years old. And the average age, you think we're a young church. Their average age is about 21. And it's in the middle of Seattle. And Seattle, you know, I was reading not too long ago, Seattle is definitely one of, if not the most, hip places. It's a cutting-edge place. And amongst the young, in this church, for example, and the friends of the people in this church, you're talking about musicians and artists and graduate students and people right on the cutting edge, the hippest people. And this pastor said, he's been looking and looking for all the years he's worked amongst these people. He says, I haven't found an atheist yet. No atheists. They all believe. They want connection to the divine, to the transcendent. You know, now, this hunger, this enormous hunger that's been, for the last 10 or 20 years, has been really beginning to sweep the culture. This hunger for the transcendent, this hunger for the spiritual. It's taken a long time for the media to pick up on this. And the reason the media has not been picking up on this is because the media is run by people my age and older. Run by people in their late 40s and 50s and early 60s. And these are people, we were people, who were educated in the middle of the 20th century. And there we were told that if you're an educated, rational person, you may be irreligious. I mean, there's plenty of atheists among my generation. But even if you are religious, your religion must be a very non-supernatural religion. Utterly non-supernatural. If you're going to go to church, make sure it's the kind of church that says, ah, we're modern people. We don't believe in miracle. We don't believe in revelation, God speaking through the Bible. We don't believe in conversion. We don't believe in mysticism. We don't believe in that. We believe in ethics. We believe in making the world a better place. And so you see, people from my generation, they either didn't go to church or they preferred churches like that. With all the supernatural, all the mystical taken away. And it's very hard for us to admit what's happening. It's very hard to admit. Like I said, you know, only recently the media has finally kind of begrudgingly opened up. And one of the things that's pretty interesting is in the early in the middle of the 20th century, most of the Protestant churches in this country decided we've got to get rid of the mystical. We've got to get rid of the supernatural. We're modern people. We don't believe in miracles. We don't believe in incarnation, atonement, revelation, new birth, conversion. Ah, we don't believe in that. And those churches today, the average age of the attenders is 58.6. And they still really don't want to believe it. Something's going on. There is a desire for experience. There's a desire for the transcendent. But there's a lot of confusion amongst all those seekers. Oh, a lot. Let me give you two very interesting examples. I recently read an interview with a guy who originally wrote Chicken Soup for the Soul. Now, you can't have missed that. You can't go into a bookstore anywhere without seeing it. Chicken Soup for the Soul. And more Chicken Soup for the Soul. And there's about five or six derivatives. And they've sold 20 zillion copies and made the man rich. And in the interview, he said, I realize that people today want spirituality without morality. He says, that's what people want today. They want the sense of the soul. They want a sense of the experience of the transcendent. But they want dubstep, but they want people to believe that they want to believe that they want themselves. And the understanding of the soul is their own purpose. spirituality without morality. He says that's what people want today. They want the sense of the soul. They want a sense of the experience of the transcendent, but they don't want to be told how to live. They want spirituality without morality. On the other hand, recently I got a tract given to me on the streets of New York, and the tract invited to a church. And there's many good things in the tract, but one of the things struck me, and it said, if you come to our church, you'll get no mystical experiences. All you'll learn is what the Bible says you ought to be doing in your life. Now that's exactly the opposite. Here's a church that says, we're not, we're going to give you morality without spirituality. Come to us, and we're not going to give you spiritual experience, just the rules. You'll know what to do. You see, the Bible knows nothing of such divisions. There is, in this passage, as some of you know, maybe my favorite of all the passages of the Bible that gives you almost a complete, full theology of Christian experience. What it means, not just to know that there's a God, but to experience God. Not just to know that there's a God who loves, but to experience his love. Not just to know that there is a God of fullness and glory, but to experience, to be filled with it. It's all here. Let me show you what it tells us. It tells us three basic things. It tells you the reality of this experience, and then secondly, the nature of it, and lastly, the means for it. Now, by, in other words, these three points are, he's going to show that it's there, and then what it consists of, what it really is, and then lastly, how we can know it. Okay, number one, the reality of it. Now, forgive me, and I'm going to try not to take too long on this point, but I want, would you just take my word for it? You, I, we're going to screen out. We've got our, we've got our little filters. We've got our little paradigms as to what Christian experience is, and when we read this thing, we're going to screen out and say, oh yeah, I kind of know what that means. This is mag, this is the magnitude of what is discussed here. It's something that breaks through your categories and barriers. I'm going to have to argue with you just a little bit, just to show you. For example, what are the two, what are two of the things, what are two of the things that he's praying for? Okay, look at the two things. First of all, verse 17, he says, I'm praying that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, and then down a little further, and that you may so grasp Christ's love that you may be filled with the measure of all the fullness of God. Okay, that Christ will dwell in your hearts by faith, and that you'll be filled with all the measure of God. Now, let me ask you a question. Who is he writing to? He's writing to Christians, the members of the churches. But wait a minute. In Romans 8, in John 14, and in more places than I, you know, too many to enumerate, it says that if Christ doesn't dwell in your heart, you're not a Christian. You're not a Christian unless he dwells in your heart. That's what it means to be a Christian. Okay? And further, give me another example. In chapter 2, verse 9 and 10 of Colossians, Paul makes an amazing statement, which is another sermon, and it's not this sermon, but he makes an amazing statement. He says, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily, and you have been brought to fullness in him. You have been brought to fullness. In other words, Paul says that all Christians have been brought to fullness in Christ. Every Christian is filled with the fullness of God. Every Christian has Christ dwelling in their heart. And so, this petition, if you think about it, brings a lot of confusion. Paul is praying for things that all he says elsewhere are already true. True. Or is he? The only way to understand what he's saying is this. If it's really true that all the Christians have Christ dwelling in their heart by faith, then he must be saying that it's one thing to have money in a bank. It's another thing to draw it. You can have a billion dollars and live poor. So, it's one thing to have Christ living in your heart. It's another thing to experience it. It's one thing to actually have the fullness of God in your life. It's another thing to actually experience it. And he is saying here, therefore, something very important. He is saying there's something possible, something enormous possible, that you haven't even begun to tap. And if you're a Christian, you have to realize that. There's always these two sides. It's one thing to say, I've got Christ living in me. But on the other, here's Paul praying that you'll know it. Why? Because we don't know it. We know, but we don't know. Every Christian knows that God loves them. You wouldn't be a Christian if you didn't know God loves. And he's praying that they would know the love of God, that they would know the love of Christ. What does it mean? You know, but you don't know. You think you know, but you don't know. You will never get anywhere near experience of God until the first thing you do is you kind of bow your head and you... tasted three drops out of an ocean. I've tasted four drops out of an ocean. Unless you understand that, you're never going to go. You're never going to experience it. You're never going to move on. That's the reality. That's what he says over and over and over again. Now, if you want to give an example. Now, some of you know these are my two favorite examples, and I'm going to use them. I'll tell you why in a minute. Two men who were great geniuses, extremely cerebral, tremendously intellectual. One was Blaise Pascal. He was a great mathematician and the founder, I understand, or at least he laid the groundwork for probability and statistics, that whole field. And when he died, they found that he had written a diary section of an experience he'd had of God, and he'd sewn it inside his coat. And he kept it with him all the time. And this is what he's, I'll just read you part of it, because it's rather famous, and some of you may have certainly heard it. But what he does is, at the very, very top, he puts down the date. He says, in the year of grace, 1654, Monday, 23rd November, the day of St. Clement, for about half past ten in the evening, until half past an hour after midnight. Is that two hours? Yeah. Fire. That's one line all by itself. And then after that, it says, God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, not of the God of the philosophers, and of the learned. Certainty, joy. Certainty, emotion. Sight, joy. Forgetfulness of the world, and all outside of God. The world has not known thee, but now I have known thee. Joy, joy, joy. Tears of joy. My God, don't leave me. Let me not ever be separated from you. It goes on. What happened? Christ dwelt in his heart. The reality. Now, Jonathan Edwards wrote this in his diary. He said, Once as I rode out into the woods for my health in 1737, having alighted from my horse in a retired place, as my manner commonly had been, to walk for contemplation and prayer, I suddenly had a view that for me was extraordinary. And that must have been something. For me it was extraordinary. Of the glory of the Son of God, as mediator between God and man, and his wonderful, grateful, pure, sweet grace and love, and meek and gentle condescension. This grace that appeared was so calm and sweet. It appeared so great above the heavens. The person of Christ appeared so ineffably excellent, with an excellency great enough to swallow up all thought and conception. And I continued in this state near as I can judge for about an hour that kept me the greater part of the time in a flood of tears and just weeping aloud. I felt an ardency of soul to be full of Christ alone, to love him with a whole and pure love, and to trust in him, to live upon him, to serve and follow him, to be perfectly made pure with a divine and heavenly purity. I've had several other times had views very much of the same nature, which have had similar effects. What happened? This. The same thing. He grasped. The height, the width, the breadth, the depth. The reason I bring these guys up is because it is typical today, and this shatters the myth, that the people that have these kinds of religious experiences are excitable, uneducated people. These were two of the greatest intellects that have ever lived. Everybody acknowledges that. And it's funny to watch scholars try to deal with these descriptions. Christians, 20%, there's an awe in this, scholars, and a kind of jealousy. 80%, they're just trying to deconstruct it, but they can't. What is it? They knew the thing that they had known, but they hadn't known the reality. Okay? It's real. It's there. What have you settled for? Think about it. Those of you who are Christians, what have you settled for? Do you know anything like this? Do you say, well, I know Christ lives in my heart, but do you know Christ indwelling? Do you say, I know I'm filled with the fullness, but do you know the fullness? Okay. Number one. Number two. Reality. Secondly, what is this? What is the nature of it? And I would, it is pretty important to understand, first, what it is not, and then what it is. Now, there's three things that it is not, and I made sort of mention of them in the very, very, or I began to mention them in the beginning. If you look at this passage, one of the things it refuses to do is to do what almost everybody else does in order to get transcendent experience. It refuses to make three dichotomies, split three things. Let me tell you what they quickly are. First of all, Paul is refusing to split emotion and thinking. On the one hand, there's incredible emotion. very beginning, read it in the very, very beginning, it says, I bow the knee. The reason you tend to miss that is we, well, a lot of people kneel to prayer. In those days, you stood. That's why Mark 11, 25, Jesus says, when you stand praying and you have anything against anybody, forgive. Jesus assumes you're going to stand to pray. That was normal. You did not kneel unless something had just shattered you. Something came over you. It was an expression of deep emotion. And if you read this prayer in Greek, the grammar is very difficult. There's dashes here. He's soaring. He says the height, the width, the breadth, the depth. He's not speaking in complete sentences. He's soaring. There's incredible emotion here. But there is tremendous intellect. There is no repetition. There's no out-of-control language here. This is profound, lucid, penetrating, detailed Trinitarian theology. Look at it. And you see, did you hear what Edwards experienced? You know, the theology of his experience was very deep. It's not like this went... Today, we tend to split doctrine from experience. Christian churches that put emphasis on emotion think doctrine and and teaching and theology is unimportant. And Christian churches that put a lot of emphasis on theology think emotion or are scared of emotion. This is also true in the secular realm of the sort of the secular spirituality. People say, ah, we're into experience, not into doctrine and belief. But these two things come together here. Emotion and thinking. Tremendous thinking. Deeper thinking than ever. Deeper emotion than ever. They go together. You can't split those two things. That's the first dichotomy. You don't split emotion and thinking. Secondly, another thing Christian spirituality is not. You don't split the individual and the community. Look, three places. I mean, how many times does he have to hit us over the head with it? In verse 15, he says, I bow the knee to who? God the Father of whom all the family in heaven and earth is named. In other words, God is a family God. But then look at the key word, which we'll get to in a second. The key word in the whole text is the word grasp. But if you look, it says, I want you to grasp with all the saints. And all the saints means all the Christians. And at the very end, there's this tremendous ascription to him be glory where? In the church. Now again, I mentioned this a couple weeks ago, and I can't continue. I had a whole sermon on it recently, but here's the point. Modern people want spirituality. They do not want to be part of a church. They don't want to be part of it. They don't want to be accountable. They don't be part of a group. They want individual spirituality. They want it when they want it. And they don't want to have to be part of a greater institution. This will never be allowed. The Bible never does not know of this kind of bifurcation. It doesn't know anything of this kind of dichotomy. It refuses to split the individual from the group. In other words, unless you've got Christian brothers and sisters with whom you are praying, with whom you are talking about Christ, to whom you, with whom you are worshiping God, you're not going to know this. That's the second dichotomy. The third dichotomy that is not allowed, but most, everybody does, but the Christian spirituality will not allow emotion and thinking. It won't allow splitting community from individuality. But thirdly, it will not say you withdraw from the world in order to get this. If you look at the very end where it talks about to him be glory in the church and in Jesus Christ throughout all ages, that's a reference to the end of the first part of chapter 3 and especially the end of the first part of chapter 1 in which Paul says the plan of God throughout all the generations is from Christ through the church to spread the kingdom of God, to bring to the world where there's all this brokenness and all this disintegration, to bring the spirit, to bring the word through sacrificial service, living out as Jesus lived out, a life of sacrificial service. We live out sacrificial service in the world, deeply engaged, involved with people's lives and hurts and needs. That's where the glory comes. In other words, you don't retreat away from the world to have this experience of God. Don't you see, look, almost everybody, in order to have experience, you tend to go to emotion and split off thinking. Go to individuality and split off community. Go to withdrawal and retreat and get away from sacrificial service in the lives of other people. But I want you to know something. Everything indicates that it's the actual tension of keeping those things together that creates a great deal of the energy for real experience of God. Do you know that? It's keeping those things together, fighting to keep those things together. You live both in a secular world that thinks those things can't live. thinks those things can't live together. That is not what spirituality is. All right, then what is it? Look at the word grasp. Now, this is a fascinating word. You know, sometimes in order to get a hold of what Paul is saying in these labyrinthine sentences, they go on and on and on, and they're even worse in Greek than they are in English. Usually the translators have broken them up, you know, for easier reading. They're very long. You have to find the grammatical heart of the sentence. You know, sort of follow all the, you know, all the dependent clauses down, find the subject, the predicate. It's, you know, it takes hours sometimes, and you get down into the center, and at the very heart, what he's praying for is that we be able to grasp the love. Now, why would he use the word grasp? For example, why wouldn't he use the word feel? I'll tell you. Look. Great. First of all, this word for grasp is a Greek word katalambano, and it's a very interesting word. You know what it means? It means to ambush. For example, in 1 Thessalonians 5.4, Paul says, look out, judgment day is coming. Don't let it surprise you, and it's the word katalambano, because that's normally how the word was used. The word was used to mean an ambush. Now, what is an ambush? I'll tell you what an ambush. When you're ambushed, A, you're surprised, and B, you're under control. Someone surprises you, and you're conquered, you know, through the surprise. Why would Paul use a word like that? You see why this is one of those very hard words to translate. Well, here's what it means. Boy, this is incredible. In the Bible, whenever the Bible talks about the difference between head knowledge and experience, it always descends into sensory language, always. So, in Ephesians 1, it says, I don't want you just to know about the power of God. I want your eyes to be enlightened, to see it. When Job actually experienced God at the very end, he said, I heard of you with my ears, but now I see you with my eyes, even though we know from the text he didn't see a thing. God, you know, there was a world when that was it. Or the psalmist says, I love thy law, it's sweeter than honey to my mouth. And here, now here's what he's going, it's one thing to know that God is love, it's another thing to see it. It's another thing to really hear it, it's another thing to taste it, and here, Paul says, to touch it. Now, this is one of the things that's very, very difficult. A sense. The Bible uses sensory language, and what it means is that there is, what it's talking about is a sense that the heart has of truth. It's one thing to know a truth, it's another thing to sense it on the heart. And the Bible says, that is what the Holy Spirit does, and that's the main thing you need in your life right now. Information becomes sensation. That's the essence of what Paul's talking about. Through the power of the Holy Spirit, information becomes sensation. Well, what do you mean? Well, you know, it's something like this. You say, look, you may, your heart senses, there's certain things that really are powerfully working on your heart. For example, maybe your father said, you will never amount to anything. You sense that on your heart. You don't just know it. You say, my father once said that I was trash, that I was nothing. Now, I know that historically. I know he did that. I know he did that on May 29th, 1957, when I was 14 years old. You say, I remember that. But you see, is it controlling you? Does it always seem fresh and vivid? In other words, is it always new? It's like a surprise. Is it always real? Is it always immediate? Is it always kind of re-happening? And does it control the way you live? Then you don't just know it happened, you have a sensation of it. Right? And now you come to the Bible and it says, your father in heaven says, I will never leave you or forsake you. I gave my son to die for you. In my son, I look at you, I see a complete beauty. Now, you know he said that? There it is. But do you have a sense of the heart? I'll tell you how you know. When you hear what God says more than what your father says. When you taste what God says more than what your father says. When what he said is sweeter than what your dad said. When what he said is more vivid to you than what your dad said. When you find that that is more immediate and that is what's controlling you and that is the thing that's happening to you. That is the immediate reason why you can't split thinking from emotion. There is a kind of emotion that is opposed to truth and that passes away. Like, for example, somebody has just done something terrible to you and you know if you punch him in the mouth, you are going to end up in jail. You are going to be in trouble. You will never get whatever back that he took from you. But your emotions well up and what do you do? You slug him. Why? Because the truth has descended into your heart and you sense the truth? No. Because you see, after it's all over, you say, Why did I do that? In other words, your emotions blinded you to the truth. There is a kind of emotion. There's a kind of emotion that is superficial. That is not based on truth. And it doesn't really change your heart because after it's over, you wish you had, you go back. And there's a kind of emotion that arises out of the truth descending into the core of your being. What the text says, look at the text. It says, when the spirit actually opens up, it prepares your inmost self, your inner being. When the truth, instead of being up here intellectually, descends down into your inner being by the power of the spirit, and instead of just knowing it, you sense it. You taste it. You see it. You hear it. You touch it. You feel it. It takes you over. It ambushes you. And you say, oh my word. You thought you knew it, but now you're ambushed. You say, I thought I knew this, but I'd never seen this. You know, there's a great place where Peter uses it. In Acts chapter 10, verse 34, Peter had been a racist and didn't know it. And he says in Acts 10, 34, after this great vision, where God says, you have to let the Gentiles into the church, Peter, as equals. You have to let them in as equals. And you know what Peter says in chapter 10, verse 34? He says, then I realized that God does not have any favorites. Now, surely Peter would have always known that. It's in the Bible. God plays no favorite. But you know what the word is? We're for real eyes that he uses about himself. He says, then I caught the lumbanoed. It became real. I was ambushed. I suddenly said, I knew it, but I didn't know it. It came down. It came into me. And that is what you're after. And friends, this is the thing that you need today. This is the thing you need. Maybe earlier you've prayed. You know, we give you plenty of time to pray. Maybe you said, I've got a financial need. Or I've got a relationship need. Or I've got some other kind of really bad need. Well, this is the thing you need more than that. You know why? Because number one, if you had this, you could handle those problems. And number two, many of the problems you have, I'll bet you more than half the problems you have, are manufactured because you're looking to these things to give you what only this can. If you have this, you can handle your real problems, and you'll find that more than half of the other problems are really were just manufactured. Power to grasp. All right, now, how do we get it? That's the question, right? Somebody says, okay, I already knew this part. How? I see the reality. I see the nature. How? How do I actually experience it? There's four things here, and I'm going to have to do them briefly, but everyone's very important, and I'll try to make them symmetrical so you remember them. Spiritual preparation, gospel comprehension, truth meditation, holistic participation. I'll say them again, but only in order. Like, number one, you say, ah, another 45 minutes. No, no. Number one, spiritual preparation. Look at what it says when it says, the first thing, before the grasping comes what? The Holy Spirit has to repair your heart. It says, I'm praying that you'll be strengthened by the Holy Spirit in your inner being. Do you see that? Before you can grasp, before you can find this, God's got to do something to your heart. It's really interesting. What does it tell you? It tells you this. Two things quick. First of all, it says, that's how you have to start. You have to say, Lord, I know I'm incapable of this. Help me. But here's the great thing. First of all, this proves, number one, that this is a gift. And this means, look, you can't ever get Christian experience by going after the experience. You can only go get it by going after God. If you want experience and not God, you'll never get experience. If you just want feelings, if you want vibes, you'll never get it. You have to go for God, not experience, and then you'll get it because he's the source of it. Listen, when you date somebody and that person likes to kiss you, you sure don't want to believe that all they really want is kisses. You want to believe want the kiss. From anybody, you just happen to be there. And of course, in that case, the kiss loses everything, doesn't it? Huh? The kiss, you know, if you go after the kiss, and not after the person, the kiss is nothing. If you go after the person instead of the kiss, the kiss is great. And that's the point. You have to see that. Spiritual preparation, okay? Means that you have to say, ah, I can't get after experiences. This is from God. That's all I'm going to say on that because time's going on. Number two, gospel comprehension. The second thing, gospel comprehension, which is so important, why? All right, here's why. Kathy and I saw the movie Armageddon. It was sort of fun, and it was kind of a cartoon. But you know what? At the heart of the cartoon and the marketing people, please forgive me because I'm going to tell everybody the ending. Hey, here's the plot. Here's the plot. One man dies to save the planet. Now, I want you to know that even in a cartoon, there is nothing more moving than that. That is the ultimate story. One person says, if they're going to live, I must die. There is no... What story is better than that? What moves you more deeply than that? And Christianity is the only religion in which that story is at the heart. Every other religion will say, here are the principles. Here are the rules. You know, here's how to find God. And you know what? If you go ahead and try to do that, if you say, okay, I'm going to meditate on the rules. But notice, when Paul comes at it, he does not say, the main thing he wants you to grasp is the attributes of God. He doesn't say, I want you to meditate on the wisdom of God. I want you to meditate on the glory of God. I want you to meditate on the... You know, he doesn't do that. He doesn't give you the principles and say, meditate. What does he say? I want you to grasp the height, the width, the breadth, and the depth of what? Of the love of Christ. If you want information to become sensation, you have to look at the story of Jesus. You can't just look at the principles, the biblical principles of how to live your life and how to deal with stress. You have to look at the story of Jesus. You have to look at the breadth, the width, the height, and the depth. The breadth, the width, and the height, and the depth of the cross. Everything flows out of that. That's where you're going to find information becoming sensation. Think of the breadth. Where do you see the breadth of God's love? On the cross. Why? Because on the cross, Jesus Christ said, when I am lifted up, I will draw all men to myself. It says in Revelation 5-2, you know, thou hast redeemed us by thy blood. Out of every tongue, tribe, people, and nation. The whole point of the cross is that no matter what you are or who you are or what you've done, it doesn't matter whether you're at the very gates of hell. It doesn't matter if you're a serial killer. It doesn't matter where you were born, what race, it doesn't matter where you are. All. Anyone can be saved. The breadth of God's love. You see, if you just have the principle, I love everybody, that will never move you. That will never make information to sensation. You've got to see Jesus dying on the cross, saying, I will lift all men. That's the breadth of God's love. Look at the height. No. Let me do the length for a second. If you want to see the length of the love of Christ, look at the cross. Why? We're told in the Bible that the Lamb was slain before the foundation of the world. Do you know what that means? What that really means is over the centuries, over the ages, Jesus Christ says, I am going to sacrifice my life for you. And he came, and he came, and he waited, and he came. And even though we were mean to him, even though he was misunderstood, even though he was scorned, even though he was lonely, even though we were spitting on him at the cross, he relentlessly loved us. That's the length. He started zillions of years ago and never gave up. And you know what? It doesn't matter for God to say, I will never leave or forsake you, unless you look at the cross. The principle will never, it's just going to be information. The sensation happens when you see him on the cross. It's the breadth and the length on the cross of the love of Christ. And then there's the depth. The cross doesn't just show you the breadth and the length. It shows you the depth. Maybe best of all, what are the depths of God's love? If God had given us 60 books, and on every page, 1,000 times, he said, I love you deeply, you could have meditated on that all your life, and it would never have, I don't think, it would never get rid of your dad in 1957 telling you you're spit. it. that Christianity shows us in a way that no other religion shows us? The depths to which Jesus Christ went were the depths to which God loves us. You know what? When Jesus Christ said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He had fallen into the deepest hole that anybody ever fell into, the depths. Nobody's ever been down that far. You see, it's on the cross, in the gospel, in the story of Jesus, not in principles that you see the breadth and the width and the depth and the height. What's the height of God's love? Jesus says, I died so that you might be where I am. In John 17, he says, I want them to have, Father, the glory that we had before the world began. He says, I go to prepare a place for you in my Father's house. There's many mansions. That's the height. It's Jesus Christ who died for you that shows you the breadth and the length and the height and the depth and the height of who God is. And when you meditate on that, and when you see the gospel, there and only there will you find your information becoming sensation. Thirdly, meditation. Now, you meditate on the truth. There's a very big difference between Eastern meditation techniques, which are very, you're going to be able to buy them anywhere, and Christian meditation. In Eastern meditation, they say, let's not talk about truth and falsity and all that. Let's just see everything as one. It is a big difference. Eastern meditation says, the problem is, you don't know that you're God. And Christianity says, the problem is, you think you are God. See, they're two very different ways. Christianity, Eastern religion says, we have got to definitely forget analysis and go to intuition. Forget the one brain, part of the brain, and get the other. But Christianity says, no, we've got to finally get the two together. And I want you to meditate and meditate on the truth until the fire happens. I want you to think about the truth until the Spirit of God begins to make the truth shine. Now, I'm not going into that because we have often talked about that, and maybe I'll talk about it some other time. But you have to realize, friends, if you study your Bible and then you pray, if you study your Bible and you write it all down, that's information, and then you pray for all the things that you want, that's not going to do it. What you must do is you have to meditate. And what is meditation? Meditation basically means to study in the presence of God the truth you just read. And to ask yourself this question, you have to, or ask him this question, say, Lord God, here's my favorite meditation question. Lord, if I really knew in the depths of my being what I just read, how would I be different? How would my emotions be different? How would my will be different? How would everything be different if I really knew it in the depths and the depths and the depths of my being? Oddly enough, when you meditate and you write down how you would be different if I really rejoiced in this about you like I should, oddly enough, it's as you think, how would I be different that you become different? As you meditate before him, do you, why don't I rejoice more in this thing? Is, is you rejoicing? And very often, not always, but often the Spirit of God will come down and show you these things. One time out of three, one time out of five, who knows? There's rhythms, there's seasons, but it will happen. Lastly, I said holistic, remember I said spiritual preparation, gospel comprehension, truth meditation, holistic participation, but I already told you about that. You must do this, not dichotomizing, not individual and community, right, but both. Not retreat and lots of prayer time without sacrificial service to hurting people, but both. Friends, there's a great hymn that goes like this. The hill of Zion yields a thousand sacred sweets before we reach the heavenly fields and walk the golden streets. You see, the hymn writer is saying, before we get to the heavenly fields, there's sweets. Are you tasting them? Do you understand them? Do you have them? This is real spirituality. This is what this whole country is thirsting for. Without the bifurcations, without the dichotomies, it's at the cross of Christ where you'll see the breadth and the length and the depths and the heights of a love of the God who gave us Christ. In his name, let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that this is available and possible, and we ask that you would make it a reality in our lives. We know, Lord, that if we were to know the humility of Christ truly, we would be... If we knew the power of Christ, we would be so much stronger people. If we knew the love of Christ, Father, we ask that this would all be true. And we ask that you would thereby, through our meditation, our comprehension, our contemplation, our knowing. Lord, during this time in the summer when we have more time for prayer and meditation, through this, make our church a blessing to this city. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
