TITLE: Knowing God
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 1:1-4
TOPICS: Sharing Your Faith The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/knowing-god-2/

============================================================

We're looking this year, this year, yeah, at 1 John, the first epistle of John, and the passage which is there is the very first four verses, which we looked at in a sort of introductory way last week, but now we're going to go a little more into detail. Let me read it to you. 1 John chapter 1, verses 1 to 4. 1 John chapter 1, verses 1 to 5. And his son, Jesus Christ. We write this to make our joy complete. This is God's word. Now, we said last week that here in verse 4, John says it's possible to have complete joy. Complete joy is possible. A fullness of joy, a joy that helps you face anything. Now, it falls to us this week to ask ourselves, how does John say that joy can be arrived at? I think most wise people have come to know, and this isn't necessarily something that only Christians know or that only the Bible tells us about. In general, joy isn't something you can get by seeking it directly. Joy is a byproduct of seeking something else. There are certain chemicals that you can't actually create by trying to create them, but they are created as a byproduct of a process by which you create something else. In the same way, you see the Beatitudes, that we mentioned this last week, the Beatitudes say, never blessed is that man who hungers and thirsts after blessedness, but blessed is the one who hungers and thirsts after something else. If you hunger after righteousness, you get blessedness. If you hunger after blessedness, you get neither righteousness nor blessedness. That's the point of the Scripture. But I really do think joy in general, most people realize that if I go out to try to be happy, I don't get happy. If instead I go out and try to do right, if I go out and try to live a balanced life, if I aim for other things, joy comes. If I aim for joy, it doesn't happen. Now, the same thing here. The kind of joy that Paul's talking about, the magnificent joy, the joy unspeakable and full of glory, that Peter talks about, joy unspeakable, joy that I can't describe, joy unspeakable and full of glory, it comes as a result of the interplay of other factors. What are those? Well, they're here in verses 1, 2, 3, and 4, actually, 1, 2, and 3. In verse 1 and 2, we see that John is talking about the objective truth of Jesus Christ. He says, That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked at and our hands have touched, This we proclaim, the life appeared, and we have seen it and testified to it. So the first thing he tells us is, he is one of the apostles who actually saw Jesus. He was with him before his resurrection. He was with him after his resurrection. He saw that he was a historical person. Jesus Christ and the events surrounding his life really happened. They're an object of reality, John says. We testify to it. We are eyewitnesses. Hear our testimony. That's what he says. But then secondly, he says in verse 3, We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard. So what? So that what? So that you just, you know that we're right. You know that Jesus Christ is a reality. You know that he really was born and died and raised from the dead. No. Believe it or not, as wonderful as that is, that's not the end in itself. It says that you may have fellowship, see, with us. And our fellowship is with the Father and his Son, Jesus Christ. So secondly, in order to have joy, you don't just have to be convinced that the testimony of the apostles to the objective truth of the gospel events is true. But you also have to not just have to believe in the objective truth of Jesus, but in the subjective, you must have a subjective experience of him, an experience of fellowship with him, of personal dealing and exchange with him. He says we have fellowship with the Father and the Son. You see, Jesus is gone historically. He's physically gone. He's not here. But it's in the present tense. We have fellowship with the Father and the Son. So those two things together. of reality, the object of truth, and a subjective experience of fellowship with God, or what some people call, and what other places in the Bible, it's called knowing God. In John chapter 17, John, elsewhere, John wrote the gospel of John. He says, this is life eternal, to know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. To know God is the essence of eternal life. It's the essence of what it means to be a Christian. So that's what John is saying. These two things, these two things are the things that you have to have if you want to have this unspeakable joy. There's no other way. You have to have them both. You have to believe our testimony and share in our fellowship with him. Now, what I want to do tonight is talk about that second part, because that's what the book of John is about. But first of all, let's make a preliminary statement about the balance here. Christianity absolutely refuses to be either a left-brained or a right-brained religion. We tend to be either analytical or intuitive. We tend to be people who either like the intellectual or we like the experiential. And all the philosophies of the world, I believe, and all of the religions of the world tend to go toward one or the other. Christianity refuses to be classified as either because it is both. It is therefore neither. Because what we have right here in the beginning is John saying, you have to understand. He doesn't come and say, the great thing about being a Christian is you have this mystical oneness with God. First of all, he says, there's an objective truth, an objective reality. There are historical facts that you have to believe. You see, Christianity is mystical. We're going to look at that this week and next week. Oh my, it is. Christianity promises you intimacy with the infinite. Christianity promises you. It says it's possible to actually feel his love shed abroad on your heart. It's a, Christianity says, or Paul says, Paul says, we have the one who said in the beginning, let the light shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. When Moses asked God, show me your glory, God says, I can't show you my face. Remember on the Mount Sinai, Exodus 33, in one of the most puzzling and romantic and adventurous and frightening and exciting passages. Moses says, I want to see your glory. I want to come in. I want to know you personally, is what he means. I want to see you face to face. And God says, well, that would kill you. So I'll tell you what I'm going to do. I'll show you my back parts. Now, of course, he's speaking here, as the theologians say, anthropomorphically. He's speaking in ways that we can understand. He talks about his arm. He talks about his eye. He talks about his back parts. What it really means is, Moses, I can't let you right in the front door. I'll tell you what, my glory is so great that just my back parts will transform you. But I can't show you my face. I can't give you that kind of intimacy. And, you know, just seeing his back parts, Moses became radiant with the glory of God that when he came down the mountain, the Israelites couldn't look on his face. They said, put a veil over your face. We can't stand it. You're too holy. You're too much like God. There's too much of him on you. And then Paul has the guts to say, and surely, you know, this is why the New Testament makes no sense without reading the Old Testament. If you understood the Old Testament, you would understand when Paul says in 2 Corinthians that through Jesus Christ, God has shined into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, the knowledge of the glory. He's not saying only you have to believe these objective facts, the mind. He says God has shone into our heart. It's possible to have that intimacy that Moses wanted. We're going to have it. We're going to see him face to face. But even now, we already have glimpses of the face of God. You can have that kind of personal interaction, fellowship, communion, personal connection. And that's what Christianity teaches. But first, here's what's so wonderful. But first, Paul says, John says, they all say, but John right here says, you have to believe that Jesus Christ was a physical being, that he really was a human being. rose again from the dead, it was a physical thing. We touched him. We felt him, you know. Our eyes, our own eyes, he says, you see how he puts it? Our own eyes are seen. Sense experience. And the reason that John is saying this, and then turns around and talks about fellowship, he will not let us be either right-brained or left-brained. You know, in the days, in the days that he was writing, he had two kinds of heresies that he was dealing with, and they're the same two kinds of heresies we have now. On the one hand, he had the Gnostics, which were the pro-runners, the prototypes of what we call today the New Age movement. It's been around for a long time. On the other hand, you had the materialists. The Gnostics believed that only the spiritual was real, and the physical wasn't very real. It wasn't real. The physical was an illusion. It's going to pass away. Only the spiritual is real. The materialists said, only the physical is real. The spiritual is an illusion. See, they're opposites, but we have the same people today. The New Age movement, the Gnostics say, you know, you can create your own reality. All this is an illusion. The physical isn't important. It doesn't matter. All that, you know, it doesn't matter. You know, the physical shouldn't concern us. This side of the audience understood that, see? And that's what the Gnostics were saying, and therefore they would not agree that God could become flesh. They didn't believe it. On the other hand, the materialists, for completely different reasons, they could believe that Jesus Christ was a great guy and he was flesh, but they wouldn't believe he was raised from the dead because they didn't believe in the miraculous. They didn't believe in the supernatural. The one said only the spiritual is real. The other said only the physical is real. And as a result, John comes forward right now and says, on the one hand, the doctrine of the incarnation destroys the Gnostic approach. It says God became a human being. There is objective reality. You can't just create reality in your own way. This is not a world of illusion. On the other hand, the doctrine of the resurrection destroys the materialist that says, I don't believe in the miracle. And John says, we saw it. 500 people saw it. Eyewitnesses, they're still around. Go talk to them. And so what you have here is John laying out for us the first layer. Christianity is not just all spiritual or all physical. You know why? Because we have a God who created both the physical and the spiritual and he will redeem both the physical and the spiritual. We don't choose between those things. We're not the kind of people that says, all that matters, you know, is that we work for a better society. And we're not the kind of people who say, all that really matters is you find personal fulfillment. Oh, no. Christianity says, both of those, all these dimensions have been created by God and they're good and they're all tainted with sin so they've fallen and they're all going to be redeemed. And all that goes to say that Christianity is not just mystical and it's not just intellectual. It's not just left brain. It's not just right brain. It's very mystical. On the other hand, there's objective content. There's a body of truth that you have to receive. You have to submit to it. Oh, people don't like that idea. They love the idea, I can know God. Christianity allows me to have this mystical communion. I need that. I need something like that. But then you come to, see, John says, you can't get to verse 3 unless you go through verse 1 and 2. You have to see that there's an object of truth I have to submit to. In other words, there's nowhere in the New Testament that says knowing God is like one hand clapping. You see, there's a rational body of truth that you have to submit to. You have to check it out. You have to work through it. But then you don't stop there on the basis of that truth. As we're going to see here in a second, you can know God. Now, let's take a look here at verse 3 then. So first of all, you've got both of these things working together. There's got to be objective truth. On the other hand, there has to be mystical knowledge and intimacy with God. That's real Christianity. They both have to happen. It's not one or the other. But now let's spend the rest of our time looking at this, at least beginning to look at this whole subject of what it means to know God. And I'd just like to reread verse 3 and on the basis of this, start making preliminary comments at least, and maybe we'll see how far we get. We proclaim to you what we have seen and heard so that you also may have fellowship with us and our fellowship is with the Father and with the Son, Jesus Christ. All right, here's a couple of preliminary thoughts that you see taught here about knowing God. First of all, this is clear. It's clear. Number one, the first thing we see is this is for everybody. This is not just for advanced trainees. John is writing a church and he's writing all kinds of people. Later on, we're going to see he writes, he calls them fathers, young men, and little children. He's writing all to miss out, and it's possible for Christians to miss what is offered here, but John is actually saying, he's assuming this is for everybody. Okay, maybe that's obvious, but there shouldn't be anybody who sits here saying, well, all this talk about contemplating God and knowing him and experiencing him, wow, that's for those really religious people. I'm a pretty religious person, but I'm not into all that. And, you know, this is eternal life that you know God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent. Do you see what that means? I'm sorry, this is not for spiritual Christians. This is not for advanced Christians. This is for Christians. This is for anybody who says, I've got eternal life. Anybody who says, I'm a Christian, this is for you. But then secondly, interestingly enough, one of the marks, not the only mark, not even the main mark, but one of the ways you can tell that you do know God and you are having this experience is you want to share it. You see what John is saying? He says, his joy will only be full when they have the same fellowship with God that he has. Now, why should I point this out? I'll tell you why. This flies in the face of a lot of popular conceptions. John says, John shows us here that the way you know that you know God, one of the ways that you know God, maybe not the main way, but one of the ways you know God, you know that you know him, is that you can't wait to bring other people into the same experience. Now, that flies in the face. Not only do we have a lot of people outside the church who talk like this, they say, well, you know, it's great that you're devout. It's great that you're religious. And that's fine. But don't try to persuade others. Don't try to assume that everybody else has got to have the same experience you've had. In fact, I'll go so far as to say I've heard people inside the church who say, people inside who say, I have a deep faith in God, I have a deep relationship with God, but I don't believe in talking about it. It's a private thing. I don't like to talk about it. Now, I'm willing to grant there's differences in temperament and personality. I'm willing to grant that some people are more outspoken, other people are more shy. Some people don't mind the kind of conflict that sometimes can come when you try to share your faith. And other people, other people, really, that bothers them a great deal. So I'm not saying I don't agree with individual differences and I don't see individual differences, but this is what John is really showing us. This is what the Bible says. If you don't desperately and deeply want other people to know God, it means you don't know him. Because anybody who's ever tasted this experience feels a burden and a pressure that others around you share it. If you don't have that pressure, if you don't feel that pressure, you don't have it, period. I mean, if you've got arthritis and you find a cure for arthritis, what do you say? Well, you know, it's a very private thing. And besides that, how do I know? And by the way, what if you didn't know? What if you sat down and said, well, you know, it completely cured my arthritis. Unbelievable. It might not work for everybody. And even if you weren't sure it would work for everybody, wouldn't you still crow it from the housetops? You see, anybody who actually has this experience, when you have it, you realize you have been ushered in. You've been ushered into ultimate reality. You know it. You realize this is not like really getting into a certain kind of music. This is not like getting into a certain kind of literature or art and you sit there and say, boy, I really dig this, I dig this. But I know that most people don't. Because when you get knowledge of God, when you experience this, when you realize the divine life is in you, when you begin to become liberated from fear, when you find that death has lost its sting, when you actually sense the pressure of his love on your life and sometimes I actually feel the glory of God pressing down on you. Sometimes. You know that this is not like music. This is not like art. This is not like getting into a certain kind of sports or something. This is ultimate reality. And you have to share it. And you want to share it. And if you don't want it and you don't feel that pressure, you have never tasted it. In fact, I'll go, I mean, take a look at 2 Corinthians where Paul says, while he's preaching, he says, the love of Christ constrains me. The love of Christ. What does that mean? He's not saying, duty. I've got to. I've been told to. God wants me to. Even though, to a great degree, there is duty. There is obligation. God does say that. But that's not what constrains them. What constrains them? The transcendent nature of the experience itself. The love. I have compassion for the people that haven't experienced it. I look around and say, you need this. that you've been ushered into something that's objectively true. It's ultimate reality. It's not just for you. You know it instinctively, intuitively. Okay? So, and a little test, Christian friends. If you find, now look at yourself. If you find that your interest, let me start over. I'll get back to that sentence in just a second. I do understand that there are differences in personality. I do understand there's differences in gifts. Some people have got an outgoing gift, an articulation gift, a gift to spread. I understand those differences. Having said all that, I am saying again, let me start that sentence again. If you find no passion, no desire to articulate and to bring in other people so that they share the same fellowship that you share with you, if you feel like your joy can't be complete until they do, it means that your own spiritual life right now is really dead. Because, you see, John can't be happy unless everybody around him is sharing the same fellowship. Okay. One more preliminary thing, and it may be, yeah. One more preliminary thing, and then a basic intro just to what this thing is, and then we will close up and we'll come back to it next week. The other thing that we see, we've already seen this is for everybody. We've already seen that if you experience it, you need to share it, you want to share it. But thirdly, it is a common experience. Again, John says, I want you to have our experience. He doesn't say, I just want you to have your own. In fact, as you read the whole book of John, you'll see what the assumption is. The assumption is, he is in a position, because he's experienced fellowship with God, he assumes that he's in a position to tell you whether or not your experience with God is genuine. In fact, as you go through the book, you'll see that he is actually going to give you a series of tests. There's at least three we're going to get to them as we go on this fall and next spring. Because at a certain point, he says, if you say you walk with God, but you're doing this, you're wrong. You're self-deceived. Now, this goes against, again, it flies against the idea that most people have today, and that is that religion is such a personal and individual thing that everybody has to find God in his or her own way. And you certainly can't say to another person, oh, your experience of God is not valid. How dare you say that? But this tells us here that the central glory, one of the central glories of knowing God is that it is the same God. See, that's the reason why verse 1 and 2 says there's an objective reality here from which our subjective experience springs. So that everybody at any place, at any time, in any culture, in any century, is having the same experience. And that's the reason why you can have fellowship with each other because of the fellowship you have with God. The modern idea that everything is so individual and everything is so personal and nobody should ever criticize anybody else. What you've just said there is you have laid the basis for the absolute destruction of human community. One of the most amazing things to Martin Luther, when he actually broke through and discovered that you're saved not by works, not by a righteousness that you patch up and give to God, but a righteousness that God provides through Jesus Christ and gives to you. And the minute he realizes that, the minute he realized that, he says, I felt I was just ushered through open gates into paradise. And he began to start to read St. Augustine, the writings of St. Augustine. St. Augustine. Here's a guy that lived over a thousand years before Martin Luther. And he was blown away by the fact that this person had gone through all the same things and that he read his journals and he read his theology. And Luther said, this is what I am going through too. These are the same things. This is the same thing. Because of course, it's the same thing. Knowing God is a common experience. Recently, somebody here in the church was absolutely astonished. I picked up a book by John Newton. A Christian pastor, wrote letters to his friends and letters to parishioners and other pastors. Over 200 years ago, this man said to me what absolutely astonished him. As he was reading through these letters, he was not used to this. He was not used to this at all. But every single thing that John Newton was saying about how to deal with doubts and how to deal with temptation and what you do when God doesn't seem to be very close and how to stay close to God. He said, this described how I was doing. He nailed my situations and my issues this morning. This morning's issues. Yesterday's issues. Last week's issues. He's talking to me. This person has the very same experience as I do. this? See, John says, with us! There is nothing more sure than that. The sociology textbook that you are reading today, the brand new textbook that everybody says, ah, this is the latest thing, that 50 years from now everybody will consider it ridiculous. Maybe even wicked. You read the social textbooks of 50 years ago, your social professors now will not just say this is out of date, they'll say it's bad, it's wicked, it's terrible. There is nothing more sure than that the op-ed pages of the New York Times today will look just as ridiculous, even, quote, wicked, to the trendy people 50 years from now as the op-ed pages of 50 years ago looked today. There is nothing more sure, in spite of the fact that you feel like we finally arrived, we're enlightened, we understand these things, now we understand justice, now we understand compassion, now we understand, 50 years ago, those poor people, there's nothing more sure than that your grandchildren will consider you cultural jerks. Unless, unless you're a Christian and they're a Christian, and then in spite of those differences, your great-grandchildren, your great-great-great-grandchildren, your aunts, 500 years from now they could read your prayer diaries and your prayer journals, and you're wrestling with the scripture, and if they're Christians too, they will say, wow, this is a brother, this is a sister, this helps me. A common experience, knowing God. If you are a 20-year-old African-American raised in New York City, and you are a mature believer, and you've overcome the language barrier to talk to an 80-year-old mature Christian Chinese man who's lived all of his life in rural China, and if you somehow can communicate through the language barrier, you will find that that guy is a brother, that you have fellowship with him because you and he have fellowship with the same one. It's the same person. It's the same one. There's an objective reality. You see? And I'll tell you, the only way, the 20-year-old African-Americans and 80-year-old Chinese people, the only way that children and grandchildren, you see, hearts turn to each other, is if they have that common experience because there's nothing. Everything else is going to change. Everything else. Unbelief will always change. The unbelief of 50 years from now will laugh at the unbelief of now. But you'll be able to read, 500 years from now I'll be able to read Augustine if he's still around, and still say, I can learn so much from him. Why? Because there's a common thing. Now let's just, let's close up in this way. You say, well, okay, what is this? What is this experience? Let me prepare you for the Lord's Supper. Here's what the experience is. The reason verses 1 and 2 come before verse 3 is because the essence, and this is what we'll look at next week, the essence of knowing God is when the mind, the essence of this experience is when the mind, filled with God's truth, descends into the heart. God captures the imagination, makes all sorts of connections to your life, and that truth, in a sense, explodes inside of you and completely drenches not just your mind, but your heart and your will in that truth. So, for example, on the road to Emmaus, after the resurrection, it's in Luke 24, Jesus appears to these disciples, but they don't know it's Jesus, and he talks with them, and he talks to them about the scripture, and then they go into a house, and they sit down, and it says, he blessed, he broke the bread, he handed it to them, and it says their eyes were open, and they recognized him in the breaking of the bread, and he vanished, and they turned, and they said, did not our hearts burn within us as he opened to us the scriptures? Now, I'll tell you what that is. You can commune with God, you can have fellowship with God right here at the Lord's table. What you have to do is you look at these truths, you think about what he did for you. You think about what he did. You think about his life. You think about his death. You think about his resurrection. And you say, Lord, make this real to me. And what can happen is, it can be. The other day, for example, I was thinking about, boy, some difficulties that I see in my life and in my family's life. Just some difficulties. And I was meditating on the place where it said, he is a shield about you. The Lord is a shield about you. So I spent about 15 minutes on that. Meditating, saying, Lord, I know you're a shield. I mean, if somebody gave me a test and it said, true or false, words, I know it, I know it, I know it, but has it descended into my heart and caught fire? And as I was meditating on it, suddenly I realized, wait a minute, wait a minute, if he's always a shield, I was sitting there saying, if you're a shield, why are these bad things happening? And suddenly I realized, you know what? If he's a shield, then all the bad things that happen to me are part of his shielding of me, his humbling of me, his purifying of me, even the great, even the worst things that'll happen to me are part of his shielding of me. And I realized that's how it worked in his life, that his triumphs came through the suffering. And actually the father in many ways, well, the point is, as I was talking, as I was thinking, as I was meditating, suddenly it got real. It descends into the heart. It catches fire. And you know what? You stop worrying. It melts the fear. It melts the confusion. See? And you look up and you say, did not our hearts burn within us as he opened us the scripture? It means you have to go to the truth. Knowing God is not the sound of one hand clapping. You've got to go to the truth. You've got to meditate on it. You've got to contemplate. You've got to love it. You've got to submit to it. You've got to, you've got to reflect on it until you find that it starts to catch fire. And it will, if you've received Christ as Savior, if he's really living within you. That can happen now. Are you ready for it? Let's pray. Father, we ask that the Lord Jesus, not Tim, not the pastors, not the musicians up here, but the Lord Jesus would now sit down and break the bread and pass it out to us. And we pray that you would open our eyes, the eyes of our heart, so that we can recognize you in the breaking of the bread. Father, give us a passion to know you. Let the truth begin to shine. Help us to see you, not just know about you. Because that's what will bring the joy unspeakable and full of glory, which will glorify you. And that's why we ask for it. In Jesus' name we ask for it. Amen.
