TITLE: Light and Darkness
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:17-24
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Discipleship and Spiritual Growth
SERIES: Lord of All
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/light-and-darkness/

============================================================

This is a bridge. This section is a bridge. Actually, if you want to take a look at what we have been looking at in chapter 4, it goes like this. Verses 1 to 13 is all about how God has turned Christians into a body. We're a church. We're a unique community. Then, right here in verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, Paul says, in order to become that kind of community, in order to become that kind of body, we have to grow up into the fullness of the stature of Christ. That's why he says, and we looked at this in detail last week in verse 12, we're told there that we have to reach unity in, you know, this is the unity that makes us into the body of the church, unity in the faith and knowledge of the Son of God. We get this unity, we become this body, we become this church only if we have developed into the fullness of the stature of Christ. So this is the bridge here. Verses 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, says we're supposed to be this incredible community, this wonderful body of the church. The way we'll get there is that individually we grow up into the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God, into maturity, into Christian character. And then verse 17, which we'll get into next week, says, therefore, or so I tell you, which means Paul is saying, now the rest of the epistle, therefore, I'm going to show you how to grow up into the fullness of the stature of Christ. The word therefore, unfortunately, some translations just say so, the word therefore is a very important word, very important. Whenever you see it, you know you're at a critical bridge in the argument of the writer, especially in Paul. Somebody once, some Bible teacher once told me, whenever you see a therefore in Paul, you have to ask yourself, what is it therefore? What is the therefore therefore? This therefore is to show you that we're moving out of the discussion of the church and we're moving into the discussion of how every human being who is a Christian, every man and woman, can grow up into the fullness of the stature of Christ. Last week we mentioned what this was. To grow up into Christ is said twice. Verse 15, we will in all things grow up into him who is the head. Grow up. Into. Have you ever seen a boy of around, say, 13 years old, who's, you know, growing, normal size, might be, you know, five and a half feet tall, but he has absolutely enormous feet. You ever seen that? I mean, you know, here's a normal kid, you know, just a normal kid, you know, five and a half feet tall, all right, 13, you know, 12, something like that, but then suddenly you see he's got size 17 shoes. And you say, what? And everybody, you know what, everybody, everybody says, he's going to be a big one, he's going to be, he'll have to grow into those feet. Haven't you heard that? He'll have to grow into them. We're all like that, only we've got far bigger feet than that. I mean, you know, if you could imagine seeing somebody walk around in size 32 feet, who's three feet tall, you have some idea of what all of us in this room look like to God. Because when you are born again, you're adopted. You have the Spirit of God brought into your life. You're given adoption. You're legally united with him. You're accepted. You're welcomed into his family. You have the Spirit of power and, you know, the Spirit of wisdom and counsel, the Spirit of understanding and might. All this is in you, and it's all potential. Just potential. We're supposed to grow up into it. The things that the Bible says are true of you, they're not actually true, most of them. They're virtually true. You know, it's, it's, it means, for example, 1 Corinthians 10, 13 is an amazing statement. It says, No trouble or temptation has overtaken you except that which is common to others. God is faithful. And along with the temptation, he will always provide a way of escape that you may be able to endure it. Now, what he's saying is, you have strength, if you're a Christian, so as you never have an excuse to sin. Never. The Bible also says that you will never eradicate sin in your life to the end of your life until we meet before God. But the actual potential, the actual power you've got is such that you're never in a condition where you can say, I had to. I had to give in. I was under too much pressure. I had to. You see? He would have, you know, the point is, of course, there's been plenty of Christians that have grown up pretty much into Christ. They have grown into their feet, you know. And they were giants in the land. And so could we be. They started the same way. Now, last week, we talked about this growth. And this week, we have to finish it up in a way. First of all, we start off by saying that the reason that the reason that not forget that. Don't forget everything we're looking at in this passage, verses 12, 13, 14, and 15, has to do with everything we saw before. We are saved to become part of the body. Why? We're told by Paul that there's this tremendous unity, because every single Christian, when you're born again, receives the Spirit, so there's a unity about us, a profound unity. We become a body. Just like in the human body, every cell in my body is stamped with the same chromosome, the same DNA. Right, Lane? Isn't that right? Stamped with the same DNA. So my cells are compatible with one another. In the same way, the Spirit of God comes into us and creates a unity, so we are more like one another, and we feel more one with one another than we do with anyone else. That's what we've been told up to now. I'll never forget, I had a professor in my seminary years, brilliant man, cultured man, educated man, graduate of Oxford University, and he tells a story about how, not too long, I guess, after he became a Christian, and he was working the ramifications of that out. He was driving along somewhere, and he turned on the radio, and he heard one of these radio preachers that was just very self-aggrandizing, you know, the way they talk so often about themselves, and about all the great things God's done, so there was a lack of humility there. There was a lack of, certainly a lack of scholarship there. In many cases, they said things that, instead of looking them up, they just made statements that were really folk wisdom that many intelligent, educated people knew just weren't true. There was an awful lot about that radio preacher that was loud, that was grandiose, that was obnoxious to him, in many ways, and he said, as I was listening, I suddenly realized something. I suddenly realized what had happened to me. He said, this is my brother. See, I'm from, basically, I'm from the high intellectual plane, I'm from that culture, I'm from the educated culture, I'm from the knowledge class, yet I suddenly realized that this guy, as dumb as he was, was my brother. I am far more like this person. He says, this person's on my side, I'm on the same side. This is my brother. He says, the tie between me and him, what he stood for, what he was trying to say, and what he would, what he remember said, in the most inarticulate way, what he was trying to say in the most, in many ways, well, the way he said it in many ways, undercut what he was trying to say, was very unconvincing, and yet he said, this is my brother. The message is the same message. The experience is the same experience. I have more oneness with this man than I do with all those people I graduated from Oxford University with. He understood that unity, and therefore, we have to keep this in mind. We must never think individualistically or atomistically about our Christianity. Yes, it's true that we are saved so that God can forgive us. We're saved so that we can experience pardon and freedom from guilt. We're saved so that he can guide us. We're saved so he can answer our prayers. And all those things are marvelous. But that's not the ultimate reason why you have been pardoned and why you've been saved by God. You have been saved by God so that God can present to the world a people that will astonish the world. You have been saved so that you can be part of a community that will astonish the whole world. That's the reason why Paul says earlier in the book of Ephesians, Ephesians 3.10, his intent was that now, through the church, the manifold wisdom of God should be made known to the rulers and authorities in the heavenly realms. When all of the authority figures of both heaven and earth look at the church, they're supposed to be smitten by the wisdom of God that they see there. Wisdom, yeah. In other words, when people look at the church, when they look at the way we relate to each other, when they look at the inside, the guts of our church, any congregation, people should be saying, how wise it is to give yourself to God. When God is in charge, look at what happens. Look at how these people use their money, how generous they are with it, with each other and with people who are in need. Look at how in the church people who ordinarily never get along together, get along together. Look at how in the church the family life is so much more healthy. Look how in the church they're able to deal with their differences and settle their problems. Look at the wisdom of family life, the wisdom with which they settle their problems, the wisdom with which they carry out social programs, the wisdom with which they unite people together. Hmm? Is that it? the people look? Is that how the world looks at our church? Is that how the world looks at the church? You cannot think atomistically about your Christianity. You cannot just say, well, I get a few tapes here, and I have this fellowship here, and I jump around here to here to here. Your job is not to be saved just to have a happy time. You have been saved so that you can be part of a functioning community that astonishes the world with God's wisdom by the way in which it carries out its day-to-day business, the way in which the people relate to each other, the way in which it impacts its society and community. Are you part of something like that? Are you working for that? Have you decided, this is where I'm going to do that? This is where I'm going to invest myself to see that kind of community? Absolutely, absolutely established. See, that's what Paul's been leading up to now. And he says, therefore, you have to do everything you can to attain the unity and the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, to grow up into the fullness of the stature of Christ, to no longer be infants but grow out of spiritual infancy into spiritual adulthood. That is supposed to be your motivation. Your motivation is not simply to say, I want to be a humble person because I want people to think I'm humble. I want to be happy. Therefore, I want to have peace. Your job is to be part of a people that will astonish the world. That's your motivation for growing. That's what Paul's saying. All of this growth so that we can attain this unity, so we can be the body. So you should stop thinking individualistically. I was told by a couple of interesting people who said to me, in the future, people are going to use churches the way they use cable TV. They're going to notice that this church delivers this, and this church delivers this better than this church, and this church delivers this, and if I really want it to be fully furnished and everything, I'll just, you know, pull what I can from everywhere. And to a great degree, since the church is one, and I, you know, I'm a Presbyterian, which means I don't believe the local church is all the church. I believe in the unity of the body. I believe in lots of cooperation, lots of cross-pollination, and yet, you've got to make sure you see that you are part of a functioning community where the relationships and the infrastructure of that community manifest the wisdom of God, manifest the manifold wisdom of God. Now, that's your motivation for growth. What is the growth that Paul talks about? We started talking about it last week. He also says, and this is where we ended up, then we will no longer be infants. Now, let's pick up where we left off. Last week we said that we have to acknowledge the fact that every person who becomes a Christian enters the Christian faith as an infant, as a child. And we talked a lot about immaturity last week, and we said these are the marks of an infant Christian or an immature Christian, a new Christian. We won't go into that again at all. But we've got to talk a little bit more about how to get out of that stage. That's where we left. Don't forget that this is especially hard. I was thinking about this after last week. I do all of my best thinking on the way home after a meeting. I don't know about you, but I do all of my best thinking on the way home. And therefore, last week I was thinking, you know, this particular message has got to be harder for the kind of people that we have at Redeemer than for any other kind of people. The lower two-thirds or the lower half of Manhattan is largely a professional culture. And professional people have worked very hard to be good in their professions. They've put in lots of years of work. They have done their very best to get into the right grad schools and then get out of the right grad schools and to get in with the right firms. And you've worked very hard. You've auditioned. You've tried to be as good as you possibly can in your field. And some of you have definitely reached that. And now you come on in, you see. You know, you're not simple folk. You're people with some kind of... You're established people in many ways. You've got credentials. And now you come into a faith that says, whoever you are, no matter how many PhDs you have, no matter how many great credentials you have, you start as an infant. Everybody starts at the same place. And there are people in the church who you will have to learn from that make one-tenth of your salary, but who know so much more about the faith and knowledge of the Son of God than you do, and you have got to say, teach me. That's very hard. Very hard. The Bible says everybody starts like that. That's the reason why we say that the Christian life is not an addendum or a continuation of anything. It's a whole new thing. Everybody who's born into physical life starts as a baby outside of Adam and Eve. It's a whole new thing. It's a whole new thing. It's a whole new thing. It's a whole new thing. Thank you. That's the reason why we say that the Christian life is not an addendum or a continuation of anything, it's a whole new thing. Everybody who's born into physical life starts as a baby, outside of Adam and Eve, who obviously start out around, I don't know, how old were they when they started? But outside of Adam and Eve, we all start physically as infants, we all start spiritually as infants. There's no exceptions to that, because what matters inside the church is not your standing outside and not the pedigree, but what matters is your unity in the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God and the degree to which you have attained the fullness of the stature of Christ and Christian maturity. Now, having said that, let's talk a little bit about how you get out of that. The best way to understand this is that the Bible pretty clearly talks about stages of Christian maturity. The goal is maturity. Remember that. The goal is not some abstract standard of maturity, but the goal is to be like Him, to be like Him, to be like Him. You know, what is Jesus like? The moral glory of Jesus, what can we say about it? You know, He's as hard as a diamond and He's soft as velvet and as beautiful as both. He's full of love and laughter and at the same time power and courage. He's as intimidating as He is ultimately approachable. He is as powerful as He is tender. He is as courageous as He is patient. That's Jesus, the fruit of the Spirit, the Ten Commandments, all the stuff that the Bible says, you ought to be this, you ought to be that. You know, whenever you start to feel just crushed under the burden of all the oughts in the Bible, just realize all those things are, those are just a delineation, an outline of His royal, glorious nature. That's all. It's just an outline of what He is, and all you're out to do is to become like Him. And it's not an impossible task because He's planted His nature in you. And you have just got to give Him scriptural freedom to keep watering that and working that out into your life so that you grow up into it. Now, there's a place in 1 John where John is writing to a church, and he says, I think I've got it written down here. He writes to them, and he says, I write to you, dear children, because your sins are forgiven on account of His name. I write to you, fathers, because you have known Him who is from the beginning. And I write to you, young men, because you are strong. And the Word of God lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one. Now, almost every Bible commentary I've ever looked at, almost every Bible scholar I've ever looked at, has said it's very clear he's not talking about chronology here. But rather, what he's talking is about three classes of Christians. He's talking about young Christians. He's talking about adolescent, young men Christians. And he's talking about fathers. He's talking about mature Christians. It's very interesting because he talks about the child in Christ by saying, the thing that you know about is your sins are forgiven. You're still just tasting the deliciousness of knowing that your sins are gone. The sins are covered. The sins are passed. He talks about the growing disciple. He talks about what he calls the young men. And we're going to see this in a second. Very, very interesting. He says, I know you have become strong. The Word of God is in you, and you have overcome the evil one. The emphasis here is not so much on joy and experience of love, but the emphasis here is on discipline, on overcoming difficulty, and on working with and standing on the Word of God. And then finally, fathers, you are the ones who have known him who is from the beginning. And there the emphasis is on unbroken fellowship, which is what the mature Christian gets into. If you were here last week, I wrote down a lot longer version of this. And if you have the handout from last week, you might go back and look at it. But here's just some ideas. Paul here says in Ephesians 4, we must no longer be infants. That means we all started there, and a lot of us have stayed there. And Paul says that we cannot stay there. It's absolutely wrong for us to stay there. Now, young children, what are they like? Basically, young children in Christ are like this. Now, I'm not talking at all. I'm not even bringing up this stuff or repeating anything we talked about last week. But young children in Christ basically are people with high feelings. They have a passion to learn and grow. They're excited about the new access they have to Jesus. They're excited about the new realization they have that their sins are forgiven, that they are into his family, and so on. And there's a sense in which there is a zeal and an excitement for Christ that to some degree is never recaptured. loss. There's a zeal that can never be recaptured. And the zeal, in many cases, looks to the outsider like overzeal. Because very often you'll make too many promises and very often burn out. You want to do everything. Another thing is that you expect and you want to grow very, very rapidly. You often, I think most mature Christians in Christ realize that sometimes the very most effective people at reaching out to folks who are not believers at all, and the most winsome people to people who are not believers at all, are the new believers. However, now we bring up this issue of fanaticism. Very, very often people look at the new believers and they say, now there's a fanatic. Okay, I say, that could be. What do you mean that person's being a fanatic? See, I believe in defending new believers, no matter how silly they're being. You know, like all spiritual, listen, like real babies, real babies can really create a mess, you know, in all sorts of ways. There's these things called diapers, for example. You know, real babies can't control themselves. Well, spiritual babies can leave a pretty big mess too. And, but I will always, always defend them. And I'll say, what do you mean fanatical? And they'll say, well, the problem is that they go overboard. They're too excited about Jesus. Oh, too excited about Jesus. Hmm. Well, I say, now, tell me something. Where in the Bible does Jesus say, well, now I want you to really, really obey me. I want you to be excited about me. I want you, but not too obedient, not too excited. I want you to pray, but not too much. I want you to worship, but not too much. I want you to open my heart to me, but not all the way. Is that what he says? Does Jesus say, now, now, moderation in all things? No. Well, then you say, but aren't there people that are fanatics? Don't you have to calm these people down? Yes. The problem with fanatics is not that they're too fanatical, but that they're not fanatical enough. You see, they're fanatical about some parts of what... They're fanatically like Jesus in some ways, but not fanatically like Jesus in all ways. They're not fully orbed in their fanaticism. You see, they're fanatically zealous. They're fanatically witnessing to people about Christ, but they're not fanatically, what? Sensitive. They're not fanatically wise. They're not fanatically kind. They're not... You see, Jesus, you watch Jesus, and you see there's times in which Nicodemus comes into him and says, Lord, I'd like to have a little theological discussion. You must be born again. I just wanted a seminar. What is this? You know, Nicodemus, I paid my $75, and I wanted a seminar. Jesus says, you must be born again. Do you know what that means? And then there's other places where Jesus is very, very careful, will not do anything like that at all. There's the woman at the well. Look how long it takes for Jesus to get around to say, I'm the one you really are seeking. I have the water. He's very careful to work in what his offer to her by listening and finding out what her needs are and saying, I'm the one you seek. There's other places where he heals a man born blind and doesn't say anything to him about repentance until many days later. And then he comes back and says, do you know who I am? Why? Because Jesus is fanatically sensitive, fanatically careful, fanatically wise, you see, fanatically caring. And therefore, a fanatic is somebody who's only zealous half of it. I mean, not even half of it. He's zealous about certain aspects of Christ's character, but not other aspects of Christ's character. Now, what settles down the new believer? The new believer needs to be settled down because almost always the new believer, though intellectually believing that you've actually given your life to Christ and that you're trusting not in your good works for your salvation, but you're trusting in what Jesus did for you. Every new believer has to be brought down to earth and shown that it takes a long time for you, A, to really decide to live for him, and B, to really rest in him. New believers tend to rest in their experience. They tend to say, I know I'm a Christian not because of what Jesus did for me. I know I'm a Christian because he's answering my prayers. I know I'm a Christian because I feel close to him. I know I'm a Christian because I'm experiencing deliverance and I'm experiencing new victory over my problems. See, like all little children, little children hate to be told this will take a long time. Little children hate that. They don't want to hear that. They never want to hear somebody say, when you get older, you'll understand. I want to know now, and if I can't understand it now, it's not worth knowing. I'll tell you where you move from stage A to stage B. I'll tell you where that happens. When troubles come into your life. children, aren't you excited that your sins are forgiven? Young men, he says, spiritual adolescents, you have overcome the evil one. You are strong. You are standing on the Word of God. You see, in stage A, the younger Christian has strong feelings, but the person who's really finally growing is a person who finds maybe an old sin or temptation has come back into your life, maybe some new trial and trouble has come into your life, and you say, wait a minute, I'm a Christian now. Why are things getting harder? And when that sort of thing happens, what we have is God finally coming down and saying this. He's saying, yeah, you notice your feelings aren't very strong. I don't seem to be very close to you. Hey, your prayers aren't getting answered. The Bible isn't very easy to read. You're struggling. You're suffering. Now we'll see what you really trust. Now we'll see whether you got into this religion to get me to serve you, or you got into this religion for you to serve me. Now we'll see. It could be, friends, that you've been trusting in your feelings, and instead of giving yourself to God, you've actually, you might say, contracted with God. You know, you've signed up with him as a contractor. I'll do this for you and you deliver this to me. You don't know that until troubles start. You don't know that until some of the most important prayers you've ever uttered were not answered. You have no idea what it really means to trust in him. You think you do. Like a little child, you think everything's easy. Somebody's been doing everything for you as a little child. At a certain point you say to kids, I can't dress you anymore. I can't feed you. You've got to get these things for yourself. You've got to. Otherwise, you'll never become, you say, like me. You can't stay a child all your life. Let me give you an example of that. The only way out is through this sort of thing. Trials, troubles. Elizabeth Elliott wrote a book that's hard to find now because I think it may be out of print, and probably for the reasons I'm about to tell you. Have any of you ever seen her book or heard of her book, No Graven Image? It's a novel, and the book is about, I'm going to get this out because I have to read a quote at some point. The book is about a missionary, a woman, who goes to South America to try to translate the Bible into the dialect of a particular Indian tribe. So she goes, and when she gets there, she finds, to her amazement, there is only one person probably in the world that understands, A, English, B, Spanish, and C, the language of this particular Indian tribe. She can't believe it. There's no way that she'll be able to write the book. There's no way she'll ever be able to put the language of this Indian tribe, get it written down, first of all, because it's an oral language. It's not written. And then to translate the New Testament into this particular language. And it all hinges on this one man. So she moves out in the jungle, and this man has a family, and she hooks up with this man, and they begin to do the work, and the work goes on for months, the work goes on for years. She's on her way. And at the end of the book, everything falls apart. For example, when he gets sick, she tries to help him and gives him, I think it's a penicillin injection, and he's allergic to penicillin, and he dies. Then what happens is the Indian tribe, of course, loses complete faith in her. Wait a minute. What about this God you've been telling us about? The wife and the children of this man look at her like this. Somebody takes all of her note cards, which she's been working on for years, and her entire file cabinet full of them, and picks them up and throws them into the river, so they're all gone. And then, you know, you keep turning the page. You know, this is a Christian book. And you say, okay, okay, when does God come through? And, you know, you're getting to this place, and wait a minute, you notice, you know, there's only one page left. This is going to be really something. And you turn the page, and on the last page, it said this. This is what she says. And this is the missionary lady speaking. Now, in the clear light of day, I see, if God was merely my accomplice, he had betrayed me. But if, on the other hand, he was God, he had freed me. I find I can no longer label this work as useless or that work as useful, because in the end, it is all God's. Now, when this book came out, quite a while ago, people were in an absolute tizzy. The Christian world hated it. The president of my seminary told her at one point that that that off of any of the bestseller lists anywhere because he said this is a travesty. And she got all kinds of letters that basically went like this. This is a horrible book. I could never believe in a God like that. God wouldn't do that sort of thing to a very dedicated missionary. And she just sat and laughed because essentially the book was an autobiography. So she sits there and she says, oh, you couldn't believe in a God that would do anything like that, right? Why do you think the book's called No Graven Image? Because she said, I realized, and I heard her speak on this, she said, I realized as these people were writing these letters saying I couldn't believe in a God that would let that kind of thing happen, they were not worshiping the real God. They had created an image of him. And they were worshiping an idol. And the idol was a God who had to work things out according to my plans. This was not a God that I served. This was a God who essentially was my accomplice. If God was my accomplice, he had betrayed me. But if he's God, he'd freed me. Because now I realize this work is his. I obeyed him. He did what he wanted. He has a right to do what he wanted. My ways are not your ways. Neither are my thoughts your thoughts. For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so much higher are my thoughts than your thoughts and my ways my ways. And when you read that scripture, doesn't that begin to threaten you under these circumstances? But if you would give yourself to him, if you would finally say, yes, I'm going to go on the word of God, not my feelings, not on what appears to me, I'm going to finally trust in him because he is competent to run my life and I'm not. What makes me think I'm so wise? And when that happens, you've broken out of babyhood finally. You've stopped feeling sorry for yourself. You've stopped saying, why doesn't he come in and bathe me? Why doesn't he come in and feed me? Why doesn't he come in and dress me in the morning? You say, what's the matter? You know, when a kid says that, you say, because you're 16 years old, that's why. And you'll never become like me, and you'll never be able to help anybody else. And you're sitting there and saying, what makes me think I'm so competent? And you start to distrust finally your own perceptions. And when that happens, you will be amazed at how much easier life will be. You won't feel sorry for yourself. You won't get angry at God because you don't trust your perceptions anymore. You don't think you're wiser than he is. You go on his word. And it's a freedom. If he was my accomplice, he's betrayed me. But if he's God, he's freed me. So that's what happens when you get into stage B. And let me tell you something. A lot of folks have stalled forever at age 12 or 13, like a lot of people. Don't you see there's a lot of people that in the physical development who get stuck right around there? It was nice to be a child. It was great to be a child for a lot of us. Not for everybody, but for a lot of us, it was nice to be a child. But as soon as you got to be about 12, 13, remember junior high school? Remember junior high school. Remember junior high school. How confusing it was. What am I? You know, am I an adult? People were asking me to act like an adult, and I didn't feel like I was ready. On the other hand, I hated being treated as a child. And there's a lot of people that were stuck right there. And there's a lot of you that are stuck in eternal, spiritual junior high school. You're going to have to get out of it someday. And the way to do it is to stop demanding that God be your secretary, and be your gopher, and be your accomplice. And you have to realize what God is saying is, trust me, Abraham. You know, God comes to Abraham, and he gives him the word. Get out. Abraham says, where? God says, I'll tell you later. Just go. Abraham, later on, he comes and he says, I'm going to give you a son. I don't want you to do anything until I give you a son. When? I'll tell you later. You know, 70 years later, he has a son. And God comes and says, Abraham, I want you to kill your son. Why? I'll tell you later. And Abraham became one of the great figures in the history of the church and of the world. Why? He grew up. Isn't that the time we grow up? Now, stage C, the last place we go, eventually, in a sense, stage A is marked by high feelings, and stage B is marked by fluctuating feelings of God, spiritual feelings. But stage C is really steady. And basically, what happens to a person that's broken out into stage C is not that the troubles and trials of their life go away, but they finally get down to the disciplines that we'll have to close with here in a minute. But by that, I mean, you begin to... I'm going to study the Word. I'm going to pray. I'm going to have regular fellowship, and that means I'm going to have interaction with other Christians who are going to both tell me what's great about me and tell me what's wrong with me, who are going to lift me up and help me. I'm going to have fellowship. And I'm also going to worship with the people of God and be part of a body. Bible study, prayer, fellowship, corporate worship, and membership in the body. These things the mature person sticks with and just sticks with and sticks with and does it. Come hell or high water, day in and day out, week in and week out, and as a result, there tends to become a tremendous steadiness in the life. For example, as John Newton says, if you know God, it makes the worst times tolerable and the best times leaveable. You know what he means? It means when things go bad, you look at God's grace and you say, but I know that he's working in this, and I know that I'm not a failure. He's covered this, and there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. And so you're brought up. And if things go well, you look at God's grace and you say, this is a total gift. Yeah, it's gone well, but this is just God's gift. Yes, of course, I worked hard at it, but many times in the past I worked hard at it, and everything fell apart. The reason it's here, the reason there's an accomplishment through me, it's totally God's will, totally God's grace, and it brings you down. You know, you're not able, really, to stay down, and you're not able to stay up very long when you're a mature Christian. A Christian looks at all the different beliefs, and he doesn't have it all straight. He says, this church believes this, this church believes this. He doesn't have it all straight. He doesn't understand it all, but he knows this. He neither is confused nor is he condescending. See, baby Christians and adolescent Christians get either confused or else they say, I'm right, and you look down your nose at other people. And, you know, a mature Christian says, look, yeah, that person has a view about the Bible or a view of Christianity that I think is silly, but the grace in his life keeps him from being as bad as his bad theology should make him, and the sin in my life keeps me from being as good as my good theology should make him, and the difference between us is fairly negligible in God's eyes. You know, it creates a steadiness in you. You stick with it. The word, the prayer, constant repentance, total constant evaluation. Now, the way in which you grow, let me just close up really by drawing those things out. The last verse, verse 15 and 16. 16, it says, from him the whole body, joined and held together by every supporting ligament, grows and builds itself up in love. What he's saying here is that spiritual growth basically is parallel to organic growth. You grow spiritually pretty much the way your body grows. And the way your body grows is generally this. You have to eat. That means take in. You have to exercise. That means output. And you have to rest. You have to eat. You have to exercise. And you have to rest. And actually, look, this wouldn't be a bad way for you to think for a while here. When you try to look at your own life and say, how can I grow out of babyhood into maturity? Eat, relax, exercise. Not a bad way to think about what you should be going on in your life. And we all know if you eat too much and exercise too little, or if you exercise too much and rest too little, or if you rest too much and eat too much and exercise too little, you know, all kinds of problems happen. Any doctor will ask about those three things. Okay? Be your own spiritual doctor. Eating refers to nourishment, and the Bible is the nourishment. The Bible constantly refers to itself as, you know, pure milk and the bread and so forth. And what you should be doing with the Bible, it's not good enough just to memorize verses. Growth is organic. It's not mechanical. What you've got to be doing is tasting it and digesting it. Treat it as food, not as just a book that you memorize or learn or you just get blessings out of or you inspire. Treat it as food. Tasting it means get the sweetness out of it. Don't just say, oh, I've read that. I know that. I've read that before. I know that. That's not good enough. You sit there and you put it on the tongue of your heart and you suck on it. You meditate on it. You reflect on it until you get either a thrill, either a comfort, either a sting. Let it sting you. Let it threaten you. Let it soothe you. Let it warn you. Let it alarm you. But it's got to affect you. That's tasting it. And then secondly, you have to digest it, which means you have to work it in. And that's what exercise is, actually. Exercise means you've got to be looking your life over constantly. And you have to... you're putting into practice what you're learning. The great men and women of history used to keep journals. And this is a frightening thing. Frightening. George Whitefield and a guy named Joseph... No, wait a minute, what's his name? He was John Fletcher, who was John Wesley's successor in the Methodist Church. What these guys used to do is they used to have a little list of questions they asked themselves every day. And on one sheet, every night, they sat down and looked their life over and evaluated it according to the list. Every night. And then the next day, they'd start out with a prayer time saying, I'm going to do better in that area. Oh, Lord, help me. Cleanse me. Purify me. Forgive me. Build me up. Like, for example, John Fletcher, every night, used to ask himself these questions. One, when did I immediately... Oh, he said, excuse me. He says, did I, in the morning, immediately fix my mind on God and try to keep it there all day and keep my mind from wandering? Two, have I avoided any unkind or any unkind thoughts about anyone? Have I delighted in seeing other people preferred before me? Three, have I wasted any time I could have used for God? Four, have I spent money unnecessarily on myself when I could have saved it for God's cause? Five, have all my words been honest, few, and designed to help the hearer? Six, have I, before every deliberate action or conversation, considered how it could be used to glorify God? Seven, have I prayed and gotten close to God, or have I let my heart be lazy and idle? And it goes on to 14, I don't want to depress you any more than you are. What he would do is, every night, he would check himself out and say, how did I do? That's exercise. That's hard work. Are you doing that? See, that kind of ruthless self-examination? And rest. What's rest? Well, there's two kinds. First, there's the rest of fellowship. There's a place where, in the Bible, we're told that Moses went up during a battle, and he had to pray to God, and as long as he had his hands in the air in prayer, the Israelites were winning the battle. When his hands got too tired, he had to lower them, and then the Israelites would lose, so he put his hands on up, and then they would start to win. And then finally, Aaron and her, two of his friends, came along and picked his hands up and held them up. And they won the battle. You need people who are able to come inside and alongside and to say, I'm for you. I'm going to rebuke you. I'm going to build you up. I'm going to love you. I'm going to accept you. But I'm for you. That's rest. But there's a deeper rest. And the final rest is the rest of knowing that you're justified by faith alone. You have to be, whenever it all gets to you, you have to say, listen, Jesus Christ came to me when I hated him. And he pushed the door open. It was so wonderful. I don't know about you. He stood at my door and knocked. And I didn't open to him. Then he knocked the door down. And he walked in. And I said, I'm so glad you did that. I didn't have the strength to open that door. He came in when I hated him, when I was rebelling against him. And you know he did the same thing for you. Do you think he's ever going to give up on you? Never. Because underneath you is this assurance. You're not saved because you're good. You're not saved because you eat and exercise. You're not saved because you're growing well. You're not saved because you're honoring him and obeying him in every way. No. You're saved because Jesus Christ died for you and paid God everything you owe him. And now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. And that is a rest and a relaxation that you have to constantly come back to or you can't grow. You can't grow unless you take regular rest. You have to rest in the gospel. The gospel rest. The Sabbath rest. The final rest. Friends, where are you? Please grow. Don't stay where you are. Don't stay in spiritual junior high school. Acknowledge that some of you are not. Some of you are new Christians, but acknowledge that you are new Christians. Acknowledge that you're babies, that you've got to learn and listen no matter how brilliant and able you are naturally. Grow. There's a place where Jesus says to one of the churches, he says, you're neither hot nor cold. You're lukewarm and I spew you out of my mouth. That's a person who believes but is not following hard after growth. Don't let that be you. But relax. He broke the door down. He's never leaving. He's going to work with you. That's why Paul can say to you all and to me, I am convinced that the good work he began in you, he will do. All we ask, all we ask, Father, is that you would help us to see that what we really want is to be like your Son. Listen, when we become like him, we'll finally be ourselves. When we become like him, we will finally be ourselves. Enable us to grow into the fullness of the stature of Christ. We've gone over so much tonight. Everybody here is in a different boat. We're all at different stages. We're all facing different things. Some of us are fanatical. Some of us are stuck in junior high school. Some of us are ready to despair because we're in the wilderness, and we're just ready to give up. Father, we pray that everybody here will be enabled to see where they are in relation to you, that they will feel your everlasting arms under them, and that they will be enabled to grow in grace and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
