TITLE: Light in the Darkness
SCRIPTURE: Isaiah 60:1-5, 10-16
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Light in the Darkness: Glory of Jesus in Mark
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/light-in-the-darkness-2/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from Isaiah, chapter 60, verses 1 through 5 and 10 through 16. Arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord rises upon you. See, darkness covers the earth, and thick darkness is over the peoples. But the Lord rises upon you, and his glory appears over you. Nations will come to your light, and kings to the brightness of your dawn. Lift up your eyes and look about you. All assemble and come to you. Your sons come from afar, and your daughters are carried on the hip. Then you will look and be radiant. Your heart will throb and swell with joy. The wealth and the seas will be brought to you. To you the riches of the nations will come. Foreigners will rebuild your walls, and their kings will serve you. Though in anger I struck you, in favor I will show you compassion. Your gates will always stand open. They will never be shut, day or night, so that people may bring you the wealth of the nations, their kings led in triumphal procession. For the nation or kingdom that will not serve you will perish. It will be utterly ruined. The glory of Lebanon will come to you, the juniper, the fir, and the cypress together, to adorn my sanctuary. And I will glorify the place for my feet. The children of your oppressors will come bowing before you. All who despise you will bow down at your feet, and will call you the city of the Lord, Zion of the Holy One of Israel. Although you have been forsaken and hated, with no one traveling through, I will make you the everlasting pride and the joy of all generations. You will drink the milk of nations and be nursed at royal breasts. Then you will know that I, the Lord, am your Savior, your Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. The word of the Lord. Thanks be to God. Now, in the Northern Hemisphere, this is the darkest time of the year. It's when the days are short and the light fails quickly. And it's because of that that the, one of the reasons that the church developed a festival called Epiphany. And Epiphany is a, it literally means striking appearance, Epiphany. And it's the Feast of Epiphany, or the Festival of Epiphany, is always held by the church. It is the very first week of January. And it celebrates that Jesus Christ is the divine light come into a dark world. That's why we do it this time. And what I wanted to do is, even though we actually are going to, in a sense, have an Epiphany series, because after this week, we're going to be looking at the Gospel of Mark. And we're going to be looking at what we traditionally do, I think, in January and February, is who is Jesus? Looking at Jesus, trying to understand who he is. But tonight, I just want to share with you a meditation on this subject of Jesus as the divine light come into a dark world. The passage you just had read to you is an interesting passage to work off of. It's a vision of the end time. It's a vision of the very end of time in which God heals the world. You notice, at first, it looks like it's talking about Israel coming back from exile in Babylon. But it's too great for that. It talks about all the kings of the earth coming and living in Jerusalem, and all the enemies being reconciled forever. You see where it says, the children of your oppressors will bow down. That means all enemies are reconciled. War is over. There's no division. Unity. Everyone's together. It's talking about when God heals the world, heals the nation. When there's no more war, there's no more suffering, there's no more death. And this part of Isaiah talks about that. The book of Revelation talks about that. And it's wonderful. But notice, right in the middle of it is a theme of light. Verses 1 and 2 say that God is the light of the world. Verses 3 to 6 says that believers can be light of the world. And verses 10 to 16 explains how that's possible. Because even though it's not mentioning his name, verses 10 to 6 point to Jesus. See, God is light of the world, and you can be light of the world. Because Jesus was the light of the world. And that's essentially the message of not just epiphany, but it's one of the main themes of the Bible. One of the main messages of the Bible, as it were. So let's take a look in this passage about that. Let's consider that theme, and I'll just do a little meditation on this subject, this theme. God is the light of the world. You can be light of the world because Jesus was the light of the world. So first... the sun in the sky. And it says, arise, shine, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord rises upon you. See, this is, the word sun isn't used, but God is being imaged, being likened to the sun. It says, darkness covers the earth, thick darkness is over the peoples, but the Lord rises upon you, his glory appears over you. So it's dark, and the sun comes up at dawn, and it rises, and it brings the light, and the Bible is saying, that's God. That's just an image of God. There's quite a number of places that talk about that. Now, how is it that God is the light of the world? Well, then let's think about how the sun is the light of the world, and I'm going to use, actually, all through the rest of the talk here tonight, all through the rest of the sermon, there's three aspects to sunlight. Sunlight brings life, truth, and beauty. Life, truth, and beauty. So how is God like the light of the world? First of all, he's like the sun, and the sun gives us life. If the sun would go out, we'd all freeze to death. If the sun would just go in, as it were, and never come back out, the plants would die, and then the food chain would be destroyed, and we'd die anyway, more slowly. In other words, the sun is the source of life. And the Bible says that God is the source of all life. In 1 Timothy, it literally says, God is the source of all life. But Paul, in Acts 17, puts it more philosophically. After all, he was talking to the philosophers in Athens, and so he got philosophical. And he says, in God, in him, Paul says, we live and move and have our being. All of us, in him, we live and move and have our being. One of the reasons why some people find it difficult to prove that God exists the way some other being we can prove that this person lived or not that is that God is not a being in the universe. God is the source of all being. He's not just another being. In him, we live and move and have our being. It means he holds your molecules together. You only exist second by second only because he's holding you together. He's giving you his, you're borrowing his existence. He's existence itself. He's being itself. He's a person, by the way. He's not just an impersonal force. But he is being itself. And so he's the source of all life, just as the sun is the source of life. Secondly, sunlight's the source of truth. You say, what do you mean the source of truth? Well, if you're driving along on a bike in the dark, and you can't see where you're going, and you hit a tree, and you're in the hospital, you know why? You needed more light. Why? Because you didn't see the truth of where you were. In other words, light reveals things as they are, and you didn't see things as they were. You didn't see the tree coming. You didn't see where you actually were. Light reveals things as they are. In that sense, light brings truth. And that's the reason why the Bible can also say God is light of the world in that he gives us all truth. It doesn't just mean, by the way, when the Bible talks about this, the Bible doesn't just mean he gives us the Bible. He does. And, of course, that's the truth. But the Bible goes beyond that and indicates that the fact that you can know anything is because of God. God made your mind and your cognitive faculties. Do you realize what a miracle it is that they work? It's remarkable that actually your cognitive faculties and your mind actually see what's out there. Why? Why should that be? And the Bible's answer is because God made it and actually connects what's in your brain with what's out there so that you actually have a view of what's actually out there. God is a... There's a place where the Bible says, in thy light we see light, in the Psalms, saying to God, in thy light we see light, which means, like the sun, the sun isn't so much something you see as much as it's the way you see everything else. If you try to look right at the sun, it'll hurt you. So we actually hardly ever look at the sun. We look at everything else through the sun. The sun gives us the ability to see things. When you're looking at a mountain, you're not really seeing the mountain, you're actually seeing the light bounce off the mountain and hit your retina. And therefore, in the same way, God is the source of all knowledge and wisdom and truth. God is the source of all life. And lastly, light is not just revealing and it's not just life-giving. Light is gorgeous. Life is beautiful. Life rejoices the heart. it's necessary for joy. You know, if you live so far north or so far south that there's one season in the year in which there's like one or two hours of light a day. If you go far enough north and south, you get to places where there's like one or two or three hours of daylight a day and the rest of the time is darkness. And people who live there have trouble with depression. Isn't that interesting? Why would that be? We need light not just for life and truth but also for joy. For joy. Light is a source of all beauty and God is a source of all beauty and joy. Because St. Augustine said, our hearts are restless till they find their rest in thee. That was the very first paragraph of his confessions. Our hearts are restless until they find their rest in thee. Which means that all joy is really found in God and anything you do enjoy is just derivative. Because what you're really looking for is him. Whether you know it or not. So to say God is the light of the world means what? Life, truth, and joy. Or beauty. Life, truth, and beauty. He is the source of all life. He is the source of all truth. And he is the source of all beauty. But that's not all this says. Verse 1 and 2 likens God to the sun and we've just explored what that means theologically, what the image means. But then it goes on in verse 3 to 6. And this is remarkable. Suddenly, Isaiah says, nations will come to your light and kings to the brightness of your dawn. Lift up your eyes and look about you. All assemble and come to you. Then you will look and be radiant. Your heart will throb and swell with joy. The wealth and the seas will be brought to you. To you the riches of the nations will come. Now, here's what's fascinating. Verses 1 and 2 says, the light of God rises on us and then we become, as it were, light magnets. The light comes into us and the world is healed because they're drawn to our beauty. We become the light of the world. That's what it's saying. Now, you say, well, that's at the end of time, right? That's at the end of time. Yeah, yes. And it will be a lot better then. Everything will be better then. And yet, no, you can't put this off to the end of time. Because, as you know, Jesus said in his great sermon on the mount, he looked at his disciples and said, you are the light of the world. You are light of the world. And here's what Paul says in Ephesians 5. He says, for you were once darkness. Now, he's writing to Christians. For you were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. So, he says, live as children of the light. Huh. See, obviously, at the end of time, it's going to be much more intensely perfect and full than it is now. But we can't get ourselves off the hook. We're being told that if the light of God has really dawned on your soul, if you have actually experienced the Holy Spirit in your life, if God's light is actually shown into the inmost recesses of your soul, you are the light of the world. The object of reality of God's light becomes the subjective experience and reality of your life. Now, what does that mean? That we're light of the world or that we can be light of the world? Well, let's take our three aspects of light again. Okay? Life, truth, and beauty again, right? All right, let's start. Life. If God's light has really arisen upon you, you will have a new life. Just like the sun is a source of life, then if God's light has really shown into your heart, you will be born again. You will be regenerated. You will have a new life and there'll be growth. Now, what do I mean by that? Vitality and growth. Here's two kinds of growth. Here's a pile of bricks. I keep throwing bricks on there, bricks on there, bricks on there. And is it growing? Would you say the pile of bricks is growing? Yeah. You could say it's a fair, you could say the pile of bricks is growing. But then over here is a tree and it's growing and it's growing and it's getting taller and bigger and more branches and fruit. Is the tree growing? Yes. Are they the same kind of growth? Not at all. Because this is mechanical growth. This is growth from the outside. This is organic growth. This is growth from the inside. Growth in complexity. Growth in quality. Growth from the inside. Now, what's the difference between a good person, a moral person, maybe a religious person, maybe a person who goes to church and does a lot of things, and a person who's actually growing in grace? Well, the moral religious person is basically heaping up deeds. And then we're going to get to the ideal and look at different spirits of people who are really If not they're standing up in the outside instead, take care of the keer, And a person who's actually growing in grace. Well, the moral religious person is basically heaping up deeds. Martin Luther and John Wesley, two of the most famous Christians in history, were both clergy, were both priests, were both ordained ministers before, and this is what they themselves say, before they became Christians, before they were reborn, before they actually felt that God's light came in, dawned on them, and changed them from the inside, and new life was implanted. They were clergy. Well, what were they doing as clergy? Well, they were going to church. They were preaching the word. They were doing a lot of good deeds. All good things. But they were growing the way a pile of bricks grow. And see, it's one thing to go to church all the time. And by the way, if you are, keep coming. And it's one thing to be involved and do all these good deeds. And if you are, keep doing them. But it's not the same thing as what happened to Martin Luther and with John Wesley. What they said was, when I actually had new life planted in me, instead of just doing good things, I began to get humbler, wiser, deeper, and happier. I began to change from the inside. So let me ask you a question. And by the way, just a warning, warning, okay? This is the most convicting part of the sermon, just so you know what's coming. If you've been a Christian for a while, let me ask you a question. A couple questions. Are you a happier person than you were two years ago? Otherwise, are you harder to discourage because you're happier? You say, well, you don't know. I've had a hard two years. Well, yeah. But that's how Christians get happier. You know that. You see, it's only when bad things happen that you really learn to put your roots down into Christ and find your joy in him. And that's how it happens, frankly. That's how it happens. Happiness based on circumstances is mechanical. Happiness based on him is organic. And so let me go back, okay, to the question. Over the last two years, would you say that you're harder to discourage because you're a happier person than you were two years ago? Would you say that you take criticism better because you're a humbler person than you were two years ago? Would you say that you're a wiser person than you were two years ago, that you're more self-aware or you're less impulsive? You know, most of us are not wise because we're either temperamentally too cautious or too impulsive. And wise people are neither because wise people do whatever the circumstances require. That's what makes you wise. And the rest of us make a lot of stupid mistakes because we always do the same thing. But what happens, of course, is that Christ makes you wiser. It keeps you from being too impulsive. It humbles you. It keeps you from being too cautious. It emboldens you. And therefore, are you wiser than you were two years ago? Are you happier than you were two years ago? Are you humbler? Are you less anxious? Do you worry less than two years ago? Now, I could say to you, find a friend, maybe a spouse, find somebody who knows you extremely well and ask them, am I growing? Am I growing in grace? Am I changing? Am I happier? Am I wiser? Am I less anxious? Now, a lot of you are not going to do that. You know why? Because you don't want to embarrass yourself. But are you children of the light then? You see, if God has arise, shine, if the light has come, and if the glory of the Lord has dawned upon you, then you become radiant. You become attractive. In other words, you get changed. Not just good, bad, you know. You're not just heaping up good deeds. You're growing. You're growing in love and joy and peace and patience and kindness and goodness and meekness and humility and faithfulness and self-control. And if you are, you will be attractive. See, that's what it means to be light of the world, that your changed character attract people. Historians will tell you that the early Christians, in the earliest church, especially for almost 100 years, there was so much persecution. There was so much persecution because Christianity was labeled by a number of the emperors as a superstitio, which meant we were a cult, and that meant you could plunder Christians, you could take their goods, they could be thrown into prison, they could be killed. There was so much persecution that informers would come in and find out where the church was meeting, and the next week everybody would be in jail. And so there was a fairly long period of time in which non-believing people did not come to churches. In fact, I was reading one account that said that deacons... that deacons were bouncers. So how would you like if your deacons and deaconesses were bouncers, keeping you from coming in unless you were baptized? They had to keep unbaptized people out because any one of them could actually get them all killed. And so the gospel did not grow, even though the church grew enormously. It grew so much that over a couple hundred years it was one of the dominant religions in the Roman world. How did that happen if you couldn't even bring people to come hear the preaching? And the answer was because of the attraction of Christians' lives. One of the accounts says that the early Christians were stellar and unusual in these ways. Integrity, generosity, hospitality, sympathy, chastity, handling adversity, and seeking equity. By the way, the convicting part of the sermon is not over yet. Integrity. Early Christians were known for being scrupulously honest and transparent and fair dealing. Generosity, generosity, Christians were known for not only being philanthropic, but if they were employers, not to take so many profits out of the business that customers didn't get great prices and employees didn't get great salaries. Hospitality, they welcomed people into their homes, especially neighbors and people with needs and the poor. Sympathy, Christians were not ruthless in business personal dealings. They were unusually willing to forgive and reconcile. They were not vengeful. They were not spiteful. Chastity. Now, chastity, what the historians will tell you, was the Christian sex ethic that no sex outside marriage was weird to the culture. And yet, the stability of the marriages, the strength of the marriages, and even just the wholesomeness of the relationships between the sexes was very attractive. Handling adversity. Christians were very well known for handling suffering with poise. And seeking equity, which means justice, they were caring for the poor. They cared about the needy and the poor. Now, Christians were so unusual. That is, they stuck out. Their integrity, generosity, hospitality, sympathy, chastity, ability to handle adversity, and seeking justice and equity was so unusual that they attracted. They were light of the world. How about us? Are we children of the light? See, if God has dawned on your soul, if the light of God has come into your soul, you get new life. And that life is attractive. Well, you say, hmm. Well, how does that happen? How does it happen then? That the change that Martin Luther or John Wesley had, how does that happen to us? And the answer is, to complete our little trilogy, is to look at truth and beauty. In other words, you get the life if you see the truth of who you are and the beauty of what he's done. You can be light of the world if you see the truth of who we are and the beauty of what he's done. What do I mean by that? Well, first of all, the truth of who you are. When the lights come on, you see things. One of the ways you know that God's light has dawned on you is you see yourself in a way that you never saw yourself before. Has that happened to you? It's one of the ways you know you've become a Christian. The light, God's light has come in. Two illustrations. One, some years ago I heard a minister give this illustration that one day, for whatever reason, he was working in his office and he was working with a pencil and a tablet. And he suddenly realized he was late for a dinner party. So he looked in the mirror that he had on the wall in his office and he said, all right, I'll look okay. And then he went to the party. When he walked in, there was this brilliant, there was this chandelier up there and it was brilliantly lit. It was brilliantly lit. And as he walked by a mirror, he caught a glimpse and he found, he saw that he actually had, you know, pencil lead smudges on his face and on his hands. Because the new, more brilliant light of the apartment revealed he was much dirtier than he thought he was. Now there's a perfect illustration of what it's like to become a Christian. Right there. You say, how do I know that the light of God has come in, has shown into my life? You see your flaws. You see your sins. You see things that you never saw before. That you made excuses for. You were just totally blind to it. You were in denial about it. And now you see them. That is one of the ways you know God is arising upon you. His light is arising. Another illustration. And one of my very famous, favorite, maybe one of my favorite scenes in all of movies. of the River Kwai. Some of you know Alec Guinness plays a British officer who is the head of a POW camp. In other words, he's the head of the prisoners. I don't mean he's a prisoner. And he's the commanding officer of the prisoners in this POW camp in World War II. And he, to show his captors and to show the world that they are still soldiers, they're not beaten and cowed, he shows that the prisoners can build a bridge over the River Kwai. And he is so intent on doing that and to show that they are soldiers and to show their discipline, he's so intent on doing that that he builds the bridge and he completely loses sight of the fact that he's aiding and abetting the enemy. And at the very end of the movie, when the Allied prisoners have come back into the jungle to try to blow up the bridge, and Alec Guinness sees them, he goes down and he stops them and they get killed. And suddenly, as only a great actor like Alec Guinness could do, suddenly he realizes, as he sees his comrades dead, he suddenly realizes and he sees everything that he's been doing and he takes his cap off and it registers in his face in a way that only a great actor can do. And he says, what have I done? By the way, you can always find that on YouTube right away. That's one great thing about YouTube is you can always find, generally, your favorite movie scenes, you know, like a minute or two. You can go look it up. He suddenly says, what have I done? He realizes all that has happened. He suddenly sees everything he's been doing in a new light. How could I have missed that? What have I done? That's a picture of what it means to become a Christian. You look back at your life and you see everything differently. You see what was wrong. See, before you become a Christian, before the light dawns, you read Romans 3. And Romans 3 says, all have sinned and come short of the glory of God. No one is righteous. No, not one. No one is good. No one seeks for God. And before the light comes on, before God's light comes on, you look at that and you say, that's an exaggeration. That's offensive. I know lots of good people. And I'm not perfect. But I do good things too. You don't get it. But when the light comes on and you see what you've done, you begin to say, wait a minute. If God is actually keeping me alive every second, if I actually have my being in him, then I should do everything for him. Everything I do should be for him. But I've never done anything for him. Even the good deeds I do, I don't do for him. Even the religious things I do, I don't do for him. I do them to get a good self-image. I do them to feel better about myself. I do them in order to get a claim from other people. And I do them even to get him to get leverage over God in order to get him to answer my prayers. I've never done anything for him. See, what have I done? The light comes on. And you suddenly realize, I've never done anything right. Everything I've done is wrong. See, you may not be there yet. I would submit to you respectfully, the light hasn't come on. Because when you see the truth of who you really are, because the light has come on, that's the first step toward getting this new life in you. But it's not all. Obviously, that would just be discouraging if all you saw was, what have I done? Or the smudges on your soul. No, there's a second thing you've got. If you're really going to be changed, if you're really going to be the light of the world, if you're going to get that new life, you have to see the truth of who you are, and secondly, the beauty of what he's done. And that takes us to verse 10 to 16. Verse 10 to 16 would have been a weird thing to read if you were living in Israel at the time that Isaiah wrote. Notice it says, for example, in verse 10, Though in anger I struck you. See, Israel had been sent into exile. He says, Though in anger I struck you, in favor I will show you compassion. And then over in verse 15, he says, Though you were forsaken and hated, you won't be forsaken and hated anymore. But lastly, the very end, Then you will know that I, the Lord, am your Savior, your Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. Now when God says, Then on that day, you will know that I'm your Redeemer. If you were an Old Testament Israelite, you would say, Well, I got you, but I guess you can't take that literally. have said well okay god's a redeemer but you can't take that literally why why would they say that because a redeemer was something very specific in israel if you uh if you were about to lose your land and you're about to go into indentured servanthood slavery to work off your debt you've gone into such debt you couldn't pay your debts you couldn't pay your bills and you're about to lose everything lose your freedom lose your land you only had one hope and that hope would have been a redeemer and in israel the redeemer was a kinsman it was someone who was a relative someone who was a uh a relationship to you someone of blood a redeemer was a kinsman and a redeemer was a kinsman who then would come in and bear the cost himself pay the debt ransom you from slavery give you your land back so for god to say i am your redeemer people have said well yes i suppose in a way but not literally but ah see we christians know yes literally and because we know how god was a redeemer that knowledge is not unimportant it's the life change it's the thing it's the it's the it's the thing you need to see that will really change you here's what i mean why is it that jesus christ said i'm the light of the world in john chapter eight see in john chapter eight jesus says i'm the light of the world what does that mean well god illumines people through jesus no he had a very specific meaning if you go back to john eight and read it in the context of john seven you'll see that jesus stood up at the feast of tabernacles and said this the feast of tabernacles was the commemoration of the years in the wilderness was an annual commemoration in which the jews remembered the fact that when they were going through the wilderness after they had left egypt there was a glory cloud god's glory led them through the through the wilderness the glory cloud in the daytime it looked like a pillar of cloud at night it looked like a pillar of fire but see the feast of tabernacles always had lots of lights because it remembered it reminded them it was a commemoration of the fact that god's light led them through the wilderness and jesus christ has the audacity in that setting to say i'm the light of the world you know what he's saying he's saying i am the glory of god become human i am god become your kinsman your relative a human being like you well why would he do that to go to the cross and pay our debt to bear the cost of our sin to bear the pay the debt that we couldn't pay and how did he do that well all the stuff we see here why is it that we are not struck in anger because jesus christ got the eternal justice he was struck why aren't we forsaken huh why aren't we hated because jesus christ on the cross said my god my god why is that forsaking me but here's the most interesting thing on the cross darkness came down on jesus darkness you know this is matthew 27 and from the sixth hour to the ninth darkness came over all the land and at the ninth hour jesus said my god my god why hast thou forsaken me the light of the world was plunged into darkness what is that darkness well you know god is light and the further we get from god the more in the dark we are what is darkness it's death it's blindness it's ugliness it's taking us away from all the source of life and truth and beauty and the ultimate darkness would be to be so totally separated from god and on the cross the light of the world was plunged into cosmic darkness he lost his father he experienced hell he experienced what we deserve he experienced the darkness we deserve so that we could be what light so we could not be forsaken so we could not be struck and so we could be light of the world now i told you that you will not experience this new life unless you first see the truth of who you are and then see the beauty of what he did do you see this here's what's so paradoxical there is nothing more beautiful than to see jesus christ voluntarily out of love letting himself fall into darkness for you and me see the irony is there's light there there's beauty there there's beauty there there's nothing more beautiful than to see someone nothing more glorious than to see one who lost all of his glory for you. And that's what will really change your heart. You can't just say, I'm gonna be a good person. All that does is make you hard. Here's what will change your heart. You say, oh, Jesus, my kinsman, my brother, my captain, my king, my redeemer. Would you do this for me? If you would give yourself to me, I wanna give myself for you. See, it melts your heart. It moves you. That's what changes you. What's wrong with you and me is that we love the wrong things. We love this and we love that. We love things too much. We set our hearts on this. We set our hearts on that. It drives us. Or we just set our hearts on ourselves and being independent and being our own saviors and lords. But if you really could love God more than anything else, that would soften your heart, that's why you would be not afraid of criticism because you know he loves you. That's why you would not be driven in your career because you already have the acclaim that you want in his approval. You see, if you really could love him more than anything else, everything would be right in your life. And guess what? This is how it works. Not just by saying, get on a stick, be a better person. No, you gotta see the beauty of what he's done. You've gotta see the dazzling light of what he's done. And if you see the truth of who you are and your need for a savior and the beauty of what he did for you on the cross, that will instill the light of God, the new life in you and turn you into someone who, of whom Jesus says, you are the light of the world. Here's a little poem about what Jesus Christ did on the cross. It's from the 17th century. For Christ, your loving Savior hath drunk up the wine of God's fierce wrath. What bitter cups had been your due had he not drank them up for you? That's beautiful. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that we thank you that your son is light of the world who is plunged into darkness and therefore we can be light of the world. We do ask that the changes that you have promised would come into our lives as we turn our eyes now to you. Yes, there's the broken body. There's the poured out blood. It's beautiful. And the more we're moved to serve you in love by the knowledge of you loving us like that, the more we will be able to say that we too are the light of the world. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
