TITLE: Listening to God (Christmas)
SCRIPTURE: Luke 2:8-20
TOPICS: Christmas and Advent
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/listening-to-god-christmas/

============================================================

Let me just give you a very brief reflection on maybe the most familiar of all, the Christmas passages. Down at verse 13 of Luke chapter 2, we read, Suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men on whom his favor rests. And suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest. Pardon me. Did I just say that? I did. Oh, when you hear the message, you'll see that that's very ironic. When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, Let's go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about. So they heard off and found Mary and Joseph and the baby who was lying in the manger. And when they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told them about this child. And all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them. But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart. Now, let me take this most famous of passages and say there's something, there's a perspective that I'd like to give you on this text that ordinarily is not taken. There's many things this text teaches, but one of the things it teaches us is how God speaks to us and how we can listen to him. You notice that God comes and speaks to the shepherds. And in verse 17, we're told it's the shepherds through whom almost everybody learns about the message. See, in verse 17, we see it says, they went everywhere and they told everyone the word that was told to them. This is the way most people got to hear the message at Christmas. What does that tell us? Let me just lay out three things. First of all, it tells us what we must listen, who we must listen to. Secondly, what we must listen for. And thirdly, how we must listen in if we're going to hear God. Who we must listen to, what we must listen for, how we must listen in. Listening is tricky in that when you're not listening, you don't know you're not listening. See, if somebody comes to you and says, hey, hey, I've been talking to you. And you look up from your paper, oh, I'm sorry, I was reading the paper. What did you say? You didn't know you weren't listening. That's why you weren't listening. See, if you know you're not listening, you actually are. Or somebody says, have you had a conversation like this where you said, I had no idea you were this depressed. And the other person says, I've been telling you for weeks and you weren't listening. That's the tricky thing. Is God speaking to you and maybe you're not listening? Do you see how serious this is? Do you see how easy that would be? If we're going to listen to God, first of all, we learn here who we must listen to. The first principle we learn, the shepherd's got a vision. The shepherd's got a spectacle. The shepherd's got glory. But everybody else just got a shepherd. Now, that's very important. Every year, probably, you might hear from ministers who are trying to expound this text, and they always say, and you've probably heard it before, that shepherds were at the bottom of the social ladder. They were marginal. Their testimony was not admissible evidence in courts because they were considered, they were disdained. They were considered to be people without integrity. And so the shepherds were common people, very common, very ordinary. And here's what we have. What we've got is, God did give his message through angels, and that's how everybody wants to get the message. But some got the message through angels. God did send his message through angels, but most of us just get a shepherd. And this is very important. This is something you see in the Bible all the time. In the Old Testament, in spite of the fact you get these incredible pictures in the Bible of God speaking through a burning bush, God speaking through a flaming mountain. In general, what we get is this. You remember the story of Elijah in 1 Kings 19? God wants to speak to Elijah. And God sends an earthquake. He sends a wind. He sends a fire. But finally, he's only speaking through a still, small voice. Or you get into the New Testament. Jesus Christ is risen from the dead, and he gets his 12 disciples together, ragtag, you know. Actually, there were only 11 by then, right? Ragtag, deniers, you see, forsakers. And he gives them 40 days of direct face-to-face revelation. 40 days that they could put their hands in his side and the nail prints. 40 days to be sure about these things, to get firsthand revelation, you see, glory, vision. fucking why not with you. Is that bracky bay bayかな. Amen. put their hands on his side in the nail prints. 40 days to be sure about these things, to get firsthand revelation, you see, glory, vision. But then he leaves, and all we get is them. Now, see, over and over the Bible will say, this is how God speaks. God does give visions. He does give spectacles, but almost everybody else, he gets to some, but most of us get a shepherd. What does that mean? Let me just, let me spin out, say, a couple of examples. For example, in the beginning, for most of us, not all, but for most of us, the first way we hear the message that we need God, that we need Jesus, that we need forgiveness, the first way we get the message that we're flawed and we're weak, it almost always comes through a somebody we know, a friend or a family member, somebody we know. And the huge temptation is to defend ourselves from the message because of the flaws in the messenger. There's always flaws in the messenger. And so somebody's trying to tell you you need God or you need Jesus or there's something wrong with you or you're a weak person. And you can look, it's so easy to do this. You think in yourself, you say, who is she to talk to me? Does she not, she doesn't even see her own blind spots. But you see, just because the messenger is flawed, does that mean the message is flawed? Of course not, but that's what we do. A lot of you have had parents who told you you need Jesus. They told you you needed Jesus, but they were so absolutely flawed themselves that you have done the non sequitur. You said, because they were such messes, there's no way that what they told me about Jesus could be true. And so you've rejected it. But is that true? In the Old Testament, never forget the great story of Balaam's ass. God prophesied to Balaam through the ass. Just because the channel is an ass doesn't mean it's not the truth. And it is extremely easy for us to realize that, is to overlook this. Almost always in the beginning, the most important messages from God come through people who are flawed themselves. But we have to listen. We have to say, is this God speaking to me? Is this God telling me something? Let me give you another example. Second way that God tends to speak to us, we want successes, but God sends us failures. We want achievements, but almost always God speaks to us mainly, not through angels, but through shepherds. In general, he sends shepherds, not angels, with the tidings of the birth of his son. And so, you know, I was studying the conversion of Paul, and there's one place where Paul says in Acts 26 that when Jesus Christ appeared on the road to Damascus, he says, Saul, Saul, it's been hard for you to kick against the goads. The goads. You see, goads were spears, basically, that shepherds use, you know, pointed sticks, that shepherds use to jab the sheep to keep them from going in dangerous ways. And what God has tried to say is the way he gets us to go into his arms is usually through disasters, through troubles, not through angels, through shepherds, not through successes, through failures. You see, most of us know what every counselor in the world says, and that is the only problems you've got are the ones you can't see. The only flaws that'll really kill you are the ones that you're in denial over. So when we get married, we know we're marrying somebody who's going to be our good friend and counselor, and this person is going to show us these things. And we have this fantasy that the way we're going to grow is that certain times our spouse will sit down and say, now, honey, with great gentleness and unbelievable balances here between being firm and yet being loving and affirming, I'm going to show you places where you need to grow. That's not what happens. The way you find out who you really are, the way you get liberation, the way you finally see just what sorts of stuff and junk and mess is down there in your heart, is your spouse irritates you to the place where you're amazed at what jumps out of your own heart. You see, we want an angel. God sends us a problem. We want a vision. We want an angel. God sends us a shepherd. He's speaking to you through your problems. He's speaking to you through many flawed individuals, but even, I'll go one step further. The main way God speaks to you is through the Bible, and I would say to you, even the Bible fits this pattern. Jesus Christ shows up and says after his resurrection to the apostles, I'm going to tell you the truth, but then he goes to heaven, and now all we have are their writings. Now, when I say, I'm going to say, even here, the Bible is an incredibly human book. Oh, that doesn't mean I don't think it's a divine book, too. That doesn't mean I don't think it's the truth, but you see, the Bible, like Jesus, the Bible is like Jesus in this, veiled in flesh, the Godhead see. The Bible is a human book. It sits there. Rays don't show up, you know, when you open it, and as soon as you begin to read it, you'll find, oh my gosh. remember when you knew nothing at all about computers? Some of you say, it hasn't been very, that's not too far in the past. I knew nothing about computers and you got a PC and that was your job, okay? Can you imagine opening your manual, Microsoft 6.1, and sort of reading a paragraph a day for five minutes and thinking that somehow insight's just going to jump out at you? But a lot of you don't even do that with the Bible. You open the Bible, you read a paragraph, and you don't get half of it. Of course, it's a human book. We have to figure out the history. We have to understand the culture. There's all sorts of terms. Sometimes it takes excruciating human effort to read a human book, but that's not what we want. We want lights. We want whistles. We want visions. We want to be zapped. God speaks to you in the most human ways. You want an angel? God sends a shepherd. The Bible's there. What are you doing? God gives you a Bible, not an angel, and says, pour over it the rest of your life, or you'll never understand it. I'm in there. I'm there. Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see. Look at the Bible. Look at your problems. Look at the flawed people around you. God is speaking to you, and you probably don't even know. Okay, secondly, if you're going to hear him, you not only have to see who you have to listen to, but you also have to see what to listen for. And generally speaking, this is the message we think God is telling us, and because we're listening for this message, and it's not God's message, we miss it. What we want, pardon me, what we think God should be saying is, if you try really, really, really hard, I will give you a peaceful, comfortable life. That's what we think God should be saying. If you try really, really, really hard, I'll give you a peaceful, comfortable life. Now, of course, we never think about the fact that Jesus Christ, greatest person ever lived, our paradigm, right? Our example, that that's utterly the opposite of how his life worked. But somehow we don't even think about that. We say, if I try really hard, but is that the message that was given to the shepherds? Absolutely not. The old King James Version, unfortunately, played into our hands, because the way you remember it, probably growing up, is the message of the angels was, glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace, goodwill toward men. And what it sounds like is, God's in his heaven, and he's going to give you a peaceful life if you really try hard to glorify him, something like that. Because peace and goodwill are there for God toward us. Unfortunately, King James Version, which was translated many, many hundred years ago, didn't have the earliest Greek manuscripts of the Bible, which we have, and that's the reason why what you've got, even there in the NIV, is different. It doesn't sound quite right. I'll tell you what, the word goodwill is a synonym for grace, and this is what the message is. There is now available for you peace between heaven and earth. It's available. Heaven and earth have been fighting. God and you have been fighting. There's been hostility between you and God, but now there is peace available to those who receive grace. And what is that peace? It's something that has happened. Look at verse 15. It says, let us go and see this thing which has happened. Do you see that? The way most people want to think that God speaks is, they think God says, if I try really hard, God will just give me peace in my life. I'll have a comfortable life. That's not how any great person has ever had a life. Jesus is in that way. Paul is in that way. None of them. None of them. Why, frankly, one of the best ways to have a fairly peaceful life is to cut corners, is to lie, is to stay as far away from Jesus as you possibly can. That's one of the best ways you can possibly have a life that goes very well, and that you don't find yourself being persecuted, you don't find yourself having to tell the truth at times in which it's going to cost you. You don't have to worry about all those things. That's not what's being said here. What's being said is, the peace is not a general peace. This is saying, the message of Christmas is that there has been fighting between you and God. That the basic condition of your life is you've been fighting God for his job. You want his job. And the way you're going to get that peace, which is the thing you most desperately need, because you're fighting with God, that's the reason why you're fighting inside yourself and you're fighting with everybody else. All the fighting in the world, all the fighting in your life is coming because you're fighting with God. The way to get that peace is you can't try. You can't make it yourself. But God has sent someone. He sent his son. It's happened, see. That's the gospel. Not that you should try, but something has happened. Jesus has come. He's come to live and to die for you. And therefore, it's received by grace. God will give you a peaceful life, but that the fighting in your life between you and God, that there's peace available if you receive Christ. And by the way, before I move on to the last point real quickly, would some of you please consider that this is the most profound way for you to understand your life, that you've been fighting with God for his job? What do you mean? Somebody says, well, for example, why are you worrying? Some of you are just torn up with worry. You know why? You're fighting God for his driver's seat in history. You think you know better than God how life has to go. That's the only reason that you're worried. If you were just willing to say, I want that job. I want history to go the way it should go. I know better. I'm afraid God's not going to get it right. That's the reason you're torn up with anxiety. You're fighting God for the job. You're not just, worry isn't just failing God. It's fighting him or his resentment. Some of you are in the grip of a grudge and you just can't forgive somebody. What are you doing? You're fighting God for his job as judge. You say, I know what that person deserves and I'm going to rehearse it in my heart until it happens. You don't know what that person deserves. You're not just failing God with bitterness. You're fighting God for his job. And there's some of you that actually say, that's ridiculous. I'm not fighting God. I'm a good person. I'm better than most. First, if you believe that God owes you a good life, a peaceful life because you've been trying hard, do you realize what you're doing? If you don't think you're fighting God for his job, you are fighting God for his job because what you're saying is, I'm my own savior. I've been pretty good. God owes me. You're trying to get his job as savior. You're trying to get his job as judge. You're trying to get his job as sovereign. All of our problems, all of the internal fighting, all of the heart, all of the anxiety, all the fear, all the anger, all the bitterness, not only inside us, but between us is because we want his job. And the Bible says, that's the message. Peace is available, but through Jesus. Now, lastly, how do you listen? What's so fascinating is the message comes from the shepherds, right? And the message is not a general message. If you try hard, you'll get general peace, but the specific peace between you and God is available and comes through Jesus. And it comes, and look, there's two groups of people, basically, or two parties. You've got, first of all, everybody who it says was amazed. That's verse 18. But then one person, Mary, it says, but Mary. Do you see that? The crowd was amazed. They loved the story. They applauded. They thought it was wonderful. So they came to a Christmas service, and they said, how wonderful. I felt so wonderful. And they went home, and there was absolutely no change in their hearts. Do you see that? Mary, Luke is lifting up Mary and saying, they wondered. They amazed. They marveled. But only Mary had her heart changed, because she took what was said, and she treasured it and pondered it. Now, the word treasured means memorized. Interesting. It also means to value and cherish. And the word ponder is a word that usually means converse with somebody. And it's so weird that it's used here, but what it means is that she went back and forth with the material for years and years and years. She discussed it. She not only asked it questions, but she let it ask her questions. Now, you know what this tells us? We'll complete here. When you go to the Bible, if you want to hear God in it, if you want to actually listen to God in the Bible, you need to take a look at this text, because what this is telling us, Luke is telling us, you must give yourself to the Bible objectively and subjectively. Objectively, when it says, why would Luke be saying here that Mary memorized everything? Do you know why? See, the commentators know. A lot of people, if you're a typical New Yorker, you're saying, well, how do you know any of this stuff even happened? Wasn't this written down many, many, many years later by people who embellished it? Listen, when Jesus Christ died, Mary was in her mid-40s. Just her mid-40s. A state, I can say, is not yet a state of decrepitude. And by the time Paul and Luke, we know this, Paul and Luke were running around the Mediterranean preaching the story of Jesus Christ 15 years later. You also have to remember there weren't that many Christians in the world. It was a fairly small group. There was several thousand. There was a lot of coming and going. There is no way that Luke could have made this up and preached these were the stories when Mary was only in her 50s or 60s, right at the heart of the church. She memorized this. You see, this is Luke's way of saying, when you read these gospel accounts, you're just, you're getting it right from the horse's mouth. You need to trust the Bible objectively. You're never going to hear God. And if you go to the Bible, is sort of made up, right? That's what the books tell me. That's what the professors tell me. You can't trust all of it. You'll never hear him then. How are you ever going to hear him? You have to trust it objectively, but more, even more, or should I say, absolutely additionally, that won't be enough. Some of you do trust it objectively, and you've never really found him. You have to do what Mary did, trust it subjectively. You know what it means? First of all, when it says she treasured and pondered it, it means that first of all, she did informative thinking. She thought about it, and she said, what does it mean? What does it mean? But it also means when you go to the Bible, you don't just ask the text, what does it mean? That takes a lot of work. I've already told you about that. But then at a certain point, you stop asking the text questions, and you start to let the text ask you questions. At a certain point, you take a look at the Bible, and you listen to it. You let it ask you questions. You let it come to you and say, do you really know this? When did you last miss this? Do you realize how much your life has been distorted because you don't really grasp and love and treasure this? When we've come to the place where we realize, as we're reading about Jesus, that he's our treasure, as we treasure him, now listen, if you treasure the word of the Lord, you eventually will see by faith the Lord of the word. Treasure and ponder. That's the reason why George Herbert at one point writes this about the Bible. Remarkable thing, he writes. He says, O book, infinite sweetness, let my heart suck every letter, and a honey gain, precious for any grief in any part. This is the thankful glass that mends the looker's eyes. This is the well that washes what it shows. Who can endear thy praise too much? Look, years ago, I read a book that is really a very awkward title. He is there and he is not silent. That was the title of the book. But over the years, it's really meant a lot to me because, you see, in the West, they teach you that we evolved, that we're an accident, and therefore the heart of ultimate reality is impersonal. There's nobody to talk to, and there's nobody to listen to at the heart of ultimate reality. And if you go to the East, they said, of course there's a God. But God is the all-soul. He's the everything. See, and of course, God isn't a he. God is impersonal. It's the life force. And when we die, we lose our personality and we go into the all-soul. In other words, at the heart of ultimate reality, the same thing, impersonal. There's no one to talk to and there's no one to listen to. But the message of Christmas is that at the heart of ultimate reality is a person. The heart of ultimate reality is personal. The heart of ultimate reality is relational. The heart of ultimate reality is love. And he's come to us. That's the message of Christmas. Are you listening? Do you know what he's saying to you? Let's pray. Our Father, we pray that at Christmas, we might not be like the crowd that comes to these Christmas services and just feels good, you know, wonders at it, marvels at it, and goes home and there's no change in the root of our being. I pray, Lord, that you would make everybody in this room, not like the crowd, but like Mary, who knew how to give your truth sustained attention. I pray, Lord, that you would teach us how to give ourselves objectively and subjectively to it. I pray that you would help us to not be like those so many of the people to whom Jesus came who were overcome with his ordinariness. He was ordinary. He was veiled in flesh. They expected something spectacular. They expected something great. And Lord, the word of God, your word is just ordinary to our first sight. We pray that you would teach us how to hear you. And we know, Lord, that you will break through because you're God who speaks. You're there and you're not silent. We pray this in Jesus' name.
