TITLE: Losing and Finding God
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 42: 2-5
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/losing-finding-god/

============================================================

Psalm 42. I'm going to read it, even though all that's printed in your bulletin is just the last couple of verses of it. The most important part is there, but the Psalms, before I read this, let me just tell you something about this. The Psalms, John Calvin, who wrote a lot of great commentaries, but I think his commentary on Psalms was great, surpassed the others. He said, the Psalms is a complete anatomy of every part of the human soul. If you read the Psalms, there's 150 of them, and they're written by a whole lot of different people, and yet even though they're all written by a certain number of people in a certain region of the world that is pretty much in a limited span of history, every condition that the human soul can experience is laid out in the Psalms somewhere, and that's the reason why the Psalms are, in some ways, almost like a manual to help you understand your own heart. Because no matter whether you've experienced anger or love or joy or despair, anywhere, any place on the spectrum, the Psalms lift up that condition of the soul, that condition of the heart, lift it up, and they analyze it, and it shows it to you. Now, there's a particular condition of the soul that we're talking about tonight, that in Psalm 42 and 43, even though those seem like two different Psalms, they have to be read together. They're really part of the same Psalm. There's a particular refrain that's mentioned that three times comes up in chapter 42 and in the very end of chapter 43, which is what you've got printed. But it's a particular condition of soul I just thought I'd like to talk about tonight. This is not part of a series of any sort. It's just, as we're going to see, it talks about a condition that your heart can get into, a condition that your spirit, your soul, those are all synonyms as I'm using them tonight, a condition your heart can get into that is very important for us to understand because in the church, particularly, we mishandle it. Now, I'm going to read this Psalm pretty slowly, and there's a lot of repetition in it, but I want you to listen to it, and it'll conclude with a part with a few verses that are right there printed in your bulletin. Psalm 42. As the deer pants for streams of water, so my soul pants for you, O God. My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When can I go and meet with God? My tears have been my food night and day, day and night, while men say to me all day long, where is your God? These things I remember as I pour out my soul, how I used to go with a multitude leading the procession to the house of God with shouts of joy and thanksgiving among the festive throng. Why are you downcast, O my soul, and why so disturbed within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise him, my Savior and my God. My soul is downcast within me, therefore I will remember you from the land of the Jordan, the heights of Hermon, from Mount Mizar. Deep calls to deep at the thunder of thy cataracts. All your waves and billows have gone over me. By day, the Lord directs his love. At night, his song is with me, a prayer to the God of my life. I say to God, my rock, why have you forgotten me? Why must I go about mourning, oppressed by the enemy? My bones suffer mortal agony, and my foes taunt me, saying to me all day long, where is your God? Why are you cast down, O my soul? And why so disturbed within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise him, for he is my Savior and my God. Vindicate me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly nation. Rescue me from deceitful and wicked men. You are my stronghold, God. Why have you rejected me? Why must I go about mourning, oppressed by the enemy? Send forth your light and your truth. Let them guide me. Let them bring me to your holy mountain, to the place where you dwell. Then will I go to the altar of God, to God my joy and my delight. I will praise you with a harp, O God, my God. Why are you cast down, O my soul? And why so disturbed within me? Put your hope in God, for I will yet praise him, my Savior and my God. Now, let's take a look at the condition that this psalm shows us, the condition of your heart, and then the causes of the condition, and then the treatment for the condition. The psalms is almost a kind of manual for soul doctors. And everybody, of course, has to treat your own soul. what's the condition, what are the causes, and what's the treatment? The condition is pretty important and pretty interesting. And actually, if you're going to understand it, you not only have to look at what he says, but what he doesn't say. Now, what he says is this psalmist, who was not David, there's a whole group of psalms in Psalm 42 down to 49, and at the very top of the psalms, there's very often a little heading, and the heading of these psalms is Psalms of the Sons of Korah. This isn't David. The psalmist was a musician. The psalmist says, at least if he ever gets back to the temple, he says, I will praise you with the harp. See that? In 43, verse 4. He's at least an instrumentalist, at least a string instrumentalist, maybe also a singer. And we're told here that he used to go leading the procession to the house of God with shouts of joy and thanksgiving among the festive throng. The temple worship in Jerusalem would start with a procession. You didn't walk in and sit down and chat and, you know, chatter until the music started. Rather, you got into a parade. And the singers and the musicians, we ought to try this, by the way, the singers and the musicians would lead you in. And in you would come into the presence of God with shouts and with chants and with songs and so forth. And this musician was a worship leader. This musician was one of the people who did that. Now, we do not know why, but this musician is in some kind of exile. He says, I remember you. My soul is downcast. I'm away from the house of God. I'm away from my ministry. I'm away from these things. And he says, my soul is downcast within me. I will remember you from the land of the Jordan, the heights of Hermon, from Mount Nazar. This was a mountain range in the northern part of Israel, far away from Jerusalem, and we don't know why he's there. Maybe he was captured and taken there, it's possible. Maybe he went there and now wishes he hadn't. Maybe he has an obligation. Maybe he moved there, and now he's... We don't know why, but he's away. And what he says three times is he's now in a state of spiritual dryness and darkness. He likens himself to a deer panting after water. Now, you know, we sing a couple of, I think a couple of versions of Psalm 42, as the deer panteth for the water. It's really a, it's a much more dire and bleak illustration than it sounds like. Maybe you're thinking of a deer who's just been on the chase or something like that and is looking around for water. Listen, deer are creatures of instinct, and when they get thirsty, they drink. Like, deer do not pant unless there's a drought. And because the psalmist lived in a dry environment, he knows something about what happens when there is a drought. When there's a drought, not only does the vegetation burn up, roll up, become yellow and brown, but the poor animals die. They wander around dazed. They become disoriented. They become parched. Then they die. And he says that's the condition of his soul, spiritually. What he says is that he's in a state of spiritual dryness and darkness. He says his soul is downcast. He's depressed. He's in a kind of spiritual despair. And the reason is, he says, my soul thirsts for you, for God, for the living God. God isn't a reality to him anymore. He's just a concept. He's not a living presence. And as a result, he's experiencing in his soul something like physical thirst. Now, if you're dying of thirst, not just thirsty, but if you're dying of thirst, there's at least two effects. First of all, you can taste nothing. Your tongue has swollen up. It's kind of ironic. If you can't drink, you can't eat. Your tongue swells up. You can't put anything in there. You can't taste anything. And also, your strength dries up. You can't even stand. You don't have the strength to do it. And spiritually, to be away from God, spiritually to find God nothing but a kind of concept, an abstraction, to feel that he's remote, to have no sense of the living presence of God, is to be in a sense of spiritual darkness. And what are some of the signs of it? Well, first of all, there's a tastelessness about your life. Your heart can't engage in anything. Nothing tastes. Your heart doesn't engage. Everything is gray and dull. Nothing softens your heart. Nothing sweetens your heart. But then, on the other hand, there's also a lack of energy. Every day is a grind. It just takes a superhuman effort just to get through it. Everything is an effort. Spiritual dryness. Spiritual darkness. Now, the psalmist is in this condition. He was clearly a believer. He was clearly a person who had experienced the presence of God. He was a ministry leader. He was a ministry leader. He was a ministry leader. He was a ministry leader. He was a ministry leader. Now, the psalmist is in this condition. He was clearly a believer. He was clearly a person who had experienced the presence of God. He was a ministry leader, but now he was in this condition. And if we want to understand this condition, we have to say, notice one more thing. And as I mentioned a moment ago, this thing is very important, but we only know it by its absence, and here's the point. He is cut off from God. God is far away. He is spiritually dry. He's in spiritual distress, darkness, and despair, and there's no confession of sin here. None. He's doing a lot of things we're going to see. He's doing a lot of good things, right things, to deal with this situation. We're going to look at that in a second. But one of the things he's not doing is he's not confessing any sin. Now, Psalm 42 and 43, which is basically one psalm, is one of the largest categories of psalms in the Bible. There's a number of ways of categorizing the psalms, but one of the ways of categorizing them has noticed that many of the psalms, almost a third of all the psalms, are what's called psalms of lament. Psalms in which the speaker cries out, Where are you? Where are you? Why are you away? And generally speaking, these laments tend to break into two categories. On the one hand, there are laments that have to do with why God's not answering prayer. I've asked for protection. I've asked for military triumph. I've asked for this or I've asked for that. And you're not answering. Where are you? And the other kind of lament is not so much saying, Where are you in terms of history? The other kind of lament is, Where are you in terms of experience? Why are you so far from me? Why don't I feel you? Why don't I sense you? Why do you seem so far away? Why is my heart so dry? But most of those cases, they are psalms of confession and repentance. You can go to Psalm 6, Psalm 25, Psalm 32, Psalm 38, Psalm 51, Psalm 130. There's just a few. And they are psalms. They're penitential psalms. And they're far from God. And they feel the person is very, very dry and far away. And God is not real and so on. And most cases, one of the things that they do is they repent, but not hear. And what does that tell us? It tells us something very important. It tells us that whereas direct sin, a guilty conscience, can be a reason or one of the main reasons why you feel so far from God, it doesn't have to be. You can feel very far from God. You can feel spiritually deserted and desolate and not have a guilty conscience at all and not have done anything wrong. Now, this is pretty important to know because when you deal with yourself when you feel far from God or when you deal with others in the Christian church, which my experience is, we have a tendency, we have a tendency to assume the reason must be you're sinning. If you feel far from God, you start to beat yourself up. What am I doing wrong? Where am I sinning? Am I confessing my sins? What am I doing? I must be disobeying. And, of course, if one of your friends feels that way, you start to say, well, are you having your quiet time? Are you praying enough? Are you sinning? Are you doing something? Are you doing something that's wrong? Now, listen, if I deal with somebody, if I sit down with somebody who is spiritually despondent, of course I'm going to ask. You must ask. Have you violated your conscience? Have you disobeyed God? I mean, in any personal relationship, if you violate a person's wishes, it destroys your intimacy with that person. And God's no different. He's a person. But what this tells us is that you can be desolate and despondent and not the result of your sin. Somebody says, now, wait a minute, wait a minute. If you've been around here for a while, a lot of you have, a lot of you haven't, I know. But if you've been around a while, you say, aren't you the one that says that in every situation, no matter what the situation, repent? Don't you always say, repent? Yes. And in this situation, repent too. But now listen carefully. The reason you repent is every time, except once in the history of the world, every time this condition comes on you, you always respond wrong. You either give in to it, or you get mad about it, or you bite and scream, or you go into escape behavior, or you just give in to the irritability, you give in to it, or you stop praying. Always, you respond sinfully. Whenever you're going to deal with a situation, you've always got something to repent of. But it's always, in this condition, this situation the psalmist here is talking about, you will have to repent because of your wrong response to the situation. But you don't have to necessarily always be looking through your life for a sin that caused the situation. It doesn't have to be. Well, you say, that's important. And by the way, this is a cautionary tale, because that's what everybody thought about Job. All of Job's friends said, look at the mess you're in. Look at how unhappy you are. God seems far away. You're a spiritual wreck. You must be sinning. And at the end of the book, Job has to beg God to spare their lives. God takes bad counseling. God takes bad counseling. reduce everything to that. It's so typical in the Christian community. Reduce it all. Well, if you're not feeling right with God or something like that, you know, here's a little checklist. You must be doing something wrong. Have you done this, this, this, this, this? And guess what? This guy's done it all right. And he is parched. And he is dry. And he is cast away. And he's... Why are you downcast? It's not because of sin. So what is the causes? Well, here's what they are. Now, I made a little... I don't know if this is going to help you, but when I threw this sermon together, when I came back from vacation, you sometimes had to throw things together. I made a little list to help me remember it. And that is a series of E's. What are the causes of this condition? Exile, enemies, employment, eating, and enigma. All right? They all start with E. Maybe this will help you. A, exile. But what's he exiled from? Now, when you read this passage right away, you say, what is wrong with this guy? What makes him think he's got to be at the temple? Doesn't he know he can pray to God and he can meet God anywhere? Is he a superstitious person? He feels like he's got to go to a building or something like that? Well, even leaving out the fact that the temple is different than, you know... The temple in those days was very different than the churches in these days. Even leaving all that out, of course he would know that. He doesn't... It's not him that's ignorant. It's us. We Western, secular people, and modern people are so individualistic that we forget something that he knows. And that is, you cannot have a rich and sustained sense of the presence of God. If you have...if you are a lone ranger Christian, if you just have your little individual relationship with God, you have your little quiet time, and then you show up at churches where you like the preaching and the music, and that's that. This guy said, I need the festive throng. I need the body. I need to be part of the corpus, the corporate worship. In other words, he was exiled from community. He was experiencing community deprivation. Now, you know, here's one of the problems with this thing. These five causes, every one of them is a sermon in itself, so I'm going to have to be...I have to be very self-disciplined here. But do you know...over the last couple of years, I've had a tendency to use this as an illustration a lot, but I have to do it again. Lewis, C.S. Lewis and his four loves said that there were three really close friends, C.S. Lewis, Ronald, and Charles. And he says, when Charles died, they were mutual friends. He says, I didn't...I found out to my surprise, I didn't have more of Ronald. It's not that Charles was dead, now I had more of Ronald, but I had less of Ronald because Charles brought something out of Ronald, I couldn't. And see, the genius of what Lewis says is, no one individual, even with a human person, no one individual can call the whole person out. It always takes a group of people to know a person. Do you know that? You think you know Mr. X or Ms. X, you don't know him or her unless you know that person in community, unless you watch that person relate to other people. There's all sorts of aspects of that person because God has made us in his image and there's a richness about us. And you don't know another person unless you know that person in a community, not just one-on-one. But if that's true of human beings, how much more the Lord Jesus, how much more the Lord God? When I first went to Urbana, which is the, I think it's still the triennial missions conference of the InterVarsity puts on, it's in Urbana, Illinois. It's a big missions conference. And I went the first time, I forget, mid-70s. And there was 18,000 people there and they were singing hymns. And I'd never been in a group that big. I'd never been in a group that big. Now, if you've ever been in a group like that, worshiping, that large, that huge, you never forget it. Why? Something happens to you. Now, you might want to reduce it to just sort of mass psychology. Well, it was great to hear that and just to be part of something big. No, no, no, no. We better not reduce it to that. What this guy is saying, what the Bible says, is that you meet God in a different way. You see something about God you didn't see before. Because 18,000 people draw, call out of God things that you can't all by yourself. And three people do. And five people do. And not just white Christians, but white and black Christians do. And not just little groups, but big groups. The fact of the matter is, you cannot know God all by yourself. And this man was experiencing that. I've got to quickly move on. In New York, there's two ways in which we really get screwed up here. First of all, a lot of you are busy. And you think that by having your little quiet time and by showing up at one or two churches where you enough. It's not. You may find yourself parched and dry, and you don't know why, and you're looking around for sin. And this, it's a sin of omission. It's a foolishness. And here's the other problem. Those of us who have stayed in New York for a long period of time find something that happens. Every so often, you'll find out that a rather large segment or maybe even a majority of your closest friends have moved away and suddenly realize, I don't have anybody. I don't have a festive throng left. I'm still coming to church, but I don't have people that I'm talking to Jesus about and who when I talk to them and laugh with them and rejoice with them, I don't have anybody I laugh with anymore. And when I did that, I saw Christ and I learned of Christ, and now they're gone. Now, what are you going to do? It means every three or four years, you've got to go get yourself a festive throng again or you're going to be in the same boat. Exile from community. That is one of the things all by itself that can lead to a lack of reality. Number two, enemies. Anyways, the question that kept coming to the psalmist was, where is your God? Now, this is the second reason why you can find God suddenly becoming unreal, why spiritual desolation and darkness can come upon you, not the result of your sin, not the result of some failure in your part, because this question comes to you. And here's why. When you identify with God, when you become a believer and you say, I identify with God, that leaves you utterly vulnerable when God's ways become inscrutable. This is true of any believer. A believer, it becomes vulnerable when God's ways become inscrutable. So, for example, let's say you give your life to Christ and you really begin to live for him. Things fall apart. Relationship falls apart. Your career falls apart. Your health falls apart. And what's going to happen? The question is going to come, where is your God? If this God, you've just given yourself to God, why would he treat you like this? You see, it's the accusing question. Or maybe, by the way, you connect yourself to the church and you identify as a Christian. And one of the problems with being a Christian is there's so many people in the name of Christ doing stupid things and saying horrible things. And the question comes, again, if God is so great and you say you're a Christian, why are so many of the people that profess belief in Jesus Christ such scoundrels and such idiots? And you don't know what the answer is. You don't know how to answer that. Or what happens if you identify with God? And on the other hand, God allows some horrible things to happen in the world, horrible earthquakes, horrible tragedy, holocaust, so on. And someone comes and says, if God's so great, why is he allowing this? Now, all by itself, that question is enough to send a person into spiritual darkness after a while. Those questions can come not only from the outside, from enemies, from people who come and try to ridicule you and persecute you, but they also come from the inside. You know that. That question comes. It's either the part of your heart that still doesn't like God or it's the devil or whatever, but the question comes. And there are seasons of what the old spiritual doctors used to call accusation, seasons of accusation. I remember, I can't remember exactly when. I remember there were two long stretches, both cases, they last several weeks, probably several months, in 1991, 1993, and you don't know this, but I'll tell you now, in which I had seasons of accusation. I would get up and I would preach, and very often, at least three or four or five times, sometimes even more during the sermon, I would make a declaration and a voice would come and say, you expect them to believe that? They're never going to believe that. Why do you believe that? Do you realize there's all kinds of holes in everything you're saying? You don't live that way. Why should they live that way? Incredible times of questions, accusation. Now, have you ever heard that voice? This comes. Is it a result of your sin? Well, you know, very often, a lot of people feel like, well, I shouldn't be having these kinds of thoughts I shouldn't have, but they come really from outside. They come from, in a sense, you know, the Bible talks about Satan hurling his fiery darts into your heart, or people may hurl them in, but you see, there are seasons of accusations, seasons when the question comes, why is God doing or letting this happen, and there is no answer for it, and any sensitive heart is going to find that it's very difficult to rejoice in a situation like that. Exile, enemies. Thirdly, employment. Now, by employment, I mean this. He says, I used to lead the festive throng. You notice how I said before, one of the reasons we get spiritually dry and desolate is a lack of input, right? Input? A lack of input. That means we don't have relationships in which people are teaching us, people are counseling us, people are helping us, people are living, we have a lack of input. But another reason. But another reason. One thing, I read a book this summer that surprised me a little bit. It was a book written for ministers, and it was a book on how a minister can really keep putting, you know, it was basically how I as a minister can put my roots down in God and really stay close to God. And he said, there's three things you have to do. Number one, pray. Number two, read your Bible. Number three, struggle with people. And of course, when I got to that third chapter, I said, how is that a way of getting from God? That sounds like a drain. That doesn't sound like a way of input. And he said, over the years as a pastor, he realizes that probably, even though it is to some degree a drain to talk with people and try to help people and try to struggle with people. He says, in the end, you get a lot more out of it than you give. By leading, by ministering, by opening your heart to people, by listening to them, by being involved in their hurts, by trying your very best to give them guidance and support and bearing their burdens, it wakes you up. It takes you out of self-pity. It drives you to God. Very often, very often, as you're talking to the person, you're saying, gosh, I'd never heard this before. Where is this coming from? It's God working. It's God actually pouring into you as you're pouring out. And that means that if you're an unemployed Christian, if you're a useless Christian, if all you want is input, just think about it, huh? Think about a person that only eats and never exercises. Some of you say, well, I'm not too far from that. Well, physically, it won't take long before you're going to be seeing a doctor and the doctor is going to be saying you're all out of whack. The same thing happens spiritually. Okay? Exile, enemies, lack of employment, eating. The guy says, my tears have been my food day and night. Now, you know what that means? He's not eating. He lost his appetite, so he's not eating, and he's not sleeping. And it's interesting, David Martin Lloyd-Jones, a great preacher, preached a sermon on this text some years ago. And he was, before he went into the preaching ministry, he was a physician. He was a medical doctor. And this is what he said in the sermon. He said, does someone hold the view that as long as you're a Christian, it doesn't matter what the condition of your body is? Well, you'll soon be disillusioned if you believe that. Listen, physical conditions play their part in all of this. It is difficult to draw lines here, but some physical conditions tend to promote depression. Charles Spurgeon was an outstanding example of this. He was a great preacher who was subject to depression, and the main explanation was a physical condition which finally killed him. There are some in whose cases it is clear to me that the main cause of their depression is physical. And then in many, many other cases, part of the cause is physical. You can not only say that illness causes depression in general, but overtiredness and overstrain does as well. When you're physically weak, you're more prone to attacks of spiritual depression than at any other time. There are many illustrations of that in the Scripture. Only if you recognize that the physical may be partly responsible for the spiritual condition and make allowances for this will you be able to deal with the spiritual issues properly. What's he saying? It is very easy for us to see a person spiritually cast down away from God, and there might be some kind of physical part to the reason that person feels that way. How easy it is to say, well, are you doing the list? These things are complicated. And then lastly, enigma. Now, what do I mean by that? I said he's exiled from community. He is the enemies. It means he's being attacked with the questions of the accusations. He's not employed anymore. He's not giving out. He's obviously not physically right where he should be. And then lastly, lastly, enigma. Now, here's what I mean by enigma. Sometimes there's no sin. Sometimes there's no lack of spiritual disciplines. Sometimes there's no spiritual loneliness, which is the first one we talked about here tonight. Sometimes there's no accusation. Sometimes there's no underemployment. Sometimes there's no physical problems. Sometimes God simply lets you have a dry time. Now, almost nobody talks about this. The old guys did. The old Catholic and Protestant soul doctors, they talked about it. They called it spiritual desertion. And they said this, there are times in which God, he never takes his arms out from underneath you, but there are times in which he doesn't let you feel his arms underneath you. Why? Well, the psalmist understands. The psalmist says, what does the psalmist do? Here's what the psalmist does. And this is what we have to do. And this is almost, we never do this right away. When we start to feel God is far away, as I said, we do all kinds of things. We yell and we scream and we give in and we stop praying and we sometimes do escape behavior. That's not what we do. and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I will yet praise Him, my Savior and my God. Now look at that. There it is. First of all, number one, he's talking to himself. David Martin Lloyd-Jones, in his famous sermon on this topic, he says, you know what? When you go through one of these conditions, every morning you're going to get up, and your heart is going to be talking to you. And you can either spend the day listening to your soul, or you can spend the day talking to your soul. It's up to you. In other words, your soul is going to be saying, oh my gosh, it's terrible. It's never going to get better. All day. You're never going to get back to Judah. No, you're going to be useless. You're never going to write another song. You know, this is what the musician is. Or you can take your soul in hand and say, you listen to me. So the first thing he does is he gets himself in hand. He's not just going with the flow, okay? Secondly, he says, hope in God now. Why does he do that? And I'll tell you why he does it. Why is it that God ever sometimes puts you through dry times? Well, all the great pastors and preachers of the past said, it's because God is trying to show you that the things, the things, many of these things, like fellowship, many of these things, like ministry, many of these things that, you know, are now gone, were too important to you. You know, see, for example, relationships are very, very important, but sometimes God will actually remove some of your best friends in New York and put you through a time like this because he's looking and saying, I want to know, I want to know. How did you know I loved you? Did you know I loved you because there were attractive people around you that thought you were great and now they're gone and now you feel terrible? In other words, who's your real savior? What is your real source of love? People? Or is it me? Is it my word? Is it what I've said about you through Jesus Christ? You see? And you see, the psalmist realizes that one of the reasons he's desolate is because many of these things are gone, his fellowship and his mental coherence and all these things are gone. You see, he doesn't have answers. Boy, don't you feel great about God when somebody asks you a question, some non-Christian asks you a question and you give them the answer and the non-Christian says, wow, that was great. But when they come and say, where is your God and you don't have an answer? When your spiritual coherence is gone, when your fellowship is gone, when your strength is gone, when all these things are gone, one of the reasons God pulls back is to say, what really were you relying on? What really was your salvation? Some of you might have been very active in a ministry and somehow it's gone, just like this temple singer. And now you just, you don't have that same kind of joy in the Lord. Well, to some degree, your joy in the Lord was ego. The psalmist comes and says, hope in God, look at your hopes, analyze your hopes. See, that's the second thing. First, he takes himself in hand and talks to his heart instead of listening. Secondly, he analyzes his hope. But then thirdly, he says, I will praise him. And you know what? I've been thinking about what that means and it's got to mean a number of things. First of all, I will praise him must mean I am going home. I'm going to restore the things that weren't there. I'm going to find fellowship. I'm going to get to church. I'm going to do the things. First of all, he's saying, I'm going to go restore these things that are missing. But then secondly, it must mean, secondly, I will praise him must mean I'm going to pray. And if you read the part that's not printed in your bulletin, it says, my soul is downcast within me. Therefore, I will remember you. And he also says, by day the Lord directs his love at night, his song is with me, a prayer to the God of my life. He decides that in spite of the fact that God is absolutely gone experientially from his life, he says, that's more of a reason to pray, not less. That's more of a reason to be disciplined in my prayer life, not less. And he doesn't just pray, he remembers. And that's another subject. But in the Psalms, the word remember means more than just pray. It means meditation. It means reflection. It means a disciplined reading of the word of God in the presence of God. You know, you can read the Bible. You might say, you can do informative reading and you can do formative reading. Informative reading is reading for information. Where you're in charge, you're asking the text questions. But formative reading is where the text is in charge and it's asking you questions. It's slow reading. It's reflective reading. It's reading every part of a passage of scripture and praising God for it and confessing sin and asking God for it. It's praying and thinking and reflecting and remembering who he is and what he's done and what he's done for you in the past. And you do that day and night, he says. Now, I know what most of us do when we start to feel far from God. What we do is we just pull back and say, why do it? I'm not getting anything out of it. What an American thing. throne of grace, I can assure you you will get nothing from staying away. You know, remember when Jesus says to Philip, are you going to go away too? And Philip says, where else can we go? You have the words of eternal life. What is your alternative to this? What is your alternative to remembering him? What is your alternative to praying to him all night? This guy says, because God's further away, I'm not just going to pray in general. I'm not just going to make prayer list. I'm going to meditate. I'm going to seek him. I'm going to pour out my soul. The first part of this, if you're far from God, I ask you to do this every morning and every evening. Take Psalm 42, especially the first four verses, but the whole Psalm, and pray it to him. Don't just study it. That's informative reading. Do formative reading. Read it and pray it to him. And as much as you can, say, Lord, help me to want to want you. Let some of the words I'm about to say to you be words that I, to some degree, actually mean. You watch. You'll be remembering him. Lastly, when he says, I will praise him, I believe what he's actually doing is he's remembering something. And that is the promises of the Bible that if you belong to him, he will never let you down. See, to some degree, when he says, I will praise him, means I'm going to go and restore all these missing factors. And I will praise him, means I'm going to actually have a time of prayer. I'm going to keep, I'm going to stay there until I find him. But I will praise him, also probably means I know what the word of God says, and that is, I will never leave you or forsake you. I will dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Surely goodness and mercy will follow me all the days of my life. Now, if he knew that, how much more do you know it? And I'll tell you why you know it. Because there was one person who, though there was no sin at all, was utterly desolate, was totally spiritually deserted. And you see, you and I sometimes experience a lack of feeling of God's arms. God's arms are there, the Bible says, but sometimes we don't feel them as a way of spiritual discipline to teach us all the things we've been talking about tonight. But there was one person who did not sin who God actually dropped. See, Jesus says, no one can snatch you out of my hand. Remember? He says, my sheep know my voice, and they come to me, and no one can snatch them out of my hand. You know? And the psalmist says, my father and mother might forsake me, but the Lord will lift me up. When I do infant baptisms in the morning, very often I think about that. One time I had my little boy, David, who was, I guess, three at the time. I don't know if you remember, David. I had you on my back. I was walking along the big boulders of Magnolia Beach in Massachusetts, and I dropped you. I fell backward. Think of how smart you'd be if it hadn't happened. And you know what? Whenever I go to Psalm 27, I see what it says. If my mother and father forsake me, you see, everybody but God will let you down. God will never let you down. God will never drop you. God's arms will never fail you. But believe it or not, you know why? Because there was one person whose God's arms failed. Jesus Christ did not sin, but he was truly deserted. We just feel deserted. He was truly deserted. And because he was truly deserted, you will never be. And that's the reason why the psalmist can say, I will praise him. You see, do you right now say, Lord Jesus, I thirst? Hmm? Can you say this? Can you say, my soul thirsts for God, for the living God? The reason you know that someday you will praise him, someday you will drink, you will not starve, you will not die of thirst, is because when Jesus Christ said, I thirst, all he got was vinegar. If you say to the Lord, I thirst, I can tell you this, you won't get vinegar. You won't get a sop. Because Jesus was truly deserted, our desertions are only temporary trials. Are you thirsty tonight? Hmm? Are you hungry tonight? We're about to take the bread and the cup. It represents the fact that anybody who comes tonight, you don't have to be perfect, you don't have to be great, you don't have to have it all together. You might feel as far away from God as this psalmist. That doesn't mean you shouldn't come. Say, I thirst. You won't get vinegar. Let's pray. We pray, Father, that now as we take up the elements of the Lord's table, that you would really meet us. We want to meet. And the bread and the cup are symbols of the fact that you want intimate fellowship with us. Thank you that this psalm shows us that you want us to come to you and you will never let us go. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Bow with me and we're going to pray a prayer of confession. Our Father, all of us can confess tonight that there is a deep need in our hearts for you. All of us, to some degree, know that we are out of fellowship with you. Is that my fault? It's my fault. Excuse me. All of us know, Lord, to some degree we're out of fellowship with you. In some cases, we really are. We come with a guilty conscience and we ask for you to forgive us. In some of our cases, we can tell that you've just been putting us through a difficult time only because you love us, you want us closer to you, you want to strengthen us, you want to mature us, and we've responded poorly. You haven't let our life go the way we want. And we don't know why you're doing the things we're doing. You're doing. However, we pray that you would give us now the heart of the psalmist who said, thy waves and thy billows go over me, that your waves, they're your, they're the things that you have sent into our life are from you. We know, Lord, that you want our fellowship. We know that everything that you send us is a way to get us closer to you, not to get us further from you. And we pray that whatever it would be tonight that we have between us, you remove so that as we take this bread and as we take this cup, we might find our fellowship with you renewed. Now, Father, we're going to confess before you in silence those things which we think are coming between us.
