TITLE: Loss
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/loss-2/

============================================================

When they're doing bicep curls, well, their biceps are weak, or when they, the ones that collapse when they're doing forearm curls are, you see, you have to put them under stress to know what they need. And therefore, the first thing you need to do when you're in trouble, when troubles have come upon you, is you need to say, I'm in God's gymnasium. Most of us realize that when you get into a gymnasium, you have to dress in clothes that don't hide what's really there. Have you ever noticed that? It's one of the reasons why a lot of us don't want to appear in those exercise sorts of suits, in the, you know, in those exercise classes, because it's just not as easy to camouflage what you really are. That's the nature of a gymnasium. The nature of the gymnasium is it shows you what you are. There's mirrors all over the place, and you're wearing clothes that show every place where you bulge. That's the nature of gymnasiums. To show you yourself, to show you who you are and what you are, where you have to work. Right now, you're in conditions, you're in situations, you're maybe in a bad job or a difficult situation, or you're under a lot of stress. Stop and consider that in your condition, you're not just being confronted with, you're not just simply, God is not just simply bringing you into confrontation with this person or with this situation, but he's also bringing you into confrontation with yourself. You've got too short of a fuse, you're too impatient, you want to control people, you need lots and lots of strokes. And unless you were in a situation you were in, you would never know how weak you are, and you would never know what you have to work on. I think that's the reason why they put you in those silly uniforms, and surround you with all those mirrors, and put you through all those original paces, and give you the stress test. You don't even know what you need, you don't even know who you are, unless you're under pressure. And so that's one of the first reasons why, in order to ripen, we need to be whacked. You'll never, put it this way, John Newton, my friend we've talked about before, the hymn writer, in one of his letters he says, no one ever learned they were a sinner by being told. You have to be shown. Haven't you been listening to the testimonies? The fact is that people don't even see what they need until they've been put through some kind of stress test. You know, the doctor puts you through a stress test, or the coach puts you through some exercises, they're not creating those weaknesses, they're revealing your weaknesses. You put a truck on a great big bridge, and the truck's a little bit too heavy for the bridge, stress fractures appear. It's not that they weren't there, but they were invisible, until something goes over the bridge and shows them up. You won't know you need God, or you won't know how weak you are, or you won't know what a short fuse you have, you won't know who you really are, until God puts you through some kind of trouble. If you listen to the testimonies, it's almost inevitable. Something came into my life that didn't create weakness, but it revealed it. And until then, I had a completely unrealistic understanding of me, and who I was, and my ability to handle life. Now, secondly, if you don't have troubles, if you don't have these things coming into your life, you'll never get to know God either. I want you to, if you listen carefully, you will see that most people think they're Christians when they're not, until they suffer. An awful lot of people think they're Christians, but it's not until they suffer that their hearts are really revealed. And this is what I mean by that. What are you really living for? Not until something goes wrong in your life, and you start to pray, and it doesn't come true, he doesn't seem to be answering. Not until you come face-to-face with unanswered prayer, and you come face-to-face with a major loss, or some major difficulty or trouble, will you really be able to know whether or not you're living for God or serving him. There's a place, in the beginning of the book of Job, Satan comes to God. Very odd situation, but anyway, this is what it says. And God says, have you seen my servant Job? There is none like him in all the earth. And Satan looks at God and says, does Job serve God for naught? That's the old authorized King James Version. Does Job serve God for naught? Not means nothing. Does Job serve God for nothing? Now, what Satan is saying is, he's not a servant. He's using you. He's not serving you. He's using you. The only way to find out whether he's using you or not is, don't come through when he needs you. Then we'll see. And see, what happens in the book of Job is, this is the very thing that happens, is that Job thinks he's a servant at the beginning. It's not a servant till the end. of the book of Job is that God can make men and women into servants. Because what happens is it's not until God removes something from your life that you need, and you get ready to shake your fist, and then God is coming to you in the midst of your suffering. And this is what he's saying. He's saying, now we'll see whether you got into this religion to get me to serve you or in order for you to serve me. Now we'll see who's the master and who's the servant. So those are two completely different religions. In one situation, he's the master and you're the servant, and you obey him because of who he is, because you owe him, because he's your creator, and you owe him because he's also died, he sent his son to die for your sins. That's what it means to be a Christian. Therefore, you serve him not because you're trying to use him to get great things into your life, but because you owe him, because you're the servant, he's the king, because you're the one who was redeemed. Now you may believe all these things in your head, and you may recite the creeds, but very often it's not until the suffering comes that you suddenly realize that you've been using God rather than serving him. That you've never, ever really given yourself to him, and you're not really living for him. You want him to live for you. Don't you see those are two different religions? People sit side by side in the pews. In some cases, serving God. In other cases, manipulating God. Being good and saying, I've lived a pretty good life. I've tried my best. I'm a pretty good husband or wife. I'm a pretty good citizen. God owes me. I've lived a hard life. God owes me. And right alongside, right alongside is another person who says, everything that I have done deserves nothing but punishment, and yet Jesus Christ died for me, and therefore I have been saved because of what Jesus did, and therefore God owes me nothing. I owe him everything. See, here they are sitting alongside one person, basically someone who believes God owes him because he's lived a good life, another person who believes he owes God because Jesus died for him. They're sitting right alongside. How are we ever going to know the difference? How are they going to know the difference? Suffering. Trouble. Stress. The stress test. There's an interesting story. Not a true story, but I heard it from Elizabeth Elliott. She found it in some old Christian writing. It's an apocryphal story about Jesus. It's still fun to listen to, and the principle's good. Apocryphal means it's not a story from the Scripture. We don't know if it's true. It's very, in some way, unlikely, but it's a legend that came down to us from the earlier days of Christianity. It's about Jesus, and he came down to his 12 disciples, and he said, I would like you to carry a rock for me today. And they all looked around, and Peter, being Peter, looked around for the smallest rock he possible. He says, well, you know, if I'm going to be asked to carry a rock, okay. He looked around for the smallest rock possible, a little stone, picked it up, put it in his pocket, because he didn't understand what Jesus meant. And since he didn't know what was in it for him, he came through with a minimum. So they all walked along, and around lunchtime, Jesus said, everybody get your rocks out. So they all sat down, they got the rocks out, and he waved his hand, and they all turned into bread. He says, now that's your lunch. So most of the guys were sitting there eating up, and there's Peter with his hors d'oeuvres, you know, and saying, why didn't he tell me this? I said, after lunch, Jesus got up and said, now I would like you all to carry a rock for me. And Peter says, I'm on to you this time. So he looks around for the biggest boulder possible, finds this monstrous boulder, and picks it up, and puts it on his back, and he's, you know, for several hours they're walking along, there's Peter struggling with his boulder, you know, getting double hernias, and yet he's saying, ah, but I can't wait for supper. And finally, around suppertime, Jesus leads them to a place on the, to an embankment over top of the lake, and he says, walk over here, and they all walk over here, and he says, now everybody throw their stones, throw your stones into the water. And they all go into the water, and he says, okay, now let's keep going. And they start to stare at him, and he says, well, who are you carrying the stones for? You see, who are you being religious for? Why are you going to church? Are you doing it to get something out of him? To, to, you know, as, as, as Marlon Brando would say, to put him in a position, he can't, you know, to make him an offer he cannot refuse? I've tried real hard. See, until you, until there's troubles, until you're. to know whether or not you really have ever given your heart to the Lord, or whether you're just using him. A tremendous number of religious people are not Christians, but they're moralistic. They're Pharisees. They simply are trying to put God in their debt. There are two different religions. Now we'll see, says God, whether you got into this religion to get me to serve you, or so that you could serve me. Okay, now lastly, so you see the point? For our holiness, we need trouble. There's a place where John Newton says, everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing can be necessary that he withholds. Everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing can be necessary that he withholds. You figure that? If it's in your life, according to this passage, you need it. If it's not in your life, though you think you need it, you don't. If you don't believe that, you're going to have a lot of trouble dealing with life. It's like, life will be like a haunted house. Is your father behind the driving wheel, or is there nobody behind the driver's wheel? So, now lastly, the last thing you learn is that suffering takes an active response. You don't just sit there and say, okay, Lord, suffering is going to perfect me. Do it to me. Go ahead. That's not what happens. Instead, you see that there are two, I'll just mention this fairly briefly, but very important, too. There are two ways you're not supposed to respond to suffering, and then I'll give you three things that you are supposed to do to respond to suffering. It's your response to suffering, not the suffering. It's your response to grief, not the grief. It's your response to your losses and your troubles, not the losses and troubles that make you, that heal you, that make you good, that make you righteous, make you this person that God's going to make you. The two responses that are wrong, by the way, are right here in verse 5, where it says, My son, do not make light of the Lord's discipline, and do not lose heart when he rebukes you. In the old authorized version, it says, don't despise his discipline and don't faint. Here it says, don't make light or don't lose heart. Very important balance, friends. What does it mean to despise a discipline? It means to make light of it. It means to not feel it, to deny it, to be a stoic, to say, I won't let it get to me. What does it mean to faint? It means to collapse. It means to despair. Another place where you see this, a Christian doesn't do either. Another place where you see this balance in a positive light is in 1 Thessalonians 4, verse 13, where Paul is talking to people who are grieving because some of their friends have died. And he says, I want you to grieve, but I don't want you to grieve as those without any hope. Now, that's a very interesting balance. On the one hand, he says, grieve. You must grieve. Don't try to not feel pain. It's bad for you. It dehumanizes you. Jesus felt pain. He's always weeping. Look at all of him continually weeping in the New Testament. Here's a person who certainly felt grief all the time. But Paul says, I want you to grieve, and it would be wrong for you not to grieve, but I don't want you to grieve as those without hope. A person who grieves without hope is a person who forgets about the future, looks only to the seen, not to the unseen. A person who gives up. Hope. You rub hope into your grief to keep the grief from going bad, just like you rub salt into meat to keep it from going bad. It's a preservative. And the same way, a Christian is not somebody who tries to despise the discipline and says, I don't want to feel it. I won't let it get to me. See, actually, a Christian doesn't do that at all. Instead, a Christian says, this hurts. What should I be learning from this? Remember? On the other hand, a Christian doesn't give up. A Christian doesn't say, it's hopeless. It's all over. Because a Christian knows there's an appointment here. There's a purpose here. Instead, what are the three things that you need to do? How do you handle suffering? I'll just mention these three things. They're in here. One is, receive discipline as sons. Number two, obey. That is, strengthen your feeble arms and weak knees. Make level paths for your feet and get moving. And thirdly, consider and look to Jesus. Now, obviously, some of you say, oh, gosh, this sounds like a whole sermon left here. They sound like three points that we could take a lot of time on. Yeah, but look, I'll be brief. Number one, and I mean it. Look, number one, what does it mean to receive something as a son? Receive discipline as a son. It means to remind yourself, this is my father, and to act like a child who trusts the father. One of the most irritating things about children is, especially the kind of children... you ask them to do something, and you say, now don't go over and do that. And they say, I want to know why. You look at them and say, look, you're seven years old. So, what makes you think that even if I tell you why you'll understand, I'm your father, I'm your mother, I understand these things. You get very irritated with seven-year-olds or six-year-olds who say, I want to know why, and I want to know why right now. They're refusing to act like children. The children that are most endearing are the ones who say, Daddy, I don't understand, but I know you love me. I trust you. They act like children instead of like little adults who think that they need to know because they, and they alone, are qualified to make the right decision. But how many of you are acting like that? How many of you right now are saying, I'll be happy to trust God, or I'll be happy to obey God, but first I've got to know why he let that happen? What are you doing? You're refusing to receive discipline as sons. You're refusing to admit that you're a child and he's a father. You're refusing to treat him as a father. It's hard. I was talking to one of you about this. Imagine how you help a child learn to walk. You know, when the child's, oh, somewhere around nine, ten months old, it all depends. You kind of watch. You know, you've been everywhere the child, you've always been carrying the child or holding the child. Whenever the child's walking, you always have it by the hand. And one day, the parents decide this is a day to let little Jimmy learn to walk. So what do you do with him? You take him away from the coffee table, you take him away from the sofa, you take him away out, you know, to a place that he never goes by himself, and you let go of his hand. What are you doing? For the first time, you're withdrawing, aren't you? You're taking away all the things that he's always leaned on, and you're even taking yourself away. From the kid's point of view, he should say, this is abuse. This is child neglect. I look at the New York statutes for child neglect. You shouldn't leave me out here. What if I fall down? The fact is, in many cases, the kids do fall down when you're trying to show them how to walk. Usually you get them, right? But it scares them. But they instinctively, they instinctively know that you're their parent, that what you're doing is coming out of a father's heart, that you're not there to it. I mean, they don't say that. They don't even know that. The point is, when you say, unless you tell me, God, why you did this and why you did that, I have a right to be mad, I have a right to be bitter, I have a right not to trust you. What God is saying is, when are you going to act your age? When are you going to admit that I know best? You know, how many times? You know, some of you may have lost loved ones recently. You know, very often I go to my, you know, a little, my child, and I say, honey, you got to come home. You can't play here anymore. And the child kicks and screams, says, why, daddy? Why, daddy? Why? And you have to say, but you have to come home because you need your rest and you can't stay here any longer. But he doesn't understand all that. It's all over his head. And he says, why, daddy? Why? And you say, honey, you're going to have to trust me. I'm your father. And you pick him up and you take him home. And he does, even though he doesn't understand why. And maybe God's taken something away from you and you're saying, why? Ultimately, he's saying, I'm your father. You got to trust me. You see what it said right here? You trusted your earthly fathers and they made all kinds of mistakes. Shall you not much more be subject to the father of your spirits and live? And until you treat him as a father, until you receive his discipline as sons, until you say, I don't know what you know, until you say, and I know because of what you did in Jesus Christ, that you love me, until you receive it as sons, you're going to be, what's going to happen? Until you think about that, until you, until you reflect on that, until you treat him in that way, the suffering and troubles in your life are going to harden you instead of soften you. And you can see it already happening. Then secondly, verse 11, therefore, strengthen your arms and weak knees and move. Get going. You know what that means? Suffering. The best thing you can do in suffering is just do the next thing. Do the obedient thing. When you're in trouble, did you stop praying? Pray anyway. Have you stopped serving people and helping people out? Help people out anyway. Just do the right thing and you'll be amazed at how much that's going to help you grow. You know what it's like? When you're under trouble, when you're under stress, when you're under strain, just doing the normal obedient things, just being courteous, just helping a neighbor out, just going to church, just praying and reading your Bible every day, are very hard. Have you not noticed that? You know what it's like? It's like running with tremendous weights on your ankles. But those of you who are athletes know how beneficial that can be. Because if you've been running with weights on your ankles for a long time, when you finally take the weights off, you will find that you you can run like the wind when they finally come off. You will find that while you were there, you felt weaker, but actually the weights were strengthening you. In the same way, to simply do the right things, the obedient things, when you're suffering, when you're in trouble, oh my, how that's going to strengthen your character and deepen your patience. Charles Spurgeon says, an ounce of sin will harm you more than 10 million tons of suffering. Obey. And then lastly, look to Jesus. Why? Here's the one guy who did it right, and he's the one guy who really didn't have to. You see, when we suffer, you can never say, what did I ever do to deserve this? The Bible says, you're supposed to love the Lord your God with our hearts, hearts, and hearts, and minds, and your neighbor as yourself. How well are you doing? Do you really deserve the great life? Jesus is the one person who had a right on the cross to say, what did I ever do to deserve this? And he's the only one to whom God could have said nothing. Yet he submitted himself. There were people around the cross that night that said, I don't see what good God could ever bring out of this. And they might have lost faith. They might have gone home saying, I've had it with God. I don't see what good God could ever bring out of this. Here was a great man. Here was a man healing people. Here was a man changing the face of Israel. What could God be up to? I can't see any good thing coming out of this. And I bet you there were people that night who lost their faith looking at, they lost their faith looking at the greatest gift, the greatest act of wisdom and salvation and redemption ever done in the history of the world, because they couldn't fit it into their tidy little minds. Look to Jesus. The one guy that could have, could have complained and he didn't. The one guy who said, Lord, this isn't what I want. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. And if I submit to you, and if I obey here, I know that you're going to bring great things out of it. We submitted to our earthly fathers for a while. How much more should we be subject to the father of our spirits and live? You want to grow? You want to live? Be subject. Let's pray. Our father, we thank you that you are a God who has said that you have a purpose in everything. That purpose is to turn us into people of wisdom, of brightness, of radiance, of joy, of character, of godliness, approachability, sensitivity, of deep love, of joy. And you've also said that one of the main ways in which you do it is by putting us through the fire and the furnace of stress and troubles and losses. We pray that you would help us tonight because what we've seen here, realize that with a heavy heart you do this, that you do not love to see us squirm, and that even the evils that are in our hearts and our lives are not things that you love or take any delight in, but that you sent your son to die so that eventually we can wipe the world clean of these diseases and clean of this death and clean of this decay. And yet you've also promised that you will be working in these things as they enter our lives. Help us to receive them as sons and daughters. Help us to see this as from your hand. Help us to obey you in the midst of it and not turn off to the right or the left and find that the pressure and the stresses are turning us into something great. And help us to look to your son, Jesus Christ, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despised the shame, and is now seated at the right hand of yourself on high. Help us to follow him and not faint or be weary or lose heart, not to despise or to despair under your discipline. We thank you that you're a father like that, and we thank you that the wisdom of your word is so great. We pray, Father, that you would give us hope from it and that you would give us strength from your spirit. We pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
