TITLE: Love the World vs. Love Not the World (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Men’s Retreat 1996
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/love-the-world-vs-love-not-the-world-part1/

============================================================

This is, it reminds me of a story. My favorite Calvin and Hobbes is the place where Calvin is, you know how Calvin imagines things and the first frame or two has Calvin doing something and then coming back to earth and reality. But anyway, Calvin is imagining that he's a tail gunner in a plane and suddenly over the radio it says, Calvin, enemy fighters at two o'clock. Enemy fighters at two o'clock. And he says, okay, what do we do till then? Now we have a problem is there's two different ways to understand what it means to have enemy fighters at two o'clock. You have the same kind of situation. You've got God so loving the world that he gave his only begotten son. He loves the world. And since we're supposed to be imitators of God, we're supposed to love the world. And if you look and see how God loved the world, God loved the world in the most risky way, the most adventurous way, the most self-opening way he gave his son. If we're going to imitate God, that doesn't just mean we're supposed to be mildly affectionate toward the world. Really, that's a command to love the world adventurously, radically, profoundly, relentlessly, creatively. And then you go to 1 John 5. And you know what really accentuates it is it's in John 3.16 that you hear, God so loved the world. Then you go to 1 John, same author, chapter 2, verse 15, where it says, love not the world. For if anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. So here you have a verse that actually says, don't you dare love the world. It's so very, very bad. If you love the world, to the degree you love the world, to that degree you're squeezing the love of God, the Father, out of your life. So you don't just have a slightly different understanding of word world there. On the one hand, you're supposed to love the world. Everybody's supposed to know you love the world. You're supposed to be characterized by loving the world. On the other hand, you're supposed to utterly avoid loving the world. We've got a problem. It's enemy fighters at two o'clock. What is it? And let me give you some negative couple of things that I don't think we're talking about. When we're told, don't love the world, don't love it, what are we being told? Now there's two things I think we're not being told, and then I'd just like to read you a passage that tells you something about what we are being told. Let me read the passage. Then I'll say two things we're not, and then one thing we are, and I won't take too long tonight, so we can get up tomorrow and flesh these things out. A passage that doesn't get preached on very much, but it's a profound passage in many ways, and every time I look at it, I get more out of it. It's in 1 Corinthians 3, verse 18, over into chapter 4. Let me read it to you now. This isn't going to be a lengthy exposition, so you don't even need to have it in front of you, but tomorrow maybe we can look at it. Do not deceive yourselves, says Paul. If anyone thinks he's wise by the standards of this age, by the standards of this world, you should become a fool so that you may become wise. For the wisdom of this world is foolishness in God's sight. As it is written, he catches the wise in their craftiness, and the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise are futile. So then no boasting about men. All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas or the world, or life or death or the present or the future. All things are yours, and you are Christ, and Christ is God. Now, it's required of those who have been given a trust must be proved faithful. I care very little if I'm judged by you or any human court. Indeed, I do not even judge myself. My conscience is clear, but it does not make me innocent. It's the Lord who judges me. Now, the reason I didn't maybe immediately leap up with all sorts of wisdom into your own mind is because we don't study that very often. It's not real familiar. Two things, I think, that we're not being told when the Bible says, love not the world. Some people think that means we're not supposed to love... Some people think of the term world in terms of things and places. When I had a church in Virginia, there were a number of places that were the world. You didn't go there. The Anchor Room, for example, was the world. Anchor Room was a pizza place from the secular perspective. It was a bar from the evangelical church's perspective, and you didn't go. You talked about... So there was worldly places. There was worldly things. There was worldly clothes. So there were. It was like materials and stuff. Mm-hmm. from the evangelical church's perspective, and you didn't go. You talked about, so there's worldly places, there's worldly things, there was worldly clothes, there was worldly music, and therefore you stayed away from those things, and the world was thought of in terms of things and places. And you're supposed to avoid worldly places. One problem I think we all know, intuitively, though I'm not defining this yet, is a person who is incredibly pure, keeping himself away from places like that, can still have a tremendously worldly spirit. And Jesus said that to the Pharisees, who were extremely obsessed with thinking of worldliness in terms of things and places. They didn't go places, they didn't get defiled, they didn't wear certain things, they didn't touch certain things, so they wouldn't be defiled. And yet Jesus, of course, never got mad at the prostitutes, told them to stop sinning, only got mad at the Pharisees. So obviously that's not what it means when we say, love not the world. We're not talking about the world in terms of things and places. Secondly, and this is a little more subtle, I think, I don't think we should be thinking of worldliness in terms of positions or beliefs. I guess I would say that it used to be that the churches I was surrounded with were obsessed with denouncing worldly people who were the folks that went to the anchor room. That was worldly people. In the last few years, I've just noticed that people around me in the church are denouncing the secular humanists. Those are the worldly people. And we have a tendency to talk about worldliness more in terms of worldly thinking. Now this is an improvement. This is definitely improvement over the idea that worldliness is our practices and things and places. Now we talk about secular humanists. We talk about liberalism, essentially. They're the bad guys. They're the worldly people. They're not letting us bring our religion into the public square. And we talk about culture wars. The frightening thing about this, or the bad thing, is it's pretty clear that you can be theologically and philosophically very God-centered in your thinking. Not a humanist. You're not a secularist. You're not a humanist. You've purged yourself. You've thought about these things. You've taken a lot of theology courses. And you're not into man-centered humanistic psychology, man-centered humanistic sociology. And yet, it's obviously very, very possible to have a worldly spirit again. Very obviously possible. In fact, just like obsessing with worldliness as a matter of things and places isolates you, makes you pull your skirts up, and in a sense, keeps you from loving the world the way Jesus did. Because we don't have anything to do with worldly people, because we think of worldliness in terms of things and places. The same thing happens if you think too much about worldliness as basically secular humanism and man-centered philosophical thought. In other words, a lot of people feel, I think, that you're supposed to denounce activists. You're supposed to denounce secularists. And as a result, they picket our churches. And by the way, this is someday going to happen. I have a caveat here. I'm not saying that the chances of my church in Manhattan getting picketed sometime are mighty good, just because it's Manhattan. But nevertheless, I know of folks, I know of ministers, I know of churches that have said, we've taken a stand against worldliness. And as a result, the people you want to reach would never have anything to do with your church, because you're not friends with them. It says in James chapter 4, friendship with the world is enmity toward God. But there's nothing in the Bible that says friendship with worldly people is enmity toward God. As a matter of fact, Jesus is a friend of sinners. And when I was just reading this Philip Yancey book on Jesus, the Jesus I never knew, one very striking point he made, he said is, Jesus fearlessly denounced greed and lust, and yet had tremendous friendships with rich men and loose women. And, therefore, if we denounce worldliness in such a way that those people would not ever have anything to do with us, and we don't even know them, there's something wrong with identifying worldliness as things and places, or even philosophical thought. We're not being told to avoid the places of the world, and we're certainly not being told to avoid the people of the world. What are we being told to avoid? We're being told here to avoid the standards of the world. But even further, let me say this. Before I even explain kind of the essence of that, what are the marks of worldliness? Thank you. Thank you. David Martin Lloyd-Jones' book, Sermon on the Mount. I've always been so impressed with his exposition in Sermon on the Mount. And one thing I've never forgotten is he says, do you think that it's a mistake that in chapter 6 you have the place where it talks about mammon? You cannot serve God and mammon. Greed, materialism. And most of us know that's worldliness. Somehow that's worldliness. Greed, materialism. Right. The very next thing is a denunciation of worry. And the very next thing after that says, judge not lest ye be judged. And Lloyd-Jones has the wisdom to say, these are all worldliness. He has the wisdom to say, materialism, sure it's worldliness, but so is worry. Worry is a very, very important heart indicator of a worldly spirit. And so is haughtiness and judgmentalism, in a sense. And you see that here. Boasting, you see. And if you want to take a look at a really unworldly spirit, you have an example of this. Now let me give you the essence, let me show you the point, and I really do want to make sure I don't expound tonight as much as I want to tomorrow. You see, it says here in an amazing spot, the world is yours. Did you see that, if anybody was reading it? All things are yours. Neither, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, well, the background we don't have to go into here. The world, life, death, the present, the future, all things are yours, because you're of Christ and Christ is God's. Now, what he means is, if the world owns you, rather than you owning the world, you're worldly. If you stay away from the world's standards, and the world's standards are, I am that which owns you. And Paul shows that if you take your self-image from the world, you're going to fall into one of two categories. But if you take your self-image from the gospel, I am Christ's, and Christ is God's, here's what you have. Look at this weird, weird thing. He gives an example of what it's like to live a life, in which worldliness is not a problem, in which the world is not pushing you around. He says, I care very little if I'm judged of you or any human court. That's chapter 4, verse 3. Then he says, yea, I do not judge even mine own self. My conscience is clear with it. It does not make me innocent. It's the Lord who judges me. Look at this. First, he says, I don't care what you think of me. Okay. Now, what if you took, gee, what if you took a typical person and went to a typical counselor, a secular, I can say a worldly counselor, and you took that person in and said, you know, I've got a problem, and that is, I'm just, I'm very nervous, and I'm very anxious. And what if the counselor kind of dug in, and after a while, the counselor says, you know what your problem is? You get your identity from what other people think. You see, you care about what all the human courts think, various human courts, the court of your family and so on. What is that counselor probably going to say? Counselor is probably going to say, you know, your problem is that you're taking your identity from what people think about you. Don't do that. It shouldn't matter what they think about you. All that should matter is what? What would they say? What you think. See? You set your standards. You write the script. That's how you're going to be emotionally healthy. Is that what Paul says? Does Paul say, I care very little that I'm judged by you or any human court? Then he says, I don't care what you think. And then he says, I don't care what I think. In fact, he goes, you know, you know, do you not, this is intriguing. You know that if a person who's a Christian says, my conscience is bad. Well, you know, there's that great verse, if your hearts condemn us, if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts. So here, you know, we know there's places in the Bible where it says, if you're a Christian and your conscience is bad, you know, you feel terrible and worthy, just, you know, look and see what Jesus says about you and so on. But here's something else. What does Paul say there? My conscience is clear. That does not make me innocent. Paul says, I feel fine. I may be absolutely wrong. I have a good self-image. He says, so what? Hitler had a good self-image. Hitler thought he was fine. In fact, you know, maybe Paul would come back to the psychologist and say, do you know that one of the few things that keeps me from being a total menace to society is that I... really don't care what anybody thinks about me, that's a great way to become a Hitler. That's a great way to become. Paul does not say, I don't care what you think, all I care about is what I think. Paul goes so far as to say, I don't even care what I think. And here's why. Why? If I only care what everybody else thinks, I worry. But if I only care what I think, I'm judgmental. Either way, I'm not letting God be the judge. I'm not letting God be the standard. Either way, I'm being worldly. I'm being, in a sense, owned by the world. If I despise the world, you know, I don't care, then I become a judgmental, arrogant, self-righteous Pharisee. If, on the other hand, I'm obsessed with the world, I become an anxious, fearful person. And Paul says, either way, what you've got to do is not think less of the world or think more of the world. You should think of the world less. In other words, you're not on a spectrum between a superiority and inferiority complex if you come to the Gospel, which says you are Christ's, you're in Christ, and Christ is God's. Because if that's the case, then the world is yours. He says, look, all things are yours. Whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death. See, that's not what the world thinks. He says, death is yours. I read a great sermon, the first sermon that Jonathan Edwards ever wrote. He was 18 years old. It's disgusting. I read the thing. It's recently been published. It's never been published before. And it's called Christian Happiness, and it has three points. And it's like all there. He says, well, there's three things we know about happiness if you're a Christian. Number one, bad things will turn out for the good. Number two, your good things cannot possibly ever be taken away from you. Adoptions, justification, circumstances mean nothing to those things. Number one, your bad things will turn out for your good. Number two, your good things can never be taken away from you. And number three, the best is yet to come. Why wouldn't a Christian be happy? You see, here comes death. Here comes tragedy. And I see, in light of these things, a Christian says, my bad things turn out for good. My really good things can't be taken away. And the best will come when I die. Now, what Paul is trying to say is, if you have that in mind, you do not need to despise the world or need to be obsessed with the world. The world doesn't own you anymore. The world doesn't own you anymore. The world is a tyrant. And if you become either a judgmental person or a worrisome person, that shows, to a great degree, the world has a great hold over you. You need to despise it in order to be free from it. That makes you an arrogant Pharisee. Or you're obsessed with it and you're afraid of appearances and you're worried all the time. Now, how do you get out from under that? As we said, it's the gospel. And that's the thing you have to understand. Therefore, a person like Paul, who says, I don't care what you think and I don't care what I think, is a person who, when they go out in the world, is going to be very weird looking. They can denounce. They can say, I denounce lust. I denounce greed. I denounce these things. But how you relate to worldly people will tell you a great deal about whether you're worldly or yourself. If you find that you're tempted by them, your self-image is taken from the standards of the world. If, on the other hand, you're repelled by them, or even they're repelled by you. You know, you might be too stupid to know that you're repulsive, but it's possible. It's true. You might be very obtuse and you may just go out there to try to, you know, talk to these non-Christians and they don't like you. They think you're smug. They think you're self-righteous. They don't see respect. They don't see humility. Why is it the judgmentalism? Jesus says, don't judge. And Martin Luther Jones says, that's part of this whole discussion of worldliness. In other words, the world is, why is judgmentalism something that is wrong? You say, well, aren't we supposed to evaluate? Yeah, but listen, I'll tell you what it means to judge, to be judgmental. To evaluate a person, a non-Christian let's say, without respect for them, and to evaluate a person without hope for them. And the only way that can happen is if you've forgotten the gospel in two ways. First of all, are you a sinner saved by grace? Do you really believe that the reason you're a Christian is because you are Christ and Christ is God? so-called worldly people, you'll realize that many of them might be smarter than you, wiser than you, because what makes you a Christian is that you're not a Christian because your doctrine is straight and because your life is together. You're a Christian because of God's grace. That means when you walk out with the people of the world, Muslims can't do this, Confucianists can't do this, secular humanists can't do this. They're worldly. In other words, they feel like, it's what I have done here that has really made me what I am. And therefore, there's going to be a kind of judgmentalism. And they're going to say, well, I'm saved and you're not. Why? Because I'm better. But if you're a Christian, you say, I'm saved and you're not. Why? Because of God's grace only. So you would be going out there with respect. And secondly, you'd be going out there with hope. If you look at anybody, anywhere, and you say, not these kind. And they, oh, but you, your kind, you know, of course your kind becomes Christian because you're, what? You know, you're a good stocker. What? You've forgotten that you're a miracle. You've forgotten that you're a sinner. And if you forget that, you see, your attitude toward people of the world is going to be judgmental. Look, boasting and arrogance, superiority complex, worry and inferiority, anxiety, the inferiority complex, both of those things, Paul says, comes from the world. Worldliness, it owns you. It's obsessing you. It's affecting you. No, all things are yours. The world, life, death, for you are Christ and Christ is God. Now, all I want to say after this is I want to say, it all flows from this. This is what it means to stand against the world. It means to stand against the spirit of the world. It means to stand against the standards of the world. It doesn't mean stand against the places of the world or the people of the world. And unless you understand that, you're going to be ineffective in the world. People have to see that you have this very odd boldness in humility, that you have this very strange combination of strong convictions like Jesus did about lust and greed, and yet a gentleness, a respect, and a hope for people that makes you winsome and makes you listen. Most of us just don't have these things. I would say most of us who have got Christian friends, pardon me, most of us who are Christians who have non-Christian friends, we have them because we're cowards. They don't know just how important Christ is to us. Or else, we don't have non-Christian friends at all. You see that? Because we're either anxious people, getting our, you see, worldliness in that sense, or else we're arrogant people in that sense. But not Jesus. And not anybody who really goes out in the world like this. I don't care what you think of me. I don't care what I think of me. My conscience is clear. It does not make me innocent. It's the Lord who judges me. Let's close in prayer. Thank you, Father, for providing for us a picture in Paul and in your son, Jesus in particular, of someone who was obviously in the world but not of it. Lord, we don't really, we can't love the world unless we're free from the world. We're not loving the world unless we're free from the world. We're either, we either have relationships with non-Christians because we're cowards or we don't have relationships with non-Christians because we're arrogant. Father, how in the world could we have this this complete freedom from what the world thinks about us? Yet at the same time, freedom from any kind of disdain of the world either. Either way we're bound, either way we're trammeled, either way we're chained. We actually have to think out the implications of the gospel. We have to get in line with it. And we pray that you'll help us do that because we spent this time together here today. Now we pray these things in Jesus' name. Amen.
