TITLE: Love and Truth
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:14-15, 25-32
TOPICS: 
SERIES: What We Are Becoming: Transforming Love
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/love-and-truth/

============================================================

The scripture reading today is from Ephesians 4, verses 14 to 15 and 25 to 32. Then we will no longer be infants, tossed back and forth by the waves and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning and craftiness of people in their deceitful scheming. Instead, speaking the truth in love, we will grow to become in every respect the mature body of him who is the head, that is, Christ. Therefore, each of you must put off falsehood and speak truthfully to your neighbor, for we are all members of one body. In your anger, do not sin. Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry. And do not give the devil a foothold. Anyone who has been stealing must steal no longer, but must work, doing something useful with their own hands, that they may have something to share with those in need. Do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouths, but only what is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen. And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice. Be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other, just as in Christ God forgave you. Through the word of the Lord. Some weeks ago we took a look at 1 Corinthians 13 that is very famous as being the wedding text, because it talks about how great love is. Love is patient, love is kind. And we pointed out that Paul was not thinking about weddings when he wrote that. What he was talking about was the fact that it's possible to be very religious, to be very filled with biblical knowledge, to be quite active in ministry, to be very moral, and not have a supernaturally changed heart, which is how he defines love. And then he went through and gave a series of signs of a supernaturally changed heart. And what we're doing each week is we're not going back to 1 Corinthians 13, going to other passages to look at these signs in some detail, some depth. One of the signs in 1 Corinthians 13 of a supernaturally changed heart was, love rejoices with the truth. And what we have here in this passage is, in Ephesians, is a treatment of the subject of truth-telling or what we can call integrity. And some people say there's a cultural crisis of integrity. One of the things that might be a bit of evidence for that is last year, as many of you know, Volkswagen was revealed that Volkswagen had deliberately put on 11 million of its cars a software designed to lie about its emissions. Obviously, the way you're going to win in the automaking world is if you can say, we have the highest mileage, the lowest emissions, and we don't sacrifice performance. And the way they were doing that was that they actually were lying, essentially, about how many pollutants that each car was actually putting out into the environment. And the reason I think it's, to me, kind of a bit striking is that's a pretty astonishing lack, failure of integrity of one of the great companies, business corporations in the world. And I don't think there's been a whole lot of, I think mostly people have been yawning, ho-hum, yep, that's the way things are. But that's not, listen, let's talk about that. Let's talk about how important integrity is, how you practice integrity, and how you can become people of integrity. How important it is, how you practice it, and how we can become people of integrity. First of all, the importance of it. And verse 14 and 15, in some ways, is a summary of what Paul's already said and a thesis statement for what comes afterwards. And let me summarize the book of Ephesians for you. Just like that. Chapters three and four especially. In those chapters, Paul has been making a case that we need Christian community. It's all about the church. And about the greatness of the church. And what the Christian community ought to be. And the unity it ought to have. And what its characteristics ought to be. That's all. and 15, he shows us the results of that community. The results of Christian community is not just fellowship and inspiration. Here's what it is, that we no longer be infants. Instead, we grow in every respect into the mature body of him who is the head who is Christ. Now, that is radical supernatural character change. That is nothing less than Christlikeness. When it talks about growing into the mature body of him who is the head, being grafted into Christ and growing into the head, what this is talking about is the character and the love and the wisdom and the humility and the joy and the beauty and the power of Christ's character reproduced in us. It's all talking about transformation. In fact, the passage that we left out between verse 14 and 15 and verse 25, we left a few verses out. In verse 23 and 24, it says, Paul says, put off the old self with all of its distorted desires and put on the new self being created in his likeness. Transformation. Put off the old self with all of its insatiable cravings for things that will not fulfill and put on the new self created to be like him. Now, if there's anybody in this room, and I hope there is, who has a realistic estimate of both your flaws, weaknesses, and the depth of your discontent, this should make your mouth water. This is the transformation. This is what we need. This is becoming your true self. That's what Paul's saying. Ah, but the message of Ephesians is that only comes through being plunged into a community. And it makes sense, does it not? Because after all, what made you what you are with your flaws and your weaknesses was not just your individual decisions, although those are important, but it was the fact that you came up in a particular family, and it's the way your family treated you, the way society treated you. And if you're going to change, it means being plunged into a community at least as intense as a family, a counterculture. See, this change does not happen just by showing up at church events three or four times a month. It means being plunged into a community that does what? Speaks the truth in love. Now, that's, by the way, not all that goes into the transformation of character through community, but that's what we have right here. Paul is saying, if you're in a body, if you're in a, that's what he says, if you're in a body, if you're in a community in which there is this truth-telling in love, that's going to change you. From the inside out. So that's, so in a way, integrity, truth-telling is not just something in the abstract that Christians ought to, you know, do because we're supposed to do it. No, it's actually, it's a sign of a supernaturally changed character, and it's the means to supernaturally change character. Speaking the truth in love. Now you say, how does that work? Okay, we'll get to that in a second, but give me two minutes just to stay here, and please notice two things, top-level things. Top-level things. The first is speaking the truth in love is important for any kind of community at all. Look at verse 25. Therefore, each of you must put off falsehood and lying and speak truthfully to your neighbor for all members of one body. I mean, that's a very comprehensive statement. First of all, it's saying because we're members of the body, because we're a Christian community, we must speak truth to each other. The idea of membership, now don't think of membership meaning, you know, the word member here translates the word that means a body part. So when you become a Christian, you are truly fused to other people according to the Bible because of the Holy Spirit, because of common experience, because of identity change. And the thing that keeps members together, that is to say, is truth-telling. If you start lying to people, wait till you see how lonely you feel. Lying separates people. Truth-telling unites people, brings people together. And it's not just true, by the way, within the body of Christ, but notice it doesn't just say speak truthfully to your brother or sister. It says speak truthfully to your neighbor. Because there's a sense in which truth-telling is crucial to all human community. Some years ago, a, you know, one academic wrote this, a scholar wrote this, imagine a society in which no one trusted anyone to keep a promise, in which every leader was expected to lie as a matter of course, in which every teacher was suspected of being an academic cheat, lying about their research research findings. In which— legal contract was not expected to be honored, so no legal partner could ever bank on the loyalty of another, no one could make a decision with the assurance of having the facts in hand, what would happen in that society? The economy would collapse, rule of law would be impossible, life would become brutalized, and by the way, Václav Havel, the great Czech reformer, who wrote a wonderful essay called The Power of the Powerless, which you can find online, basically says the communism class because of lying, because you couldn't trust the government to tell you what they told you, you couldn't trust the newspapers, you couldn't trust the banks, you couldn't trust the doctors, you couldn't trust anybody, and as a result, life collapsed. And The Power of the Powerless is truth. Just simply tell them the truth. And so the first thing we see here is really, human life isn't possible without truth-telling. Every single time you tell a lie, you are assaulting human life. But secondly, I want you to notice, here's the other top-level observation, is truth-telling and love have to always go together. They must never be separated. Truth-telling without love isn't really about truth. Think about it. Truth-telling without love means, we'll get to this in a minute anyway, it means being harsh, being cruel, making scoring points. Truth-telling without love isn't really about truth, it's about you, it's about making you look good, it's about making you feel good. Truth-telling without love is not really about truth. But loving without truth-telling isn't really love. There were some years ago, seeing a family in which the father, out of love, would not tell his teenage daughter how grievous and how destructive her behavior was. He didn't want to confront her. He said, oh, I just don't want to hurt her, I just don't want to disappoint her. In other words, love, but actually, it was selfish, because he didn't want to go through the pain of her displeasure if he confronted her. So he didn't tell her, he didn't tell her. And that meant her 20s were all taken up by blowing up one relationship after another. Why? Because she was deprived of learning from her father how her behavior influenced people. She couldn't see the impact of her behavior on people because her father didn't tell her. And see, every time you say, out of love, I'm not going to tell that person the truth, you exploit them because you deprive them of reality. And because they're deprived of reality, they're disempowered. So if you're selling a house and you lie about structural defects and the buyer buys it, you're keeping that buyer from seeing the reality of what it's really going to cost to be in that house. So you're disempowering, you're exploiting that person. The seller is exploiting the buyer to get a good price. The father was exploiting his daughter just so he didn't have the pain of having to confront her. But there is nothing more unloving than not telling the truth. And there's no better way of loving people than telling the truth. So truth telling without love isn't really truth telling. And love without truth telling isn't really love. They must never, ever, ever, ever be pulled apart. In sum, point one, the world doesn't work without truth telling and truth telling doesn't work without love. Now you see the importance of verse 15. The world's at stake. Point one. Point two. What does it mean to speak the truth in love? Well, we only have time for a little bit here. James tells us a lot about this, by the way. Proverbs tells us quite a bit about this. This passage tells us to really understand all of what it means to speak the truth in love. You have to go all over the scripture. But, there's two, I'd say, practical principles were given here. I want to show them to you. And the two practical principles is this. And I'm going to use the word and I'll explain it in a minute. Truthful speech acts, truthful speak acts, never deceive. Loving speech acts, always seek to edify. Truthful speech acts, never deceive. Loving speech acts, never fail to build up or edify. So first of all, truthful speech acts, don't deceive. Now why do I call these things speech acts? Well, here's the reason why. Because your words are also an action. When I say something, it's not just, you shouldn't evaluate what I say just by the content of what I said, because the content of what I said might be technically true. If you have an action, I don't keep saying it's true. I don't feel good. When I say something, it's not just, you shouldn't evaluate what I say just by the content of what I said, because the content of what I said might be technically true. But what am I trying to do with what I'm saying? What is my intention? What's my purpose? You must always evaluate every statement, not just by the actual content of what's in the statement, but also by what you're trying to do with the statement. Because you know you can say something which is factually true, but designed to deceive. It's factually true, but it's designed to actually put people off the scent. And the reason why even Paul, I think, here recognizes that when he starts talking about telling the truth, he doesn't just mean giving factually correct statements, but not deceive. What's the opposite of speaking the truth in love in verse 14, in 15? 15 is speaking the truth in love. What's the opposite in verse 14? Being cunning and crafty. See, those are words that mean trickery. To speak the truth is not just to give factually correct information. It's to not deceive. And see, all kinds of statements that might be kind of half-truths or even true, but said in such a way as to put people off the scent. You're depriving them of reality, and so you're disempowering them, and you're exploiting them. Now, once you begin to realize that a truthful speech act is not just something that's, you know, technically correct, but something that does not deceive, suddenly, oh my goodness, there's a whole lot of things that we say that maybe are not truthful speech acts. Whenever I talk about this, I always give you a list of six. Here are six kinds of falsehoods, untruthful speech acts, all right? Political lies, exaggeration, word inflation, benevolent lies, Watergate lies, and routine business lies. Okay, first of all, it's political lies. I would love to go, but I won't be home that night. Of course, you will be. Here's one. You know, I think your writing is just too sophisticated for our readers, when actually it's horrible. It's just horrible, okay? Political lies. Now, exaggeration. The problem with exaggeration is, and by the way, this particular sin is usually used inside marriage. Because exaggeration, the quintessential exaggerations are, you always do that, or you never do that. You never, ever, ever. Okay, now, what's bad is that usually there's some grounding in reality. Usually when you say you always do that, that's usually something that the person probably sometimes does. To say you always do it, it grounds it in reality, puts the person at a disadvantage, but then obviously infuriates because it exaggerates. There's political lies. There's exaggeration. You know, thirdly, word inflation. Now, you say, what's word inflation? Okay. Word inflation is, oh, it was wonderful. It was great. It was, especially Christians. It was a blessing. It was just such a blessing. It was awesome. It was unbelievable. It was brilliant. And there are people who use so much word inflation. You say, well, what's wrong with that? Those aren't lies. Well, word inflation means people get cynical. They say, well, that's how that person always talks. If I'm going to find reality, I'm going to have to ask somebody else. And so you say, well, those aren't lies. No, but they actually are keeping reality away from people. And they make people cynical. So there's political lies, exaggeration, word inflation, so-called benevolent lies. I already talked to you about those. I gave the quintessential example is a family member that you won't confront. And you say it's benevolent. It's I don't want to hurt them. But actually, you don't want the displeasure and pain of having to do it. It's really all about you. There's a whole lot of benevolent lies. There's also friends that are incompetent, but you tell them they're competent. But probably the worst is a failure to confront a family member. Go to 1 Samuel. Look at Eli and failing to confront his sons. Look at David and failing to confront Absalom. And go and see how benevolent, benevolent lies are. Lies are, excuse me. Fourth, I said Watergate lies. Watergate lies are arrogant lies. Oh, the little people, they don't need to know. But then business lies. And those of you in business, which is, this is New York, so lots and lots of you. Go read a, there's a Tom Peters book. Tom Peters is really good about integrity in business. One place he made a list of about 30 lies that he says virtually happen all the time in business. It was pretty scary. You know, he said, here's three of them I just pulled out. He says, you say publicly, our companies offer quality. But privately, all your employees know that you have unreasonable deadlines that make it impossible for the employees to make high quality products. Thanks. Thanks. Thanks. just doing fine. Your employees know it's not. Things are not fine. He just threw this one in. He says, you put in a big number of orders right before the end of the quarter because even though you know that most of them will be canceled, it's going to look good for the figures in that quarter. And it makes you look good. There's zillions and zillions and zillions of ways in which maybe they're not lies exactly, but untruthful speech acts, they deceive. So first of all, untruthful speech acts are designed to deceive. Secondly, unloving speech acts are not designed to edify. Look, there's two places where in here we get some more details about what it means to be loving in our speech. But one is verse 31. Get rid of all bitterness, rage, and anger, brawling, and slander, along with every other form of malice. Most commentators would say the word malice is a kind of summary word. And the other words in there are forms of malice, forms of being malicious. And without boring you with looking at every single word, basically what Paul is forbidding here, basically what he's forbidding here is being caustic, sarcastic, dripping with disdain, belittling, and insulting. So he says, you might be telling the person the truth, but if you're doing it with his tone, if you're doing it with his attitude, where you're belittling and insulting and caustic and sarcastic and dripping with disdain, he says that's not a loving speech, that's not speaking the truth in love. Now, we do know, do we not, that we live in an age in which on social media you are rewarded for that behavior. You're rewarded for that tone, you're rewarded with clicks. So it's always been destructive of human community. Remember, speaking the truth, truth-telling without love destroys human community. And yet we live in an era in which one of the main ways we communicate rewards this. But, it's not just verse 31. Paul is not only saying that as long as you have a nice tone, as long as you're not sarcastic and as long as you're not caustic, as long as you have a nice tone of voice and you're telling the truth, then that's fine, that's not enough. Speaking the truth in love is not just telling the truth with a nice tone of voice. Verse 29, I have always found the most convicting thing in this whole passage. Verse 29, therefore do not let any unwholesome talk come out of your mouth. That's not the word untruthful. A word could be true and not be wholesome. What does wholesome mean? It literally means putrefying or decaying. But if you're, we don't have to worry about what Paul means because he tells us. But only that which is helpful for building others up according to their needs, that it may benefit those who listen. Ah. Okay, here's what this means. You're ready to tell a person the truth. And you're going to do it nicely. Tone of voice, not malice, not, you know, caustic, not sarcasm. You're going to tell the person the truth in a nice tone of voice. You're free and clear, right, to do it? No. Here's what Paul is trying to say. What's your motive? Right now, what's your motive? Why are you telling that person the truth? And you better look at your motive right now, and you better not make a move until you know what that motive is. Are you telling that person the truth to show that you're in control? Are you telling that person the truth just for the joy of winning the argument because you know you're going to be able to win that argument? Are you telling that person the truth in order to make points with somebody you want to impress? Are you telling that person the truth to feel better about yourself, to feel like you're in charge? Are you telling that person the truth to punish them, even though you're going to be nice about it? Then don't do it. Find some other time. Find some other place. Work your heart until you can do it, either for A, because you see that they really need it, and B, you know that the way in which you tell this truth, you're trying to get closer to them in a relationship. You're actually trying to draw yourselves together. The two of you together, rather than divide. Do you want to build that person up? Do you want to draw them into a relationship? Is it something you really know that would benefit them, or are you really doing it for yourself? And what Paul is not, Paul's not saying don't tell people the truth. He's just trying to say, very often the timing, the way we do it, the words we choose are all wrong because of our motive. Speak the truth in love. The world doesn't work without truth-telling, and truth-telling doesn't work unless you're doing it. can we become people like this? I did a little study, you know, around sociologists and psychologists tell us that we all lie a lot, a lot more than anyone wants to admit. Now there's a great difference of opinion about how often we lie and I'm not going to share any of that with you because I couldn't adjudicate between the various claims. I don't think it matters. I don't think, I don't think you, I don't think you can argue with that. There's a tremendous amount of lying going on. There always has been. It's possible that we actually are having a greater amount of it than ever. Certainly speaking the truth in love is going down because I said the way in which communication happens now, uh, when you're not so much communication is not face to face, it's not even on the phone, it's far easier to be doing it in a malicious way than it's ever been. And human community is unraveling. People don't trust institutions anymore. You know, read Robert Putnam's bowling alone or our kids, that kind of thing. Uh, so we do have a problem. What's the solution? Well, we're not going to know the solution until we figure out what is the cause of the problem. And I can actually tell, I don't think this is that hard to tell you. Whenever you look at people, uh, whenever you look at studies of the types of lies, if you go to find any kind of study that says here's the kinds of lies, they generally divided into three kinds of lies, approval seeking lies, power seeking lies, and control seeking lies. Approval seeking lies are things like this. I lie about who I am, had my resume, tell you things that aren't true because I want you to like me. Or I lie to avoid conflict because I don't want you to dislike me. That's approval seeking lies. Power seeking lies is I lie because by fabricating, by shading, I'm going to make more money. Or by lying, I'm going to get you to do things that otherwise you would never do for me. Control seeking lies are partly just wanting to avoid accountability, like, you know, putting all those, putting the wrong software on 11 million Volkswagens just to make sure that they weren't punished for the emissions that they were, and the pollutants they were producing. So what, you know, control seeking is just, I don't want to stay away from punishment, but many times control seeking lies are just, you lie just to get people off your back. You lie just to get them, get, just to get, make them get lost. You lie just to get rid of them. You lie so you can feel like I've got control over my life. So these people are not on me all the time. All right, now think. Why do we lie? We lie. We lie to get approval. We lie to get power. We lie to get control. And if we have to exploit people, if we have to lie and exploit people and disempower them in order to get a power, approval, and control, we're going to do it. Why? Because of the inner neediness of the human soul. We can't live without approval, and we don't have it. We're not sure. We're not sure that we're okay. See? We can't live without power and influence. We can't live without control. We can't live without these things. And over and over and over again, every single day, you're going to have to choose between telling the truth and losing approval, power, and control. And you're not going to do that because human beings can't live without approval, power, and control. What's the solution? Well, the solution is this. You've got to have approval, power, and control that comes to you. It's in such astonishing proportions and degrees, and that you're assured of it, and you know you have it so that you never have to lie again. Now, how does that happen? Verse 32. In verse 32, it says, be kind and compassionate to one another, forgiving each other just as in Christ God forgave you. Now, for years, I thought Paul was sort of changing the subject. It seemed like a tag on verse 32. Here he's talking about truth and love, truth and love, truth and love, and suddenly he says, oh, and by the way, forgive as Christ forgave you, as God in Christ forgave you. And I used to think, oh my goodness, well, that, you know, it seems like God, he, Paul's sort of changing the subject postscript maybe. No. I now realize this. The quintessential example of combining truth and love is forgiveness. Do you want to forgive somebody? Do you want the joy, relief, and healing of forgiveness? You have to do two things. First of all, you've got to, number one, you've got to absolutely tell the truth. Be honest. Be honest. This person hurt you. Be honest. What the cost is. of them one of the ways i've we i have a tendency to try to forgive people say oh it's okay no problem don't worry it didn't bother me didn't bother me a bit that didn't hurt me at all no sweat i don't even have to bring it up to them i'm not being honest see if you're going to and then at the same time in your heart you're kind of like you know it's darkened your heart see a lot of times the way in which we fail to forgive is we're not honest you need to be honest make a full assessment of the wrong that was done the wrong that was done and the cost of that wrong make a full uh assessment of it and tell it tell the truth to yourself and tell the truth maybe to the person but then love the person by bearing the cost yourself when the perpetrator you have an opportunity to make the perpetrator pay by making them uncomfortable don't do it when you've got an opportunity to make the perpetrator pay by tearing down the reputation of other people don't do it when you have an opportunity to sort of sit around and nurse your grudge grudge inside your heart against the perpetrator don't do it and every time you don't do it it hurts it hurts you want to make them pay and you don't do it and you know what you know why it hurts because you're paying it you're paying for it you're paying the cost see forgiveness is being absolutely honest and being absolutely loving and the more you pay that is to say the more you refrain and refrain and refrain from making the other person pay and you bear it eventually the anger goes away and through truth and love you can forgive and you say my goodness that's that's so hard not yeah paul doesn't say just forgive he says forgive as god in christ forgave you you want to let's watch huh watch let's watch christ forgiving you why did he go to the cross first reason went to the cross is commitment to truth he was so holy he was why did christ did not look down at all the evil in this world and say oh well you know human beings there you go what do you know they're just like that don't worry about it overlook it no he was so committed to the truth to a true assessment of the wrong and the evil he went to the cross because it has to be paid for that's a commitment to truth but he went to the cross out of love to pay for it himself you know if somebody you don't know very well rejects you that hurts a little if somebody you know well rejects you that hurts a lot if your spouse or your parent or your sibling or your child rejects you that that seems to hurt that just inflicts a wound you feel like will never be healed but we have no idea the greatest love relationship in the history of the world cannot even compare to the father and the son who have known and loved each other infinitely perfectly through all eternity and on the cross for our sake the son lost that my god my god why hast thou forsaken me he experienced an agony he was paying the infinite debt i don't know how much that pain was but it probably would be like millions of eternities in hell all rolled up into one all coming down on him at once and in john chapter 18 when pilot the roman imperial governor looks at jesus christ and says are you a king are you a king then and jesus knows if he tells the truth he's dead more than dead he's in agony so pilot says are you a king then now jesus could have said nothing you know which often he didn't say anything or he could have said well i'm just a king in their hearts you know you know what he said to pilot he says yes i'm a king and i've come into this world to testify to the truth and he was dead why did he do that for you look don't look at jesus christ as an example of truth telling oh you say look at how wonderful he told the truth no matter what the cost be like jesus that'll just crush you you can't live up to that but if you see him saving you through his truth telling he loves you so much that he was willing to die on the cross for you there's the approval his love will fill you up in a way that no one else's love could possibly there's the power you've got the lord of the universe on your side working everything out in your life according to his good plan for you there's control and now finally you've got approval and you have power and control you never ever ever need to lie to get in fact lying is actually going to weaken your connection to it ever made you know why pinocchio of course is an animated puppet but he's actually suspended between two possibilities you know that the one is he's told you know if if he lies he not only becomes more of a puppet more of a caricature but you know what the most horrible and most horrifying scary passages of any children's movie ever made is the fact that if if the boys lie and cheat and do all these bad things they become animals to become donkeys and see pinocchio if he doesn't tell the truth and doesn't live according to truth can actually become less than an animated puppet and actually become an animal who can't talk and think or and he's told if you are if you care for the truth if you tell the truth and you live according to the truth then you can become a real boy and of course it's there's a lot of truth in that from a christian point of view but basically um pinocchio saves himself he tells the truth he lives for the truth with the help of jiminy cricket and the blue fairy basically he does it himself and he wins he becomes a true boy transformation he's transformed well here's what here's what the book of ephesians is going to tell you here's what jesus is going to tell you if you think that you can bring about transformation by just being a truth teller in your own power you'll never do it never you'll want approval and power and control so much that you sometimes will lie to get it you'll never do it but you know what jesus christ is trying to say you know pinocchio gets this grace that comes out of the sky when he becomes when he when he when he you know tells the truth and lives for the truth and sacrifices dies for the truth and his little grace comes on down and he becomes real jesus says i earned that grace for you you could never earn it yourself my grace will come down and you'll become your true self you will become real so believe in me believe in me go to him let's pray our father we thank you that if we are members of a truth-telling loving community we will become more and more transformed into the likeness of your son and father we thank you that uh we have the prospects for that here at redeemer we have a prospect for that here on the east side but we ask that you would help us to realize that you would make us more and more uh conform the image of your son through speaking the truth and love to each other and father we do ask that you would transform us into our true selves so that we can become more and more like your son in whose name we pray amen
