TITLE: Love Before the World (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 1:1-4
TOPICS: Doctrine Salvation
SERIES: Salvation from the Outside In
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/love-before-the-world-part-1/

============================================================

I'm a part of Ephesians that we move to now because somebody said, what do you do when you get to the end of Ephesians? It's just like sailing around the world. If you keep going in a particular direction long enough, you come back around. And we're going to read from the beginning of Ephesians. Ephesians chapter 1. I'll explain the reason behind all that. Ephesians chapter 1. And what I'd like to do tonight, anyway, is read actually verses 1 to 14. One of the things that is most intriguing about that, one of the things that's most intriguing about this first part of Ephesians is that even though in your English translations, including the one we're going to read from tonight, it's broken into several sentences. Ephesians 1 verse 3 to 14 is one long sentence in Greek. And I'll give you some reasons why I think that happened. It's not good grammar. It's not, even in Greek, to have a sentence that long is not good grammar. It's not good form or style. But Paul was caught up. Let's take a look at this. Ephesians 1 verses 1 to 14. Now, weigh every word. In love he predestined us to be adopted as his sons through Christ Jesus in accordance with his pleasure and will to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the one he loves. In him we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins in accordance with the riches of God's grace that he lavished on us with all wisdom and understanding. And he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ to be put into effect when the times will have reached their fulfillment to bring all things in heaven and on earth together under one head, even Christ. In him also we were chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will, in order that we who were the first to hope in Christ might be for the praise of his glory. And you also were included in Christ when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. Having believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God's possession to the praise of his glory. You don't mind, let's start in prayer, all right? Just for a moment, let's pray. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you are so willing to let us in on your heart and in on your counsels, that you write us a book like the book of Ephesians, that you would take us as myopic as we are, as self-centered as we are, as dim-witted spiritually as we are, and seek to tell us about truths and about realities that are so great, to try to take us to heights, spiritual heights, to give us vantage points, to see vistas and panoramas, which are almost too much for us to bear. And yet you want us so much to be partners with you, and not just servants but children, and not just citizens but friends. And therefore you would show us these things and you would give us these things and you would help us to see these things. Father, I pray that you would help us tonight to understand and to revel and rejoice in them. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Now, you know, it's been a long time that we've been looking at Ephesians 4, 5, and 6, and a lot of you, at any given time, I figure 70% of you have only been coming to the church for six to eight months. I figured that out somewhere. And that means that a lot of you have no idea where we started when we were going through the book of Ephesians. And we actually started in chapter 4. Now, the book of Ephesians is a fascinating book, and sometimes, unless you stand back, you can't see some of its teaching. Chapter 4, 5, and 6, which we move through in a snail's pace, is full, chock full of practical, the most practical and specific and detailed instructions on how to live daily life that you can find anywhere in any literature. It tells us, to reconcile your differences. It tells you how to change habits that are hard to change. It talks about community. It talks about the church. It talks about spiritual warfare. It talks about your conscience. It talks about marriage. It talks about work. It talks about the family. It talks about the most practical issues. And therefore, we went on through and we saw how detailed the Christian lifestyle was and how just tremendously practical it was. However, chapter 4 begins with, at least in this translation, it begins with the word for. In the modern translation we're reading here, it says, as a prisoner for the Lord then, chapter 4, verse 1, I urge you. That little word then is kind of lost. Actually, Paul begins with the word therefore. Chapter 4, 5, and 6, with all of that great practical stuff, is completely based on chapters 1, 2, and 3. When you read chapters 1, 2, and 3, you've got almost a totally different atmosphere. Couldn't you tell as I was reading it? I mean, we've been working through chapters 4, 5, and 6 in great detail, and it's just full of the most practical stuff. Chapter 1, immediately, if you're reading it at all, immediately gives you a nosebleed. Immediately, you begin to get nitrogen bubbles in the stream because you've been brought up from the place you were to a level and to a vantage point, as I was praying, and to see things from God's point of view. And it's lofty and it's difficult in some ways. But listen, chapter 4 hinges, 4, 5, and 6 hinges on chapter 1, 2, and 3, and therefore the teaching, and let's just take a minute to think about it, is that you cannot live practically unless you know what you believe. In other words, doctrine. I use that word again. We worked on this a couple of weeks ago. Doctrine. There is nothing so dangerous as to say it doesn't matter what you believe religiously. It doesn't matter what your doctrine is. It doesn't matter what you believe as long as you live as a decent person. It doesn't matter what you believe as long as you're loving, honest, and so forth. Now, Thomas Jefferson made that into a dogma. He said, it's not your creed, but your deeds. It's not what you believe. Who knows what you believe as long as you live as a decent person? He wrote one lady in the letters pretty famous. He said in there, I've never tried to persuade someone else to believe as I believe about God. Because who knows? It doesn't matter what you believe. It's by my life and by my deeds that my life is validated, not by my beliefs. Now, the whole book of Ephesians is a complete contradiction to that. On Easter Sunday here, we talked about 1 Corinthians 15. That entire chapter is a challenge to that idea. Because Paul was writing to the Corinthians and he said, some people are telling us that the dead are not raised. He says, if Christ is not raised, if the dead are not raised, let's eat and drink and be merry for tomorrow we die. What's he saying? He is saying that beliefs are absolutely practical for your daily living. And he said, he said, if there is no afterlife, if there is no heaven or hell, then who in the world is to say that I should sacrifice myself to be nice to people? Who's to say what is being moral and decent? See, Paul is perfectly logical and Thomas Jefferson is perfectly illogical. But I know that what Thomas Jefferson says certainly rings much more true on the streets of New York than what Paul is saying. And therefore, we've got to screw this in. We've got to make sure that our understanding as Christians of reality has not been restructured by the world. Paul says, you cannot live a decent and loving life except on the basis of faith and belief and doctrine. Now, when somebody says, just to show you the illogic of what Jefferson says, is if somebody says to you, it doesn't matter what you believe as long as you're decent and loving. Okay? The problem with that is that's a belief. Who's to say it's important to be decent and loving? Why? Scientists tell you it's important to be decent and loving? It doesn't matter what you believe as long as you're decent and loving, but that is a belief. You've just done something, you know, you just told me I'm not allowed to do. And that is to say, it's a belief. Besides that, you can turn around to a person and say, well, let me ask you why you believe it's important to be decent and loving. For example, I'm a landlord and I think it's much more important to get money than it is to care for the welfare of my tenants. So I'm gouging them and I don't care. All right? See, that's not right. Why not? And as soon as that guy tries to answer, as soon as he tries to answer you, he's into beliefs. He's into doctrine. You see, for example, he has to be assuming that people are more important than money. But why? Money lasts longer and money is a lot more useful and money doesn't talk back to you. I mean, there's all sorts of ways in which you can say, why is, why, what makes you say that people are more important than money? That's belief stuff. That's faith. That's doctrine. You can't even say doctrine doesn't matter without laying down a doctrine. You can't even say, for example, that it's only important to be moral and decent without defining moral and decent, and science can't do that, but that's a belief. And what Paul is trying to say, then, is let's make sure as Christians, we don't let that illogic and that pollution and that pernicious idea, which is not only illogical, but ultimately it contradicts itself and it eats itself up. There's no basis for morality except religion. There's no basis for even talking about moral and decency unless you start talking about the nature of God, the nature of human beings, the nature of right and wrong metaphysics, not physics, that which is beyond that which you can taste, touch, hear, and see, and smell. And Paul says, let's not be bothered by that nonsense. Let's make sure we see that you cannot be good in your marriage, chapter 5. You cannot deal with your conscience, chapter 6. You cannot work in a way that is satisfying, that's chapter 6. You cannot solve your differences and communicate in chapter 4 unless you understand the great lofty doctrines about the nature of God and about salvation and about redemption and about sin and about Jesus as the sin bearer and about adoption and forgiveness and so forth. All the deep doctrine, all the heavy stuff in chapters 1, 2, and 3 comes first. And frankly, what it means to live a Christian life is to understand that doctrine and work it out. There is absolutely no life without truth. Life is based on truth. Jefferson was wrong and many of us are living, though we say we're Christians, as if Jefferson was right. Because you read chapters 1, 2, and 3 and you say, I don't want to get into all that. Well, that's where we're going. And we're going to do this actually over a period of about four months. I've tried to map the thing out so we move through a little bit more of a clip than we did the last three. And what we're going to do is I would like to show you that chapter 1 and chapter 2 are pretty intriguing. In chapter 1, we actually see salvation from God's point of view. In chapter 2, we actually see salvation from our point of view. In chapter 1, we see what God has done. And you see, if you go through chapter 1, verse 3 to 15, you see this marvelous, almost what some of the theologians call, the order of salvation, the ordo salutis. You see, first of all, it talks about Him choosing us, then redeeming us by blood, then we're forgiven and adopted, then we're kept safe forever, then we're brought into glory. And believe it or not, even that's not the end of the picture. That's verse 14. But when you get into verses 15 to the end, it actually begins to talk about the fact that there's a glory beyond heaven, and that is the consummation of all history, in which there's even a further glory can fade on us. Now, it's heavy stuff. It's esoteric stuff. I'm telling you this. If you say this isn't practical, you don't understand how Christianity works at all. It's intensely practical, as I'm going to try to show you all the way along. Chapter 2 actually shows salvation from the human point of view. Instead of starting with Him choosing us and forgiving us and redeeming us by blood, chapter 2 starts with sin, being dead in trespasses and sin, and then becoming alive. Then it moves into the idea of, and the concept of how faith develops us and turns us into people who can do certain things, that there are certain deeds that we alone can do because of the empowerment of the Holy Spirit. And then it moves on through into talking again about what it means for our relationships as Christians. So chapter 2 is almost a psychological, starting with your own heart, from your point of view, what happens in salvation. All I knew is I was dead and I'm alive. And now these things are beginning to happen. But in chapter 1, we see salvation from God's point of view, what He's done for us, and what He does in order to enable the great things in us that actually happen. Now, we're only going to start with the first step tonight. And I think it's going to be pretty intriguing because the first step is, what? You see it? It says in verse 3, 4, pardon me, it says, we get all these great spiritual blessings, and then it begins, 4, see? It says, praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ. That is a statement. If you realize the heaviness of it, if you actually try to intellectually get underneath it or even emotionally get underneath it, it will just crush you. It will break your back. It's like putting something on. It's too heavy. You see what it's saying? It says, in Christ, there is no joy, there is no honor, every spiritual blessing, there is no satisfaction, there is nothing possible. Of a good nature, there is nothing great possible, but is actual for the Christian. that you can possibly imagine, and even beyond what you can imagine, great that is possible that will not happen to you if you're a believer. In Christ, every spiritual blessing. But then, verse 4, 4, which means, here's why, here's why you as a Christian are the recipient of these great blessings, of these great benefits and great resources. Verse 4, for he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love, he predestined us to be adopted as his sons through Jesus Christ. The first step is he chooses us. Now, let's start with that. I like to state it, I like to state what the Bible teaches, and then backpedal a bit and deal with all the objections. I want you to know, let me start off this way by saying, this doctrine is the most comforting doctrine possible. If you just, if you just kind of let yourself experience it. The problem with most of us cognitive types is as soon as we hear the doctrine, instead of experiencing it, we immediately begin to say, but what about this problem? What about this problem that it creates? Frankly, the doctrine of election and predestination, which is constant through this chapter and constant through the Bible, and which you really, if you try to avoid it because you don't get it or you don't really like it, and you try to, you know, it's a little bit like trying to walk and miss the mud puddles, you know, down in the village on a rainy day. After a while, you give up because you just start getting soaked and you say, oh well. The same thing happens with this. You can't avoid it. It keeps coming up. It keeps coming up. The doctrine itself, if you experience it, is a tremendously comforting thing if you don't sit down and try to work out every bit of the intellectual implications of it, which can, in some cases, be pretty complicated. Think of the doctrine of election as a piece of hard candy. When you first bite it, it hurts. You know, you don't taste anything. In fact, it kind of feels like maybe it's going to actually break your tooth or something. But if you just put the pressure on it, once you bite into it, it's tremendously sweet on the inside. From the outside, it looks like it's going to bust your jaw. But from the inside, it's tremendously sweet. And I would not bring it up. There's plenty of things that people differ on. This is one of the things. But I wouldn't even bring it up because I believe in choosing my battles. I wouldn't bring it up if I didn't think that this was crucial for the Christian life. And I'll be happy later on to tell you how crucial it is for my life. But let me just explain what the doctrine is. Look, basically what Paul is saying is, why do some people have these spiritual blessings? Why is it that some people have got these great things happening in their life? Verse 3. And his answer is, if I say to you, why are you a Christian? You immediately say, because I chose the Lord. And that is true, but that's from the human point of view. Ephesians 1 is looking from the other point of view. Looking down from God, in a sense. And the answer here is, the ultimate cause that Paul is saying is, you chose him because he chose you. So, he says, I'll put it this way. Why do some people have these blessings? Why do some people have it? Why do you experience this today? And the answer is, because he chose you. Now, when somebody says, I don't like it that way, I think, frankly, the real reason is because I accepted Christ. The answer, of course, is that's the penultimate reason, according to chapter 1. It's not the ultimate reason. And let me show you the problem that comes up immediately if you insist on making your choice ultimate rather than penultimate. If I ask you, and this happened to me some years ago. I do this in the new member seminar, so some of you have heard a number of these illustrations. But we got to this place in the passage, so I'll pull them out again. Some years ago, the question was put to me like this. Because I thought you could be kind of agnostic about this whole thing. Was God's choice more penultimate or was our choice? Which is ultimate? Which is penultimate? Which causes which is the answer, is the question. Here's the answer, I think. Somebody once said to me, why are you a Christian? Why, verse 3, do you have these spiritual blessings? Why do you have these things in your life when other people don't? So your answer, the first answer always is, from the human point of view, because I've received Christ. The question is, good, why did you receive Christ? And the other people haven't. Well, the answer is because I admitted my sins. Great. Why did you admit your sins and other people haven't? Well, I humbled myself and other people didn't. Great, comes the question. Why did you humble yourself and other people didn't? Now, you see what's going on here. As long as you make your choice, the ultimate reason that you today are a Christian, the real bottom line, the real bottom line of why you're a Christian and other people aren't today is because you're better. There's no other way out of it. You're better. You're smarter. Or maybe you're more open. maybe you say, well, there's nothing better about me, but I was just willing. Then you're more willing. Listen, that goes completely against everything the Scripture teaches. 1 Corinthians 15, Paul says, I was the least of the apostles. I was one abnormally born, but by the grace of God, I am what I am. And therefore, you have got to see that this is the doctrine of election. Let's put it this way. Nobody, you cannot make yourself a Christian. You did not make yourself a Christian. This is how Christianity differs from every other religion. The teaching of the Buddhists is, if you want to be a Buddhist, you have to make yourself a Buddhist. Here's what to do. The teaching of Islam, you want to be a Muslim, you've got to make yourself a Muslim. Here's what you do. Christianity is completely different. You want to be a Christian? You can't even want to be a Christian unless God has begun to open your heart. You can't make yourself a Christian. Nobody can. Therefore, pride and superiority are utterly excluded. And you are what you are by the grace of God alone. If you believe that God's choice is ultimate and your choice is penultimate, then you can really mean that when you say that. If you believe that your choice is ultimate, then when you say, I am what I am by the grace of God alone, you don't actually mean it. Almost completely by the grace of God alone. But there was one little bit of difference between me and other people. No, says Paul. There's no qualifications. There's no qualifications at all. There's no of course about it. If somebody says to a person who understands that your choice was ultimate, are you a Christian? You say, well, of course I'm a Christian because I received Christ. But you see, if you believe that your choice was penultimate and God's choice of you was ultimate, and somebody says, well, are you a Christian? You say, yes, it's astonishing. It's amazing. It's almost a joke. Why me? But it's true. You see, the doctrine of the sovereignty of God of election, the doctrine of the ultimacy of God's choice, the doctrine of the absolute sheer graciousness of your Christianity means that you always will have a sense of humor about yourself because you know that it's actually a joke. Why me? I don't know. There is no good reason in me at all. And therefore, you see, that's the doctrine. Jesus says, no one, chapter 6, verse 44, no one can come to me, no one can come to me unless the Father draws him. Now, there's one more thing before we state the doctrine, it'll be complete. The doctrine is that Jesus, God's choice of us in eternity is ultimate, and our choice, therefore, is caused by his choice. His choice is ultimate, our choice is penultimate. Secondly, that means that therefore you really can say it's by the grace of God, absolutely alone I am what I am. You can't make yourself a Christian. All of the religions say you can make yourself this, but Christianity says, no, you can't. It's something that God has to do to you. The Father, no one can come to me except the Father draw him. The Father has to enable you. The Father has to open your heart. The Father has to give you the desire. The Father has to let you see the way to go. John chapter 3 says you must be born again to see the kingdom. You can't even see the kingdom to want the thing unless God begins to open your heart. And if that's true, then there's always a wonder, and pride and superiority are completely excluded, and there's a joy and a wonder and an amazement always about the miraculousness of the fact that today you believe. The last part is, some people say, well, isn't there a place, some place, in Romans 8, verse 30, that says, those he foreknew, he predestined. Those he predestined, he justified, and those he justified, he glorified. Isn't that true? Those he foreknew, he predestined. Well, somebody says, that means God can see the future, and so God saw the end from the beginning, and he looked down the corridors of time, and he saw some people would choose him. So, since he foreknew them, he predestined them. Now, the problem with that, besides it being pretty redundant, I mean, if the person's already going to believe, why predestine them? I mean, why fix something that's already fixed? But not only that, if you look carefully at that verse, and I'm only saying this for some of you who've thought through this, it doesn't say, some of them he foreknew, he predestined, and some of them he justified, because the word foreknow, the word know in the Bible is not an intellectual word. You know, when Jesus says to somebody, I never knew you, he doesn't mean, I never knew about you. I didn't see you. I didn't have anything. You know, when Jesus said, I never knew you, he didn't say, who the heck are you? That's not what he means. He says, you're not on the list of human beings. That's not what he's saying. When he says, I never knew you, he says, I had no relationship with you. To know someone is a personal noun, a personal verb in the Bible. And when he says, those they foreknew, don't. It's not an intellectual word at all. It means, listen, to foreknow someone means to forelove them. It means God put his love on you. God looked down the corridors of time, put his love on you. And that's the reason that today you're just, because he loved you from before the creation of the world, that's the reason that today you say, I believe. Now, does the Bible teach that? Yeah, and I can't really take the time to explain how often it teaches it. You know, we went through the book of John in the morning services over the last few years, and it's kind of hard to avoid it. Here's a place, you know the place where Jesus is talking about himself being the bread? He says, I'm the bread of life. He who comes to me shall not hunger. We sing it sometimes. So, whosoever would take me, and so forth. And it sounds very, very democratic. Of course it is. However, the Pharisees, the religious leaders, say some mean things, and he turns around immediately and says, you know why you don't believe in me? It's in John chapter 6. In verse 35, he says, I'm the bread of life. Anyone who comes to me will not hunger. In verse 36 and 37, he says, you don't believe because all the Father gives me will come to me. I will lose none of those he has given me, and I will raise them up on the last day. What is he saying? If you don't believe, it's because you weren't chosen. And it's not just John who says it. It's not just Jesus who says it. It's not just Paul who says it. You know, it can go on and on. Acts chapter 13, verse 48. That's Luke now. Not John, not Peter, not Paul. In the book of Luke, Luke is talking about how Paul was preaching and then how the people really liked the sermon. And they believed. And Luke says, The word ordained means to be appointed, you know. It doesn't say as many as believed were appointed to eternal life. It says as many as were appointed to eternal life believed. And, you know, it racks it up. I mean, the more you go through it, after a while you try to avoid the puddles, next thing you know, you can't. You're wet. It's all around you. Now, why do people want to avoid it? Why do people want to avoid it? Here's a couple reasons, and I need to talk about it. First of all, a lot of people say, Well, that means that people don't have free will. No, that's not true. That's not what the teaching is saying at all. Look, you have perfect... What is free will? Free will means I choose what I want to do. That's free will. So, the Bible doesn't say that a human being can't choose God. The Bible teaches that a human being doesn't want to choose God. Not that you're incapable of choosing, but you're incapable of wanting it. Romans 3 says no one seeks God. Romans 8 says the natural mind, unless God actually comes and does something, the natural mind, remember we talked about this a few weeks ago, has hostility toward God. So, a lot of people say, Oh, that's not true. What do you mean? I see people trying to obey God all the time. They obey God. Yeah. They're raised in the church. They listen to the Ten Commandments. Look carefully, and you will see. If you were raised in the church, and you were given a kind of general Christian morality, you haven't stuck with it. Where haven't you stuck with it? You didn't stick with it. Whenever to obey really meant losing something. In other words, wherever your mastery of your life was really challenged, you always took it. You say, Well, I obey the Ten Commandments 90% of the time, but it's the 10% where you disobey. Look and see where that is. It's whenever God actually challenges you for the mastery of your life. If you know to obey this means I'm going to lose something really important to me. Then you disobey. Why? Which just goes to show that 90% doesn't count. In that, the whole time you're in charge of your life. You haven't really done the whole purpose of obedience, which is to submit your life to the king. He doesn't just want your keeping his rules. He wants you. He wants you to say, You're the king. That's why I obey. Therefore, the Bible says that if you give a person a thousand choices, unless God opens that person's heart, she will never want to come. Here's the best example. Remember the lion example? You've heard that one? Here's a lion. You put in front of him a bowl of hot piping Quaker oats for breakfast, and on the right hand, and on the left hand, you put a piece of raw meat, and you give him that choice a thousand times. Now, everybody will tell you, any zoologist will tell you, that the lion is capable of eating the hot piping Quaker oats. But he never, ever, ever, ever, ever will. Why not? Do you mean he doesn't have free will? No. He's carnivorous. Very, very much. You're the one. You are the one. eating the hot piping Quaker Oats, but he never, ever, ever, ever, ever will. Why not? Do you mean he doesn't have free will? No. He's carnivorous. It's his nature not to want that. It's his nature to want this. And when the Bible says that you cannot come unless the Father draws you, that doesn't mean you don't have free will. Heck no. It means that you don't want him. And you can't want him unless he opens your eyes. The best illustration of the doctrine of election goes sort of like this. Here's 20 people, and they're walking along, and they're all blindfolded, and you see them walking one at a time down a ramp and everyone falling into a furnace and each one dying. So you go up to each one and say, you've got to stop walking into this furnace. You're walking into a furnace. You're all going to be killed. And the guys won't listen to you. They say, that's ridiculous. We're not. We're on our way to Miami Beach. We can feel it getting warmer. We can't wait to get out and get in under those rays. I mean, we live in New York City. It's the end of April. It's 40 degrees and raining. We've got to do something. What happens is the Bible says the doctrine of God's ultimate choice is that God has to come and pull a blindfold off of you. And then you look and you say, what's the matter with me? Why am I walking into the furnace? Where's the way to Miami? Now, do you consider that a forcing of a person's will? Heck no. You're giving the person his or her mind back. You're pulling the scales off the eyes. So this doctrine has nothing, nothing. In no way does this thing challenge the idea of free will. Well, somebody says it's unfair. Now we're getting closer to a problem. I admit it. But not completely yet. You're not there yet. I'll tell you where the problem shows up. But not yet. See, it's unfair because, you see, the whole problem, I can understand this idea. See, a lot of Christians sit there and say, if this makes no sense to you at all, you probably aren't born again. Because anybody who has eternal life, you know deep down in your heart that you know you just didn't choose this thing. God came to you. He opened your... I mean, you know that. You realize that eternal life is a gift, which means that there's a sense in which you don't really decide on it. What it means to be a Christian is not that you've decided to adhere to these beliefs and to move in this direction and to do these moral values. And you're sort of proceeding as if you've decided to take a course. You've decided to sign up or something. That's not what Christianity is. People who really have eternal life, they sense that some outside agitator has come on in. That something has grabbed you. Something is dealing with you in your innermost being. It's shaking you. It's your maker making you again. And you sense that something's being done to you. You know that. So you know that. The real problem is the intellectual thing, which is it's not fair. Why should God choose some people and not others? Well, it's not unfair. Again, another illustration goes like this. It's only unfair if everybody deserves this. See, for example, here's five people and they're friends of yours. And you go up to... and they say, you know what we're going to do? We're having... the recession has been hard on all of us. We're having trouble making our rents. We're going to go rob a bank. So you sit there and you say, this is ridiculous. You can't do that. You know what's going to happen if you get caught in all this sort of thing? You can't do it. And you argue and you argue. But they're blind. They won't listen to you. They're crazed. So they say, out of our way. We're on our way out the door. So as they go out the door, what do you do? You come after and you take a nice little baseball bat and you hit the last two, knock them out, drag them on in, tie them up until they come to their senses. The other three go off and they rob a bank. They kill a guard. They're on death row. Okay? Now what happens? So you go to see them on death row and they say, well, this wasn't fair. If you took two of us, you had to take all of us. As a matter of fact, it's your fault that we're here. And you'd have to look at them and say, that's ridiculous. The two people who are free have me and me alone, you see, to give gratitude to. But the three of you have you and you alone to blame. Since all of you deserved to be here, therefore it wasn't fair. It wasn't unfair for me to take two of you. Heck, I wasn't obligated to take any of you. So you really can't choose. You can't say, listen, God sends out the message to everybody. And if he decides to go and open the eyes of some people, it's not unfair. Well, then here's the third objection. Now we get to the real problem. No, I won't get you to the real problem yet. I got five minutes. Let me get you to another objection. Let me get you to another objection. A third objection is, well, if that's true, then why do we have to do anything? It's all set. It's all predetermined. I don't have to do a thing. For example, I don't have to talk to other people about Jesus. If they're elect, they're going to get it. I myself don't even have to do anything because if I'm elect, you know, I'm going to get it. It's as simple as that. Yeah. Again, it's really, if you think the thing out from God's point of view instead of your point of view, it starts to work itself out. See, for you're going to get it. You're going to get it. up to a cabin, and it's cold, but it's a great place. We're going to rough it. And I say to my oldest son, I say, listen, we're going to go out, we're going to cut the wood, and we're going to, if we don't cut the wood, you know, we're not going to have a fire, and we're going to freeze, so we're going to go out and cut the wood. And you've never cut the wood, but I want you to cut the wood with me. I just want you to come out and cut the wood. And I'm going to watch you, and I'm going to cut the wood. And so after you go on out there, and you sit down, and he doesn't do anything, you say, well, listen, I'm going to go in, and I'm going to do something else, but when I get back, I want you to cut the wood. And I come on back, and he hasn't done anything. And I say, honey, why haven't you cut the wood? He says, well, dad, I know that if I don't cut the wood, you're going to cut it anyway. So because I know that you won't let us freeze, I've lost all incentive. See, that's stupid. I say, I'll give you some incentive. I say, I would say, your incentive, see, your incentive for doing what I have said should not have been fear that you were going to die if you didn't do it. Your incentive should know you've got a father who at least has got the skill and got the capability and got the love to know that if you don't do it, yeah, yeah, you're right. You're not going to freeze. You're not going to die. You're not going to really muck your life up. You're not going to kill your family. But I wanted you to be my partner. I wanted you to grow like me. I wanted you to do this to please me. In fact, you know, it takes all the pressure off you to realize that people aren't going to die if you don't do a good job. What was your incentive to start with if it wasn't love for me? Well, the only incentive was fear. See, the same thing happens when you say, well, if all these things are set, then I don't have to do anything. I've lost all my incentive to know that I can't really muck my life up. My dear friends, that is so wonderful to be a Christian and to believe this truth, to know that you're secure, that you can't muck your life up. He's put his love on you. And if he's put his love on you, that means that he is working with you and he has given you things to do. And the reason that you're supposed to do them is to please him, to be grateful to him, not to say, well, if a person says, well, if it's all set, I've lost my incentive. That means the only incentive you had before was fear and not love. Now, the real problem comes down to this. Why? Doesn't God want to save everybody? Yes. He says so. He says, I'm not willing to see anybody die. Isn't it secondly true that God could save everybody? Yes. He's all powerful. Then why doesn't God save everybody? And you know what the answer is? We don't know. But you see, you better not blame it on me. If you say, well, I don't believe in this election predestination stuff. I'm a Christian. I don't believe in that. You've got the same problem. Do you believe God wants everybody to be saved? Yes, you say. Do you believe that God could save everybody? Well, you say, I guess so. But you say, he doesn't want to violate anybody's free will. What's the big deal about free will? Insult me for a minute and save me for eternity. What in the world? You're so wonderful about free will. You're going to tell me that you've got the answer for why God isn't saving everybody? Yes, I got the answer. He's not going to violate anybody's free will. That's ridiculous. If that's God's reason for sending people to hell, it's a stupid reason. He's got a reason. He's got a reason that he doesn't save everybody, but you and I don't know it. And he's got a reason that he chooses some people, but you and I don't know it. And we do know it's not in us. It's not because I'm better. Let me conclude this way. When I first met my wife, I was a Christian. She was a Christian. And I did know there were some people that believe this thing. And I said, but I thought only cultic, strange people believe this. And I first met her and I said, we've talked and I realized she believed this. She believed the doctrine of the ultimacy of Christ's choice over ours, causing ours. And I said, well, how do you believe this? And she said, I couldn't face life without it. And that just floored me. And I began to realize as time went on, it's true. You see, there is nothing more humbling and yet more wonderful than this. There is nothing makes you more secure. This is the kind of love you want. You see, why does he love you? Well, because I was humble. Well, because I did this or this. Remember when your wife asks you guys, those of you who are married, when your wife asks you, honey, why do you love me? You don't say, I loved you because you were humbler than the other girls. I loved you because you're a better tennis partner. I loved you because you're prettier. None of those things. Nobody wants love like that because you know that you could lose that kind of love. You see, the love that you want is a love that is its own rationale. You know, whenever somebody is really in love, you start to say incredible things that are so slurpy when they're put down on a piece of paper. You know, that slurpy thing from years ago, the Dan Fogelberg song that talked about, you know, longer than there have been fishes in the ocean, higher than any bird ever flew, longer than there have been stars up in the heaven, I've been in love with you. But the reason you talk slurpy like that, you know, slurpy like actual six months ago, you have to take a couple times we're bound to help you get him fine with yourself, ab charging for longer than there have been fishes in the ocean, higher than any bird ever flew, longer than there have been stars up in the heaven, I've been in love with you. But the reason you talk slurpy like that is because you know ultimately that there is a kind of love somewhere like that, a love that is its own rationale, a love that says I love you just because I love you, just because I love you, just because I love you. Only Christians know that there is really a love like that, that there really is somebody who has said longer than there have been stars up in the heavens, for he chose us in love before the foundation of the world. A Christian who understands this says the stars may fall from heaven, but his love for me will stand because his love is older than the stars and it will outlive the stars. That's liberating. Those of you who wonder about self-esteem, electing love is the only thing that will really do it. There's a friend of mine, now I'll try to finish up next week, there's a friend of mine I knew, for example, was a missionary in Korea and he tried to win the little girl prostitutes to Christ. And when he gave them a kind of conventional appeal to become Christians, they usually would say, you don't understand, God couldn't possibly, possibly accept us. No matter what we do, we're just awful. Their self-esteem was that bad. Finally, Harvey turned around and said to them, listen, they told him about the doctrine of electing love and predestination. He says, you know why some people come to Christ? Because God, surely in his mercy, chooses some people so that the people who come to Christ, like me, he said, it has nothing to do with my desserts, it has nothing to do with my merits, it's surely because of his love and grace. Totally. And they said, you're kidding. In Korean. And they said, well, how do we know if we're elect? How do we know we've been chosen? And this is the simplest part. Harvey says, do you want this? And he said, yes. Well, I said, well, listen, that means God must be working in your heart because the Bible says you can't want God unless he's working in your heart. Don't give yourself too much credit. You see, the doctrine of election actually takes away anything, any kind of merit. If you say, but I do want this, I do want this, I do want this, then he's working in your life. You couldn't possibly want it otherwise. You can't say, well, I want this, but how do I know God's going to accept me? What did Harvey say to them? He said, if you want it, it means he has accepted you. Come. This is the doctrine of grace, grace, not just grace. This is the doctrine of love behind love, not just love. This is the reason why my life verse in 1 Corinthians 1 is, God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the weak things to shame the strong. God chose the foolish things and the lowly things and the despised things, even the things that are not, to bring to nothing the things that are, that no one will boast in his presence. Don't you see? You look at that and you realize the only thing God actually says might be a reason why he chooses some over others is he likes to play jokes. He loves to go after the weaker ones. He loves to go after the most foolish. So the proud people will see that God is God. So the proud people will see that salvation is by grace and grace alone. There's been no worship in my life till I understood this. There was no security in my life till I realized this. Till I realized I never truly earned it at all, that I really understand that I couldn't possibly lose it at all. Some of you think that you're better than other people. You think that you've made it. You think you're more polished. You think you're getting up in the world. My friends, eventually life is going to teach you that you're not. And come to this doctrine and let Jesus teach you. Jesus was always a better teacher, a much more gentle teacher than life will be. It's only by God's grace that you have not been, that you weren't born clinging to the, in a Kurdish family clinging to the side of a cliff, another part of the world. Then how many degrees would you have, huh? Then what would your cash flow be? Even what you are now is due to the grace and mercy surely of Jesus Christ and God. And therefore, you need to rest and relax completely in that grace tonight. If you're a Christian, you need to see that he loves you because he loves you. And you need to worship him for that. If you're not a Christian, then you have to say, man, it's a little bit confusing, but I'll tell you this. If you don't like the idea of a God who's king, I tell you, you need a king. You don't need a president of the universe. You need a king. You need a king who loves you and loves you in terms of sovereignty and power. I know that right now, our culture is against the idea of really submitting to an absolute king. That's all that the Bible gives you. And I tell you, if your heart leaps at all and says, I would like to know a king like this, I would like to have a love like this, then that love is already working in your life. Then go to him because he's already come to you and he's done everything for you. Let's close in prayer. Father, as we listen to the music, as we take up the offering. We listen to the music, as we sing again. Thank you. Thank you. Because he's already come to you, and he's done everything for you. Let's close in prayer. Father, as we listen to the music, as we take up the offering, we pray that all of us will think about this great grace and realize that the ultimate reason that we chose you is because you chose us. We thank you that you're a God like that, that there really is a love that's older than the stars, and that therefore there is a love that will outlast the stars. Father, help us to revel in this, help us to rejoice in this, help us not to worry about the intellectual problems that are there. Instead, help us to bite down into this and receive the sweetness out of it, for we pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
