TITLE: Love the World vs. Love Not the World (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Men’s Retreat 1996
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/love-the-world-vs-love-not-the-world-part-2/

============================================================

Let me remind you what we talked about last night. Last night we said the problem you've got when you read the Bible is we are intensely urged to love the world and we are intensely urged to absolutely avoid loving the world. And what I was trying to get at tonight, I'll say this here so we can get back and use it later. What we're really being asked to do, I think, is to be free from the world for the world. I think John Stott said that somewhere, but I couldn't find it. I don't think I came up with that. Maybe you can tell me where that happened. You see, to love the world but not love the world, how in the world could that be? We're supposed to be freed from the world in one sense, so we're freed for the world in another. Now, last night I tried to make a distinction. I said that means the Bible is certainly not saying to us avoid the places of the world or avoid the people of the world. In fact, last night I said there were a couple of mistakes we make. We make a mistake when we so focus on worldliness as behavior and we really think basically the worldliness is a matter of the will. And sometimes we may focus on worldliness too much as beliefs or systems of thinking and therefore we focus too much on worldliness as a matter of the intellect. But worldliness is a matter of the heart. It's not so much the will primarily or the mind primarily. It's a matter of the heart. Because when James, in his very famous statement in James 4, verse 4, he says, Don't you know that friendship with the world is enmity against God? He starts off, now in most translations it says nowadays, it says, Unfaithful people. You unfaithful people, he says. Don't you know that friendship with the world is enmity against God? But what is the word that he actually says there? Adulteresses, he says. Adulteresses. But he's not talking about sexual immorality, literal sexual immorality, because he's talking about everyone. He's calling all of his hearers, all of the people in the church that he's writing to adulteresses, feminine. In other words, he's saying that worldliness is a matter of putting yourself in the arms of the world spiritually. It's committing spiritual adultery. So, when we read that passage last night in 1 Corinthians 3, we said, worldliness is really being under the power of the world, being shaped by the world, being swayed by the wisdom of the world. And I think the fact that Paul pushes this stuff at the end where he says, I don't let the world judge me, and I don't judge even myself. This judgment thing I've been thinking about last night, and I'll put it this way. Worldliness is putting humanity on the judgment throne of the world, one way or the other. Humanity, putting humanity on the judgment throne of the universe. Because, you see, on the one hand, Paul says, you're being molded by the world if you're just controlled by what they think of you. You're worldly if the standards of power and the standards of approval of the world really push you and squeeze you. You become a nervous person. You become a timid person. You become a conformist. And in all those ways, that's a form of worldliness. But then Paul turns around and says, I judge not mine own self. And what I think we need to keep in mind is a parallel. There's a parallel to a story I heard John Bettler, from the Christian Counseling Center, tell years ago. I heard this a long time ago. I heard this when I was still in seminary. I don't even know if this is a common story that a lot of the rest of you have heard him say or not. But it's just always stuck with me. And he remembers that when he was a young pastor, he went. It was typical after your church ran a vacation Bible school. And if you had children coming to vacation Bible school from the neighborhood and from homes that did not have church-going parents, it was normal for you, the pastor, to go knock on doors and say, say, we're so happy that Sally and Jimmy were coming to vacation Bible school and they were interested in Sunday school. We'd be very happy to bring them to church in Sunday school. We'd be happy to get somebody from the church to come around and give them a ride. It's sort of a way of trying to essentially draw that family into the church. And John said he went to one home and he knocked on the door and he said this to the father. And the father looked at him and said, my parents made me go to church and crammed their religion down my throat and I am not going to send my children to church. And John said it was intriguing. He said, you see, there's one response to... that this man could have made is he could have, in a sense, let them judge him. In other words, he could have spent all of his life trying to conform to his parents' expectations, and maybe going to church just simply because it was the right thing to do because his parents wanted him to do it. That would have been bad. That would have been, in a sense, the first sort of thing that Paul was talking about. But, Betler points out, he says this man is just as controlled by his parents in his reaction as he would have been if he had just bowed to them. He is still being controlled. His behavior is still being controlled. He doesn't send his children to church only because his parents made him. He now doesn't send his children to church because his parents made him. He's still being affected. He's not making an independent decision. He's not making a free decision. He doesn't let his parents judge him, but in defense against his parents, he has now set himself up as a judge. And in his self-righteousness and his arrogance, he's molded by his parents. Maybe he's got a sibling who is wimpy, you see, and he's rebellious. But they're both being influenced by their parents. Now, in the same way, when Paul says, not only don't I let you judge me, I don't let the world have that kind of power over me, but I don't judge myself or anyone else either. He says, the gospel has taken me out of the judging business. I, on the one hand, don't let you judge me. I've taken you out of the judging business, but I've taken myself. I don't judge you and I don't judge myself. If you move out into the world like that, you're neither a sheep nor a wolf. You're a shepherd. If you move out into the world like that, I don't care what you think and I don't care what I think. I've taken humanity off the judgment throne. I'm not being affected by the world in the sense that you're molding me by making me conform, but I'm also not being affected by the world in that I'm actually defining myself in reaction against you either. He says, I can move out as a shepherd because, on the one hand, I'm not afraid of you. And on the other hand, I don't need you. I don't need you to define me negatively or positively. I don't need you to define me directly by approving of me. I don't need you to define me indirectly by getting my whole idea of myself from being superior to you. You see, there's a sense in which when a person says, I don't care what this rabble thinks. All I care about is what I think. You're out-worlding the world. You are out-arrogancing the world. You've set yourself up as a world of one. And you can always see that when you get pharisaical people, people who are judgmental and arrogant, and they think, therefore, they are completely free of the spirit of the world. When you get them together, you get them in a room. You get them in a community. And their relationships inside that community are identical to the relationships of worldly people outside. Because they're relationships of power and manipulation, they're not relationships of service. You can still see this, unfortunately, to a great extent in the Christian community. The relationships are just as much on the basis of self-promotion and keeping up a good image instead of repentance. The relationships are just as much on the basis of...well, Tom Howard has a wonderful way of putting it. Tom Howard is one of those evangelical guys that went Catholic. And he has an interesting approach. He says, you know what? He says, heaven and hell are under every bush. God and the world are...it's possible to go one direction or another. And he says, here's heaven. My life, he says, for yours. Okay? Here's hell. Your life for mine. See, when you go into the center of the tabernacle, the center of the temple, there's the altar. There's the mercy. See, what have you got? My life for yours. You go out in the world, you see, I'm going to use you for my ends. Not self-giving. And the fact is that when you get the judgmental types, when you get the people who have really decided, I'm not going to let you judge me, I'm going to judge you. You know, I remember the guy at the end of the prologue to every...what was the name of that? What was that first...who was the guy who used to say, get out there and do it to them before they do it to you? Remember that? The Hill Street Blues. Remember at the very beginning, there was always a kind of early roll call, and then the guy would say, get out there and do it to them before they do it to you. Which is really, that's the only difference between being a conformist and being a despiser of the world. You're supposed to be... judging altogether, if you say, you're not on the judgment throne, I'm not on the judgment throne. You move out of the world, you're not afraid of them, you don't despise them. Either way, you're controlled by them. You're free from them, you're not under their influence. You're not trying to avoid the people of the world or the places of the world. In fact, and you've got to be even careful here, of course, but if you believe you're a sinner saved by grace, you don't even completely avoid the thinking of worldly people because there's a lot of, you know, sin in you keeps you from being nearly as good as your good theology should make you. And the common grace in them keeps them from being anywhere near as bad as their bad theology should make them. And you're not a whole lot different. And you see, the Pharisee, the Pharisee is the one that says, if a person from the world said this, I don't learn a thing from it. The person from the world said this, I don't respect it. And of course, with that attitude, you come on inside your so-called Christian community, we're free from the world, and yet all the relationships are just like they were in the world. Power relationships. Now, power-based, not service-based. Now, how do we move one step beyond to, let's get more specific this morning, and then tonight I'm going to try to be even more specific, most specific. I'd like to read you another passage of Scripture. And here I'd like to show you a way of, you know, Angela just said it perfectly right at the very, very end. He says, Lord, make us, help us to live out of the gospel so we can move out into the world of integrity. However, we're always falling down. See, I think the problem is we all know we've got problems out there with living in the world of integrity. We know that we all sort of get whiplash back and forth, do we not, between the two sides. We either find ourselves, in some cases, condemning. And I asked you last night to think this morning, which was your tendency? We, as Christians, have a tendency, I think, to either be the kind of persons who are very judgmental, and therefore we don't have non-Christian friends, really. Or else we have non-Christian friends, but we're cowards and we're just afraid to speak up. The fact of the matter is, though, most of us kind of back and forth, you know, on that. I think we have a tendency to be one way or the other, but we go back and forth. And we have a lot of trouble living with integrity, a great deal of trouble living with integrity. And by integrity, I mean we have a lot of trouble going out there, like Jesus, who was able to denounce wealth. A lot of you laughed at that, and I'm still thinking about that. It's true. He denounced wealth, and he denounced lust, and all of his friends are rich men and prostitutes. That's not all of his friends, but how could he do that? See, how is it possible that those rich men and prostitutes knew what he thought, and yet they wanted to be with him? How is that possible? And the answer is, he's free from the world for the world. He loved the world, and on the other hand, he absolutely loved not the world. And if we have that humble boldness, as I like to say, if we have that, which is not halfway between being bold and being humble, but it's being bold to the nth degree and humble to the nth degree, where does that come from? How do we get that? Well, as we've been saying, and it's almost a cliche around not only most of the New Life churches, but it's around Redeemer. It's a cliche to say, well, it's the gospel. But now I'd like to show you, give you some insights into how the gospel actually does, how you can work the implications out, how you can apply it to your individual problem areas. A perfect example of this, and I've been working, we're writing a curriculum at Redeemer on the small group curriculum on Galatians, and that got me into this section. In Galatians chapter 2, you have this very interesting incident where Peter falls into worldliness, worldliness, and Paul heals him of it. See? Peter falls into worldliness, and Paul heals him of it. In verse 11, I'll just read 11 to, I guess I have to read down to 16. When Peter came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he was clearly in the wrong. Before certain men came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles. And by this he means Gentile Christians, you know, other Gentile Christians. But when they arrived, he began to draw back and separate himself from the Gentiles, because he was afraid of those who had belonged to the circumcision group. The other Jews joined him in his hypocrisy, so that by their hypocrisy, even Barnabas was led astray. Now, interestingly enough, just notice something, just briefly, that for a Jewish Christian to say, I don't want to defile myself and eat with Gentile brothers and sisters, on the one hand, that's tremendous. racial pride, you know, and at that point you can say, yes, I can see that he's fallen into pride, but at the same time, notice, he did it out of fear. It says it because he was afraid. He was afraid of what people thought. That's what I mean by saying, I think it's fair of me to say we have a tendency to either be the timid kind of worldly person, the conformist type, or else the proud, judgmental type, but you know, they really do kind of go together, right? Even here, they kind of go along. It's pride and fear. Now, what does Paul do? And I haven't really, I've been reading this thing, this particular verse, for about two years, and I haven't completely gotten over it. I've been thinking it out all that time. He says, when I saw that they were not acting in line with the truth of the gospel, I said to Peter in front of them all, you're a Jew, yet you live like a Gentile, not like a Jew. How is it then that you force Gentiles to follow Jewish customs? We who are Jews by birth and not Gentile sinners know that a man is not justified by observing the law, but by faith in Jesus. So we too have put our faith in Christ Jesus, that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by observing the law either, because by observing the law, no one will be justified. All right. Look what he does. Very interesting. You see, first of all, did you notice that Paul does not simply say to Peter, you have sinned. Of course he has sinned, but that's not what he says. He broke the rule. He doesn't say, why? Well, because there's a hundred rules as Christians, and one of them is don't be a racist, and you broke the no racism rule. Now, on the one hand, listen, from one perspective, this is absolutely would be fair to say that. There is a racism rule. But that's not what Paul does. And I will tell you something. If he would come after Peter and basically, in a sense, match worldliness with worldliness here, Peter, in other words, come at him and say, God's going to get you if you don't obey this rule. I can't believe it. And you're supposed to be Peter. There would have been nothing but a fight. Okay. Yeah. And he's going to say, well, take that Catholic church, right? Okay. Anyway. Oh, sorry. Gee. I got to be careful. I would never do that anywhere else. I don't know. So what am I doing here? Anyway, he says, Paul doesn't come after Peter like that and just simply, in a sense, just say, you broke the rule. And here's why it works. He says, what's so great, he does gospel analysis. He shows why it's a sin. He even shows how it's a sin. When he says it's not in line with the truth of the gospel, you know, in the original, basically what Paul says is he was not ortho walking with the gospel. You know, an orthodontist is straightens out the teeth. The gospel has a trajectory. The gospel has a thrust to it. And what we don't do, the reason we fall into fear or pride is that we don't think it out. We don't walk it out. We don't say, how does the gospel apply in this situation? Now, what's so intriguing is on the one hand, the reason this is so profound is he shows why racism is wrong. Why is racism wrong? Is it just because it breaks the rule? In a sense. If racism is not in line with the gospel, that means that its roots are self-justification. See, he's showing Peter why he tends to racism. Racism is a denial of grace. Racism is a form of works righteousness. Racism is a way for you to endow your cultural differences with moral, spiritual significance. You see? So, very, very simple. Like, if you're from Northern European stock, you get to weddings on time. Okay? So, let's just say, let's say, you know, let's just say you have a Northern European person marrying a Latino person, and the Northern European people are right there on time. Latino families get there, you know, 20 minutes after the wedding's supposed to happen. And so, Latino people are saying, well, what do you do? Now, listen, racism is you endow the difference with moral significance. You say these people aren't responsible. That's a very small way to go about it. Now, there's... But, you see, it's not in line with the gospel. Because what happens is, it's a... Don't you see, your natural self-justification, your heart wants to get a leg up on people. And because of that, Paul comes and doesn't just say, you're... You know, it doesn't work, frankly, to hit people over the head with their racism, say, this is wrong, this is bad. You know, I don't know, the liberals want to find people for racism. The liberals want to punish people for racism. And there's nothing wrong, I think, with the... a more civil society. But you hear what Paul does is he comes to Peter and he says, use the gospel on yourself, Peter. Do you see what the roots of your racism are? It's self-justification. You don't really want to believe you're a sinner saved by grace or you've forgotten that you're a sinner saved by grace. You need to have a leg up on everybody. You need to endow your cultural differences with righteousness or make them into a righteousness. But notice then what he says. He doesn't say, Peter, repent or God's going to get you. What he says is, Peter, you have forgotten how much God has welcomed you. Whenever you confront somebody about sin, one of the reasons they're sinning is because they're afraid. One of the reasons they're sinning is just like this. The reason we sin is there's something we feel like we've got to have. If I don't have it, I'm spit. If I don't get it, you know, I need this person's approval. I need this person's, I have to have this kind of, I have to look good in this way. I have to save face. I have to get this or that. I have to have it. I have to have it. Ultimately, there's a root of fear at the bottom of an awful lot of our sin. Maybe all of our sin, if I think about it enough, I might actually say that. If you come in with somebody, and with just, in a sense, with the law, and say, you better obey or God's going to get you. What you're just doing is you're feeding the very fear, in a sense, that is at the bottom. But Paul comes into Peter, and he says, he convicts him with the comfort of the gospel. Okay? He convicts him with the comfort. He doesn't say, God's going to get you. He's going to say, how can you treat somebody? Jesus Christ, how can you treat somebody like this? How can you forget what he has done for you? How can you need somebody else's approval more than his? These people from James. And you know, when you come after somebody and you seek to get them to repent, by reminding them of grace, if you come in with somebody, and with just, in a sense, with the law, and say, you better obey or God's going to get you, what you're just doing is you're feeding the very fear, in a sense, that is at the bottom. But Paul comes into Peter, and he says, he convicts him with the comfort of the gospel. Okay? He convicts him with the comfort. He doesn't say, God's going to get you. He's going to say, how can you treat somebody? Jesus Christ, how can you treat somebody like this? How can you forget what he has done for you? How can you need somebody else's approval more than his? These people from James. And you know, when you come after somebody and you seek to get them to repent, by reminding them of grace, they can tell immediately you're on their side. If you don't do that, you may not be. You may be being very worldly at that moment. You may be using the fact, ha-ha, I am Paul. He's Peter. I'm an apostle. He's an apostle. I caught him. I always knew, in fact, I always knew that I had a little better grip on the gospel than Peter. How many epistles has Peter got? Two. How many epistles do I get? You know? And Peter would have never listened to him. Never in a million years. Because it would have fed the fear. It would have fed the very issue. It would have fed the very thing that's getting, you know, put Peter where it is. Where he is, Paul comes at him and he actually says, he says, Peter, Peter, he loves you. You've forgotten that. He welcomes you. You're acting out of accord with that. You're not being influenced by that. And so really what, see how winsome it is. And you see how utterly different this is from either being judgmental. It's not. Or from being a coward. He says, when Peter, this is Peter, St. Peter, he's, you know, in every single joke about heaven in the last two thousand years, that St. Peter, okay? He said, when Peter came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face. That's guts. But take a look. He says, you have forgotten how gracious God's been to us. Us. Us. We, he says. When he gets down there, he doesn't basically say, you know that you're sinners saved by grace. We know that we're sinners saved by grace. Now, here. Think about this now. Think this out. In general, and then I'll give you some particulars. This means that you have to go and apply the gospel when you get out in the world to every issue and say, the gospel will create. neither moral or therapeutic. I'll tell you what I mean by this. Fairly recently I read three interesting statements by three utterly different people. First of all, there was an interview in New York Magazine some weeks ago with a kind of liberal journalist and some conservative journalist, and at one point one of the women, her name was Heather Higgins, she's some kind of conservative think tank lady, she says basically the real problem in America is are we going to be a moral culture or a therapeutic culture, she says. And she says that's the culture wars. She says moral culture says that this society, that's moral, she says a moral culture believes that salvation is through self-discipline, whereas a therapeutic culture believes that salvation is through self-discovery. That's a pretty interesting way of putting it. I thought it was insightful. She says that's the battle. Is it salvation through self-discipline or is it salvation through self-discovery? The therapeutic culture, she says, leads to people continually feeling sorry for themselves, feeling like victims, feeling like nobody really has a whole lot of control over what's going on in their lives, whereas the moral culture says, hey, get a life, suck it in, you see, get out, get a job, stop belly aching, and she says basically that we have a moral culture and we stem the tide, the movement to our therapeutic culture, things are going to fall apart. Then another person on the other, very much on the other side of things, a lady named Camille Paglia, I don't even know if I'm, okay, she wrote vamps and tramps and sexual, a lot of things, and she's a, you would call her a, well, she says I'm a pagan, and she says that there's really two forces in every society, and they're at war. She calls them the Apollonian impulse and the Dionysian impulse, and she essentially says, the Apollonian impulse says, you are your duties, that's who you are, whereas the Dionysian impulse says, you are your desires. The Apollonian says, you must do what is right, find your duties and do them, and that's how you will find fulfillment, and the Dionysian says, find your passions, you know, climb every mountain, ford every stream, follow every rainbow, until you find your dream, and get there, and that's who you are, and that's really what you're going to do. And she says, she's a pagan. Pagans are the Dionysians. Now, it's interesting, that's exactly what Heather Higgins says, and she says, these are the two things that are going on. Does the gospel produce a moral culture or a therapeutic culture? Be careful. The gospel doesn't, it does not produce either. And the gospel does not produce something in the middle either. And this is the reason why we have to be so doggone careful not to ally ourselves with the people who simply say, we've got to get back to the more moral culture. We've got to get back to the conservative culture. We've got to get back, you know, when men were men and women were women, and we knew our duties, and everybody knew their place. We can't do that. The third person I was talking about was that C.S. Lewis has written an essay called The Necessity of Chivalry. I've never, it's a very hard thing to find, actually. I found it in a little booklet of his essays that I found in England, and it's not printed here, so I'm sure it's printed somewhere. I wouldn't even know what compendium to tell you. But in it, he says, very interestingly enough, and this is, I think, very appropriate to say at a men's retreat, the only thing he ever said much about masculinity was, that when he studied, and he would know because he was a professor of medieval literature, when he studied the medieval ideal of the night, he says that this was a unique view of manhood that no other culture, no other time even, has ever produced. And he quotes a place where it talks about St. Lancelot, pardon me, Sir Lancelot in, well, Sir Lancelot in Mort the Arthur, you know, the death of Arthur. And there's this place where the writer says, Lancelot was the sternest knight that ever pulled a spear out of a breast, and the meekest knight who ever sat in a hall eating with ladies. And, you know, Lewis says that was the ideal. The ideal was that a knight was someone of poetry, of music, and who could relate to women. Someone who cried. Someone who had good relationships with women. But on the other hand, a knight was also somebody who was a man of blood and steel and had no problem lopping off a limb when necessary. Okay? And he says, now here's what's so interesting. He says, this ideal was a uniquely Christian ideal. people were not supposed to be fierce to the nth degree, pardon me, he says that Christian night was not a halfway between fierceness and meekness, but he was fierce to the nth degree and meek to the nth degree at the same time. Now in the rest of the article, I don't know, I can see why it never got out, I think it would be very offensive to a lot of people, he says basically, he says without the gospel you cannot keep fierceness and meekness together, you'll either be a liberal or a conservative. Now see this is what I mean by it would probably be offensive to people, he says you're either going to be a dove, you're either going to be a whiner, you're either going to be a victim person, you're either going to be a liberal or else you're going to be a hawk, you're going to be, you know, suck it up, get a job, you're going to be a conservative, you're going to be one or the other. In fact, he goes so far as to actually say that he sees the histories of civilization as starting out conservative and going liberal and then falling apart. And he says, but why do they go liberal? He says because the conservatives oppress people. The conservatives are, if you don't fit into their mold, if you don't fit into, they do put people down. They do make people feel like I can't share if I'm weak. On the other hand, so what happens is liberalism comes as a response to that. And then everything falls apart. And he says that's been the history of humanity. You can't keep it together. It can't be kept together. Just the idea that we as Christians now are supposed to march along with people, and by the way, this is not a tirade against the Christian right at all. I hope you see that I'm not saying that therefore we ought to be centrists in our politics. I just, as Lewis says, this isn't on the spectrum. It's off the spectrum. It's not on the continuum. It's not halfway between. It's something else. It's something different. So, for example, does, do Christians believe in the moral society or a therapeutic society? Neither are both. See, on the one hand, Christians know, we agree with the moral society in that we believe there's a transcendent moral order and people are responsible to it. We also believe, with a therapeutic society, that people are blind. See, if you believe you're a sinner saved by grace, you look out at those people who are living the lives they're living, the broken lives and the rebellious lives, and we don't say what the moralists would say, and that is, you've got everything that I've got. Why can't you see the truth? You fools. Do something. Suck it in. A Christian who's saved by grace looks out and says, these people are blind. The only difference between them and me is I have grace. Period. And therefore, like the therapeutic society, like the therapeuticists, okay, the moralists and the therapeuticists, not the therapists, but the therapeuticists, the therapeuticists says, people are bound. They're blind. They need intervention. We know that. But, see, unlike the therapeuticists, we believe that there is a need for self-discovery, but the first thing you have to discover is that you're a wretch, you're a sinner, you're lost. And only then will you find your value. The moralists don't think self-discovery is important. They say, come on, suck it in. Get it together. Let's go do it. And that's the reason why neither conservatism nor liberalism is in line with the gospel. And it means we have to get out there and we have to say, what does it mean to be in line with the gospel in, say, racial politics? What does it mean to be in line with the gospel toward the poor? Let me give you some examples. Conservatives despise the poor. So do liberals, really. Christians have a whole different attitude toward the poor. Conservatives despise the poor. Why? Because in their worldview, the poor are responsible for what they've done. Ah, but the liberals despise the poor because they're helpless victims and they can't do a doggone thing. We have to fix them. They don't trust the poor. That's the reason why, rightly so, conservatives, they criticize liberal social programs helping the poor, noticing that almost no money goes to the poor at all. It all goes into the helpers of the poor, you see. Right. All the money for the poor goes to the helpers of the poor and doesn't go to the poor. They don't trust the poor. But you see, why is it the Bible is continually saying that the gospel is for the poor, that the common people hear God gladly? And here's the reason why. Middle class people, we, because we have a self-justifying heart, we believe that we are where we are because we worked hard. But poor people know that privilege, in a sense, poor people know that whatever you are is because of privilege. that. Middle class people want to believe that I am where I am strictly because I've worked hard. Poor people realize that it's not as simple as that. When the gospel comes to poor people, the gospel says you're sinners and everybody's a sinner and nobody's anything unless they accept grace. The poor understand that. They jump up with it. They do it. This is the reason why Jesus could say to the Pharisees that, yes, of course, it's wrong to be a moralist. It's wrong to be a conservative. It's wrong to be a liberal, on the other hand. He said the prostitutes and the pimps get into the kingdom of God before you. And that doesn't mean the prostitutes and the pimps are okay just because they're prostitutes and pimps. What he's trying to say is they will understand the gospel better when it comes to them. They tend to understand the gospel better when it comes to them. Christians are people, when they see the poor, know that there is no difference between themselves and the poor in God's eyes. But, intellectually we know it, but do we act in line with it? See, therefore, Christians would move out to really partner with the poor. Christians would move out. I'll tell you something else. I've got a set of, there's a number of ladies in our church who've become Christians who we call the Chanel suits. They're well off. They've had pretty privileged lives. And some of them steal away and they go to Brooklyn Tabernacle, which is a largely black church in the middle of Brooklyn because the worship is great. And they get to know some of the people there. And one of the things I was saying to my wife the other day was, I was saying, you know, it's amazing. Liberal people may pity the poor, but there's no way they would ever, ever, ever think that they could learn anything from a poor person unless they were Christians and the poor were Christians. Then you can sit down and say, these people can pray better than me. These people trust God better than me. These people understand grace better than me. Unless you're a Christian, you won't despise the poor. You'll despise them as a liberal or you'll despise them as a conservative, but you will despise the poor. You won't care. Let me give you another example. When you move out into the public arena, there's a lot of talk about how do we move out in the public arena. And the liberals say, you move out in the public arena and you leave your religion behind. When you get out of the public arena, religion's for the private world. Conservatives are saying, when we get out into the arena, we bring our Christianity with us because we have the right to operate out here as Christians. But not too long ago, I read an interesting article in First Things magazine by Wolfhard Pannenberg. It's nice for me. I don't read many of his things because my German's pretty bad. But anyway, he had a very interesting article and it was very simple. He's German and he's a theologian. He says, you want to know why Christians have been kicked out essentially of the public realm all through Europe? It's because when Christians were in power, all we had were wars. Because when Christians got into power, they said, we're better than other people and we're going to impose our views on you. In other words, there was no sense of grace from what I can tell. There's no sense that since I'm a sinner saved by grace, therefore people who differ with me, though they may not be saved. I've got things to learn from them. You see, they didn't move out into the world for the world. And Pannenberg says, he says, Europeans are never going to let Christians back into power because of the way in which they abuse power. We had the Hundred Years' War. We had the Inquisition. We had all these things. And just because you can't say, well, that was the Catholic Church, the Protestants, they had their Inquisitions. Now, what that means is a Christian moves out into the political realm, and I've recently had to do this in a couple of cases, to, if a Christian says, I want to come out into the political realm with my faith, but you have to come out saying, you have a right not to trust us. We don't deserve it. In the past, when Christians have come in as Christians, they have come in with no sense of the gospel, but only with a sense of superiority. And as a result, they have really put other people down. When Christians were ostensibly in power, there was a tremendous amount of institutional racism. There was a tremendous, these things happen. Now, I can't just walk back out saying, we're Christians, we're here, you're not going to push us around. What do you do? You come out and you say, we want to serve the common good. And until we do a pretty good job, please let us do it as Christians, but until then, you don't have to trust us. See, that's a whole different attitude. Nobody's talking like that. That's the way you go out with the gospel. It affects everything. I'm going to keep, I'm just going to go until 11. I have a couple more. For example, Christianity lifts you out of your culture a little bit. One of the things that Westminster was so many of my classes had a lot of Korean folks in them and a lot of Anglo folks in them. And Korean and Anglo approaches to authority are very different. Have you noticed that? And you see, very often what will happen is the Eastern approach to authority is you obey. I would call, I say, in a sense, it's really what Heather Higgins would call the moralistic approach. I obey, and that's my way of knowing I'm a good person because I'm fitting in. On the other hand, the therapeutic approach to authority is to deny that it should be there at all. My middle child does this to me all the time. My middle son says, Dad, I will obey you as long as you show me why I should. I'll be happy to obey you, but give me one good reason why this is a good thing to do. Just show me what sense it makes. It makes no sense to me, but I'll obey you if you show me why. And I'll say, but dear, if you obey me because I've shown you why, then you're just agreeing with me. You're not obeying. See? You're just, no, what you're really saying is, Dad, I am sitting here on the throne of my life, and I will receive your application. I will give a great consideration as to whether I'll obey you or not. I say, well, if you're giving great consideration, you're not obeying at all. So you're just deciding whether or not it makes it practical. And see, the therapeutic society says there's no such thing as authority at all. Well, when you become a Christian, it has to pull you out of your Confucian-based culture, and it also has to pull you somewhat out of your Western individualistic culture because both of them have different kinds of idols. Both of them have different kinds of ways. Martin Luther says that every single culture has its own set of idols so that you can redeem yourself without Jesus. You look carefully in the preface, and there's a great place where he says, he says, in every nation and every culture, every nation and every culture will give you some ways to redeem yourself without Jesus. A Christian looks at every culture and says, every culture, therefore, is sinful. But on the other hand, I would never look at anybody else's culture as inferior to mine because my culture is superior, too. It means that you have a very different attitude when you get on out there. Whenever you hear all these people saying how terrible all these battles are over how we write history now, have you been reading about that? How do we write history now? Are we going to let people know about how the oppressors have oppressed the minorities? A Christian approach to history would be, instead of a conservative approach, which is to say that the winners were fine, they didn't hurt anybody, and the liberal approach that says the winners are the wicked people. A Christian approach to probably writing history would be to say, let's see how every culture needs, well, grace. You could write a book without being a Christian and say, let me get the gospel in here, but you could write it in line with the gospel. You can write it in line with the gospel. Now, I mean, I didn't get a chance. Let me just read these things down because when you go into, this is what I want you to do when you get into your small groups. If you're in line with the gospel, it means you are different than the moralist or the therapeuticist, the liberal, you know, the conservative liberal in race, your approach to race, right? In other words, the conservative sees your culture is superior. The liberal says all cultures are relative. And, you know, that's one of the, the Christian says, all cultures, he says, when I become a Christian, it relativizes ethnicity as the main component of my identity. It's no longer the main component of my identity, which means if I'm being discriminated against, it's not the end of the world. And it also means, on the other hand, I won't discriminate against anybody. But I don't need to. You see? A very, very, very different approach. A moralist's approach to physical pleasure is almost to be afraid of it. The liberal approach is that this is what, this is meaning in life, is to indulge. A Christian, and I guess this is how I need to, I need to conclude. A Christian's attitude toward work is so radically different. I've been reading Jonathan Edwards on this, and he has a very profound work called The Nature of True Virtue. And this is what he says. He says, if you're trying, and this is very familiar to people in the New Life Network, but let me show you how it applies here. He says, if you are not a Christian, if you don't believe the gospel, then you will be trying to use your work, you'll be trying to use your relationships, you'll be trying to use your politics as a way of justifying yourself. You'll be trying to say, I'm working so that I can feel good about myself, or I'm trying to say, I'm working so that I can feel good about myself. become a Christian, you say, it's in Christ, Christ is my righteousness, I don't have to make my work, I don't have to make my relationships, I don't have to make my politics my righteousness. I'm already accepted. Now, therefore, Edward says, until you not only become a Christian, but until you think the gospel out in every realm, you never do work, work is never about work, work is about you, about your identity, about your, you're never doing work for its own sake, you never delight in the work for the sake of the work. It's a means to an end, only. It's a means that you can have a name for yourself, you see. You never have even a relationship with people. You never love people for themselves. You love the people that you want affirmation and approval from, because you've got to have it. And you avoid people. The relationships don't build you up. You never work for its own, you never work just for the delight of work. You never, you never actually serve your neighbor for the delight of who they are. You never love anybody for their own sake. And that's the reason why Spurgeon has this great story about the gardener and the carrot. And you know that one? He tells a story. He says, there was a gardener who grew the biggest carrot he'd ever grown. And he came to the king and says, King, this is the greatest carrot I ever have grown, ever will grow. And because I love you so much and admire you so much, I want to give this to you as a token of my esteem. And the king said, thank you. Well done, good and faithful servant. You are a good man. And I would like to give you, I'd like to double the size of your garden. I want to give you some land that I own right next to your garden. And he went home rejoicing. But a nobleman was nearby and he heard this and he says, my, if that's what you get, if you get two acres for a carrot, what would I get if I gave him a bigger gift? So the next day he comes to the king and he says, oh, king, this is the, I raise horses and this is the greatest horse that I ever have raised or ever will raise. I would love to have you have this horse as a token of my esteem. But the king read his heart, realized what had happened, realized he'd been overheard from yesterday. And he says, thank you very much. And he just walked away with it. And the nobleman, the nobleman's jaw drops and he turns around and says, let me explain. The gardener gave me the carrot. You were giving yourself the horse. You were not giving this to me just because you loved me. You were giving this to me. I was a means to an end. You were using me. Now, until you believe the gospel, you use everybody and everything. You've got to, you're not working for the, you're not making shoes for the joy of making shoes. You're not loving this, you're not having a friend for the, for the joy of, for who they are. In a sense, you're not living. You're using everything. Christians go on out there and we can truly delight in nature for what it is. We can truly delight in our work for what it is. We do work just for the joy and delight of doing a good job. We love people just for the joy of who the heck they are. Why? Because of who Jesus is to us, we look out and say, I love you. You are valuable. Move out in the world like that is to think out in terms of the gospel. Now, that was very, very difficult because we are, we, we've been immersed with the world and it's very hard. Peter falls right back into his old racism. You're going to fall back into your authoritarianism or lack of, you know, or your individualism. You're going to fall back into your liberalism or your conservatism unless you think it out. My suggestion is when you get into your groups that you choose one or two areas. It could be anything. You could say, here's, here's some possibilities. Your attitude toward money and possessions. Another one would just be your attitude toward your very career. Are you bored with it? Do you like doing it? You know, why are you working? Think about that. Why are you working? Is, is your attitude toward your work in line with the gospel? Is your attitude toward the upcoming election in line with the gospel? Are you in, are you totally indifferent to it? Or are you ready? Are you ready to commit suicide if it goes wrong? Think about that. Both of those approaches would be utterly, think about how those would be absolutely out of line with the gospel. Either of those. Huh? Let me see. Okay, let me close in prayer. Fathers, we, we, we, uh, we're going to move out and we're going to do, uh, we're going to seek to live in the gospel and move out into the world of integrity. And in some ways we were just being very impressionistic this morning. Uh, is, this is not really a very detailed game plan, a step-by-step how to, but rather it gives us insights. It gives us a gist. And I pray, Lord, that, uh, by your Holy Spirit, uh, the men in this room will have been getting insights from you and your Holy Spirit as to how this. here, and I can't apply to all of them. You're going to have to do that. So I pray that you would allow these men, as they break into groups, to look at their work, to look at their relationships in their neighborhood, to look at their attitude toward money and ask, is it the way in which I am living in the world in line with the gospel? How is it? How is it not? We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
