TITLE: Love Beyond The World
SCRIPTURE: John 17:20-26
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Christian Living and Obedience Forgiveness
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/love-beyond-the-world/

============================================================

I'd like us to listen to John chapter 17, the verses 20 through 26. The end of Jesus' prayer to his Father just before he's about to die. John 17, 20 to 26. My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message, that all of them may be one, Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. They may also be in us, that the world may be, they may believe that you have sent me. I have given them the glory that you gave me, that they may be one as we are one. I in them and you in me. May they be brought to complete unity, to let the world know that you sent me and have loved them, even as you have loved me. Father, I want those you have given me to be with me where I am and to see my glory, the glory you have given me because you loved me before the creation of the world. Righteous Father, though the world does not know you, I have known you and they know that you have sent me. I have made you known to them and will continue to make you known in order that the love you have for me may be in them and that I myself may be in them. This is God's word. We've been looking for a while at the fact that Jesus has said that he sanctified, that we might be made sanctified, which means he has separated himself, he has actually put his own interests aside, he's supplemented his interests for our interests, he is actually living no longer for himself, which is one of the most staggering teachings and structures of thought in the scripture in verse 19. He has sanctified himself, he is not living for himself, everything he does is for us, to get us and make us great. Now, the four things that he's been asking for to come into our lives have been holiness, mission, truth, and today, the last one, oneness, love, unity. And if you look at the, you know, somebody has asked me, well, maybe nobody's asked me, but some of you have wondered, boy, you've read over and over and over again this whole passage. Why? Not just, you know, four verses, and then the next four verses, and the next four verses. Why is it every week we read the same thing? Because these four things are completely intertwined. Jesus will not bring one of these things into your life without all of them. He does not work one of them apart from the other. That's the reason why they're intertwined. That's the reason why here he's saying, I want to give them my truth, reveal my name to them, that they may be one, and so forth. See, look, he says he's going to make you holy. We all want that. Wholeness. There's a place where the psalmist, where David says, unite my heart to fear thy name. There he's expressing something we all understand. We're not whole. We're fragmented. We want one thing, but then we do another. We aim for one thing, but then we come through with another. We feel conflicting impulses within us. We're not whole. We want to be whole. We want to have peace. We want to be integrated selves. And that's what Jesus says he's after. But then he also says we're after mission. He wants us to have a mission. And one of the great principles of the Christian life is, if you want to be holy, and you live to be whole and happy, you'll never be whole and happy. You have to want something more than wholeness and happiness in order to have wholeness and happiness. It's never something you can get directly, but instead you have to live for God. You have to have a mission. You have to live to deal with the brokenness of the world. The best way for you to become whole, the Bible is saying, is not for you to try to become whole, but to try to work for the wholeness of the broken world, to put a higher cause than your own happiness as your number one priority. So Jesus says, I want them to be part of my mission as I'm moving out through the world. And they'll have the sense of direction and purpose, a feeling that they make a difference. We look at that. Then thirdly, he says, I want to give them truth. Truth. Bedrock. I want to give them something that they know won't let them down. Something they can build their lives on. Something they can sacrifice for and die for. I want them to have some principles that they can be sure of to guide their lives. We all need these things. Holiness. Wholeness of heart. Mission in life. Bedrock truth to build your life on. But now Jesus says the fourth and the final thing he asks for, I pray that they be with you. love for me would be love between them. That our love would be within them and so forth. And you know what the message is? And this is the basic message I'm trying to get across and the basic message of this part of the text. Jesus will not give you holiness, mission in life, truth, apart from community. They all work together. They interpenetrate. Let me put it this way. Jesus will not give you wholeness of heart and mission in life and truth to build your life on in the privacy of your own car. See, Jesus is not a drive-in movie. Jesus does not fit in with a privatized American culture that says, I want you to do all these things just to me individually. Jesus says, I don't do that unless you're out in a community. I do this in tandem with other people who also I'm working in. I do not give you wholeness of heart and mission in life unless I give it to you as a group. Jesus wouldn't even let us pray, my Father who art in heaven, would he? He said, how do I pray, says the disciples? Tell me how to pray. Jesus says, don't pray my Father who art in heaven. Pray our Father. I don't give you these things in private. And I say, I know that I'm talking to Manhattan. I'm talking to the most privatized culture probably anywhere. I know a lot of the reasons you came here is because you wanted privacy. I know there's so many Manhattan people that talk about the little town they came from. And you know, whenever they talk about it, they talk about all the great things. They say, oh, it's so safe and it's so warm and it's so beautiful there. But everybody knows your business. In other words, relationships there mean that I'm no longer completely my own. I have to be available in the small town, not here. I have to be accountable in the small town, not here. And Jesus comes and says, I will not give you these things that you want. If you think you can come to church and get a bottle of inspiration and go home and use it in the privacy of your own home, you've got another thing coming. He says, you are going to have to be in a community. You are going to have to be committed to the same people who are after the same things that you're after. The people who are in unity with me, you will be in unity with. That's the only way I work. You're going to have to be, gasp, available for people. You're going to have to be accountable to people. You're going to have to find yourself in tandem with people. I'm sorry, says Jesus, to a great degree. Coming to me is the end of your private little world. How else do you get around it? That's the reason why I haven't been able to read one section after another. They're all intertwined. I give you, I'll show you here, I give you, the unity comes from the truth. The fact we all have truth in common. You see how that works? The holiness comes partly because we're having to talk to each other about our faults. There is no holiness gift. There is no mission gift. There is no truth gift. If you think you can come privately, if you think you can just come to church, get your inspiration and go home and not become part of a community, you don't understand the teaching of our Lord. And it might be one of the reasons why you've worked so hard and not seen a whole lot of holiness and a whole lot of mission and a whole lot of truth coming into your life. That's the basic point. Now, however, let's break it down a little bit. The passage tells us a few things about the nature of this love and oneness that Jesus wants for us. And the three things that I'd like to point out is that, number one, Jesus shows that, well, here, let me just show it to you rather than tell you about it. Number one, there's a deep need for oneness and love and unity because of our sin. Jesus clearly says, I pray that they may be one, assuming that if you don't have the saving love of God in your life, you're lonely. The thing that sets you apart, the thing that isolates you, the thing that creates a need for oneness and loneliness is sin. The first thing that happened to Adam and Eve when they were separated from God is they were separated from each other. The first thing, what's it say right away? As soon as they decided they were going to be their own masters, as soon as they decided to be their own God, they became isolated from each other. And you know what? I think it was, I can imagine their first fight, too. Who knows how long they've been happily married, but they began to have their first fight. And I know exactly how the fight started. One of them said to the other, you don't understand. You don't understand. You don't understand. Adam and Eve and says, you need to take charge of your life. God says you're not allowed to eat that fruit. Who's he to tell you? This is your life, you know? You know? You've got to take it back. You've got to be responsible for yourself. If you eat that tree, you will be as God. You'll be your own God. You'll call the shots in your own life. Now, you know, God is a unique individual. And since every one of us, the Bible says by nature, seeks to be our own God, all of us feel that we're unique. Put it this way. One of the first results of sin is that you think you're more unique than you really are. You feel like, I'm special. Nobody knows the trouble I've seen. Nobody knows what I go through. Yes, it looks like I've done this and this, but I'm different. I'm special. I've got unique feelings. I've got unique needs. You don't understand. Nobody understands. Because you see, I'm God. God, I'm unique. The first response to sin is, nobody understands you, you think. Because you're so special. Or somebody put it. Sin creates a relentless, sleepless, unsmiling concentration on the self and its needs that completely isolates you from other people. And this is what happens. And that's the reason why somebody's got to cure that. The first thing that we have to see when Jesus says, I pray that they might be won by you giving them your love, is Jesus is saying that apart from God's love, human community is not ultimately possible. because we all feel we're unique. Until you've been humbled into the dust and realize you're a sinner like everybody else, ultimately there's no real possibility of community. Do you see that? So that's the need for oneness. It comes out of sin and out of a feeling of nobody understands me. The isolation of self-pity. Secondly, the second thing we're taught here, besides that there's no possibility of human community outside of God's love, the second thing we're taught here is that in Christ's love, there's the possibility of such incredible love and unity that the world will be amazed by it. In verse 23, Jesus says something that we should be obsessed to think about. He says, Father, I pray that they might be won even as we are won, that the world might know that you sent me. Now everybody knows that the world doesn't want to believe in Jesus. And every honest skeptic I've ever talked to about Jesus has always admitted that they can't be objective because Jesus is not just an abstract issue. Jesus is somebody who says, I want total control of your life. Now you can't be objective about somebody like that. You know? Somebody comes to you and says, I want you to be my servant. I want you to serve me and me alone for the rest of your life. You don't sit there and say, well, let's kick this around a little bit. What you do is, you either choke that person or you run away from that person or else you give in to that person. There's nothing else to do. You don't sit down and have a seminar. And in the same way, Jesus Christ is not someone that people can be neutral about. There's a bias against his claims. There's a bias against Christianity. It's natural. And yet Jesus says that the love that he can create between Christians, listen, the love that he can create between Christians is of such a nature that it can knock all of that bias flat. It can knock down all the intellectual arguments of the skeptics. He says, if you people, if my people, are one the way I can make you one, nobody will have any arguments against my deity, my incarnation, my message. Now a question comes up, how in the world could the love between Christians be that visible? And the answer is that real love is always visible. It's not a matter of sentiment. It's not a matter of love letters. It's not a matter of heaving breasts, you know, how I love you so much. It's not a matter of just sentiment. If you read the Bible, you'll see there's three things about Christian love and about the unity that we must be able to build in our communities that is so concrete and so visible it staggers and startles the world. You know what those three items are? Here, test yourself. Let's test ourselves. Number one, Christian love is visible because I tried to preach about this, but the early church was characterized not by just love that expressed itself emotionally, but love that expressed itself through possessions and things. In Acts chapter 4, we're told that the early Christians loved each other so much that when one person in the church had a particular need, other people were willing to sell their land, sell their property, and give it until there was no need left. There was radical hospitality. There was radical generosity. My friends, people can see how you spend your money. They can tell if you're a generous person or not. They can tell if you love with your things. They can tell if you love with your energy, with your schedule. They can tell if you put yourself out. The world says be careful who you hang out with. Make sure that you only hang out with people of the same income level so nobody's asking you for money. Make sure that you hang out with people with the same golf handicap and dress size so you don't feel too inferior. Hang out with people who are connected so that they can help you with your agenda in life. Hang out with people who aren't too messed up so they won't always be calling you and talking about their problems. That's what the world says. You know what happens, though? When the bottom falls out of your life, you'll find out there's nobody there for you. You know why? Because all your so-called friends were friends you chose, people you didn't have to invest in. And because you didn't invest anything, now there's a need. Now you've got a need. There's nothing to withdraw. They're not committed to you, and you're not radically committed to them. But the Christians are different. They love with their things. That's why it's visible. Do we? Secondly, Christian love is visible to the world because it's impartial. Impartial. You see, again, the world says birds of a feather flock together. The world says you need to build your relationships on chemistry, on affinity, people that look like you, people that have your same interests, people that you can have fun with, people that also like hiking, people that also like music, people... You know, that's how you base your relationships. The Bible, right here in verse 20, who is Jesus saying he wants to be one? He says, my prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message that they may all be one. Truth is the basis of Christian unity, and that means extremely diverse people suddenly become brothers and sisters. You've seen it. I've seen it. One of the most amazing things that has happened to me in the last two years is that I've had a little chance to travel, and being in New York, I've had much more of a chance to talk to people from other cultures, other classes who are Christians, and it's a shock to realize that the very same truth that is revolutionizing your life is in the center of this other person's life. You can recognize them instantly. You can see a brother. You can see a sister. You know who they are. They know who you are, because you see, Christian unity is based on truth, and if it's true that it's based on truth, if you meet somebody else who is so utterly different in almost every way, but who also says, you know what? If Jesus isn't real, the whole world is just walking off a short plank. You know, if Jesus is real, that means love is real. If Jesus is real, and he's, you know, that person sitting and talking to you, that person is different in every other way. Maybe that person and you are hardly able to communicate in the same language, and yet there is a clear and deep sensation immediately, this is a brother. This is a sister. Because Christian relationships are based on truth, and therefore they're impartial, and the world can see a unity there across those sorts of lines that it sees nowhere else. Thirdly, Christian love is visible to the world because it's forgiving. Have you, you know, there's those simpler life forms that if a leg or some of those little simple teeny animals, if a leg or insects are like this, if a leg comes off or a wing comes off, it grows back. They're self-regenerating. The Bible says that the mark of Christian love and Christian relationships different than other kinds of relationships is they regenerate themselves. When relationships are broken, there's forgiveness. When relationships are broken, there's reconciliation. The Bible is amazingly insistent about this. And this is another place in which, as I said, costly, impartial, and forgiving. This is the third kind of mark of Christian relationships which is really impossible apart from Christ. means when Jesus says, if you don't forgive your brother from the heart, my Father will not forgive you? What do you think Jesus means when he tells us to pray every Sunday, which we do, forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors? Here's the principle. Jesus says, if they're one, then the world will know that you love them. The day, the minute that you say about another Christian, I will not forgive, that minute you're also forcefully denying that God loves you. You see, a Christian says, I was an enemy. How can I feel superior to God, yet he forgave me? How can I grieved Jesus far more than this person grieved me, or better than that? A Christian says, how dare I be a judge when only God has the wisdom to know what this person deserves, who I'm so mad at, and only God has got the right to give this person what they deserve, who I'm so mad at. What's the matter with me? He's not my judge. He's forgiven me. See, you can't think that and be bitter. Bitterness is atheism. Forgive us our debts as we forgive our debtors. And the Bible clearly says right here that if the world doesn't see a oneness, an ability to continually regenerate our broken relationships inside the community, the world has every right to say, they're no different than we are. Jesus never came to them. There you have it. Jesus says there's a visible kind of love and a visible kind of unity, and that's the challenge to us. If we don't have that now, it's our fault, not his. And not only that, the resources are there for a costly love, for an impartial love, and for a forgiving and continually regenerating love. Lastly, finally, we see that this community is impossible apart from God's love, and we see the kind of love that Christ can make possible. Lastly, let me just point out that the only way for us to develop this kind of unity is to go back back to the last phrase of verse 23. There's two words there that if you would just look at them and realize what they mean, you would, you know how the Bible says, many places in the scripture when Moses or Isaiah would get near to the burning bush, they got near to the presence of God, they had to take their shoes off. Why? Because they were at holy ground. If you understand these two little words in verse 23, you'll take your shoes off, because you're in holy ground. At the very top, it says, verse 23, may they be brought to complete unity to let the world know that you sent me and have loved me even as you love them. Even as. This says point blank what I've tried to say is implied all through the scripture, but here it is, right in the face. You're an adopted child of the king if you receive Christ as Savior. It says that in John 1.12. If you receive him as Savior, if you make him your Savior and Lord, you're adopted. Here, it has the audacity to say God's love for his adopted child is no different. It's no less. It's not diminished in any degree behind his love for his only begotten son. And you have got to consider that. What does it mean? Imagine when Jesus came back from the dead and he came to the right hand of the Father. Imagine the welcome. That is exactly how he regards you. You will not be able, absolutely not able, it just makes, it's common sense to realize that you will not be able to love anybody completely until you feel completely loved. Isn't that common sense? You won't be able to love completely until you feel completely loved. What is it going to take for the even as to sink in? It's going to take work. At the Lord's Supper, I want you to try to start right now. Say, Lord, if that was really sinking into me, if I really understood that I was that completely loved, I wouldn't be so angry at all the people in my life that haven't given me the love I think I want. I'll never get it from them. They'll never get it from me. It's only from you. Are you talking like that? A Christian is somebody who says, I'm crowned with dignity and honor. I don't have to wait angrily for other people to do it for me. Think about, isn't it possible the reason that you're so upset today is because you feel like you deserve some honor from somebody, some consideration. You're stewing because you're not seeing that you're already loved even as. You've already been crowned with dignity and honor. God applauds you. God honors you, even as His only begotten Son. I saw a high school that has, the Bronx Science High School has a Holocaust Center. It's a museum dedicated to the Holocaust, the extermination efforts of the Nazis against the Jews. It's a frightening thing and it's a great display because the purpose of the Holocaust Museum is we have to continually rub our nose in what human beings are capable of. Why? Because if we forget, it's so easy to forget and get out of touch with reality. So we have to rub our noses in it. You've got to rub your nose in the cross. That's what this is. Because you see, on the cross, Jesus Christ became a Holocaust for you. And until you see that you are loved even as. You're loved that much. You're loved by the Father even as He loves the Son because of what Jesus did. Unless you rub your nose in it every day, you're going to slip into pride and irritability and into selfishness. You're going to start to feel like nobody understands. Hey, even as is the end of the martyr complex. Even as is the end of feeling like everybody's wronged me. Even as is the end of defensiveness. It's the end of bitterness. You'll never completely love until you know you're loved completely. Are you ready to remind yourself of what you mean to Him? And to commit yourself to creating the kind of visible love and unity that's possible. Because Jesus says, I've sanctified myself that it be possible. Are you ready to do that? Let's begin. Let's pray. Our fathers, we come to the table. Now we ask that, in a sense, yes, in a sense, you'd rub our noses in the fact that you love us. Help us to see how many of our failures, how much of our resentment, how much of our anxiety comes from a simple unwillingness to see that. Help us to see that we're out of touch with reality if, as Christians, we stay bitter. If, as Christians, we stay guilty. Our Father, help us to see you now in the breaking of the bread. We pray it all in Jesus' name. Amen.
