TITLE: Loving and Growing (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 2:12-14
TOPICS: Forgiveness
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/loving-growing-part-1/

============================================================

Good evening. I noticed that there's a lot more room for your coats tonight than usual. Actually, you know, for those of you who are not from this country, from other parts of the world, and maybe you're new to American culture, let me just give you a word of explanation. Super Bowl Sunday and Christmas are the two major religious holidays in our society. Right? And studies have shown that 70% or more of people who come to an evening service on Super Bowl Sunday, I've experienced for years, and for years they had this experience that they were always picked last in gym classes when you were choosing up sides for games and things, and so that's one of your ways of sort of getting revenge on all those people that got chosen first and who aren't here tonight. But, no, I'm glad to see you. By the way, we're looking at 1 John 2, and the passage, it's printed in your bulletin, and it's printed in two parts, and actually I'd like to focus tonight on just the second part. So you see at the bottom of the page, you've been singing, hopefully, at the bottom it says 1 John 2, 9 to 14. Turn over to the top. It starts at verse 12, and I'm just going to read these verses. These four, 12, 13, 14. Just these three verses, and base all our remarks tonight on them. This is, therefore, 1 John 2, verses 12 to 14. I write to you, dear children, because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name. I write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I write to you, dear children, because you have known the Father. I write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one. This is God's word. I just noticed that a lot of you didn't laugh at that joke about not being chosen. I guess it must be true then, right? A lot of you got kind of close to you. Well, you know, that's what preachers do, is they get convicting sometimes and get you mad. But I like to do it from the Bible instead of from the jokes. You know, this is an interruption. If we go through 1 John, if you're reading it through, and we've been going through it verse by verse all since last fall, and you get to these three verses, if you're reading it in your Bible, you'll see, too, that it's broken out in kind of verse form. It's an interruption. It doesn't really fit. It's an excursion. It's a tangent. You see, John has been telling us how you can know you're a Christian. And he starts by telling us that one of the ways you know you're a Christian is that you become like Jesus. You live as Jesus lived. You walk as he walked. Your character reflects his character. You become a holy and righteous person. That's what a Christian is, he says. That's what it means to live a Christian life. And then he goes on, and he says, you also have to love as Jesus loved. In fact, that's the passage we just looked at last week, and you can still see a segment of that in the passage that we didn't really read, but it's still printed. If you claim to be in the light, but you hate your brother, you're still in the darkness. Whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there's nothing in him to make him stumble. And we looked at that some last week. So, you know, John is going along saying this is what it means to live a Christian life. And then all of a sudden he stops. Why? He's a pastor. He's not just a communicator. He cares. He's also an old pastor. Most everyone who studied these documents knows that John was at the end of his life. So he's experienced, and he knows this, that when you start telling people, when you start telling Christians that you ought to live like this, and you ought to live like this, and you ought to live like this, sometimes you can see people's faces falling. And he knows what they're saying. He knows what they're thinking. And he anticipates the problem. He anticipates the question, and he deals with it. And the question is this. How can I keep this up? The Christian life, I'll never keep it up. He anticipates people being very discouraged about the Christian life, looking at themselves and saying, Oh, my word, I could never keep this up. Living like Christ lived, you know, his self-control, his wisdom, his kindness, his love, his integrity, never. And so you're discouraged. And sometimes people get very discouraged about trying to live the Christian life. And people are ready to throw in the towel sometimes, or at least you think about it. be if I didn't have to live this Christian life? This is too hard. So John shows up with these three verses and he sort of says, I write this to you because, see, I write to you because, I write to you because. He's saying, let me tell you why I'm writing this to you. And let me tell you how you can, how you can receive it. And what he's doing here is he's saying, I don't want you to be discouraged and therefore I want you to remember these things. If you forget these things, you'll be discouraged. But you can take what I'm writing to you. You can take what I'm saying to you. It's possible as long as you don't forget these truths. And in these three verses, he's really giving us two arguments. They're very interesting because they're all interlocked and interconnected. Even though he says, I write to you six times, he actually says three things twice. He talks about children, he talks up twice, and he talks about young men twice, and he talks about fathers twice. And he also says, because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name, because you've known him who's from the beginning, and because you've overcome the evil one. And then he actually just repeats those three things again. And this is what he's arguing. This is what he's saying. He's saying, the first argument is, if you're discouraged in the Christian life, if you sometimes feel like throwing in the towel, if you feel like you can't keep it up, if you're discouraged with being a Christian, if you feel it's too hard, you're forgetting these three basic truths. To the degree you forget them, to that degree you'll be discouraged. To the degree that you understand them, to that degree you'll be encouraged. If you are discouraged, if you are feeling, and I know people, I'm always talking to people who are saying, this is too hard to be a Christian. You're forgetting these things. He says, look at them. That's the first argument, these three truths. But then the second argument is very, fairly general. He talks about children, young men, and fathers, which are three stages of human growth. And what he's actually saying is, it's important to keep in mind that this is also the Christian life. The Christian life is a process of spiritual growth. There are stages to the Christian life. You have to realize, I mean, you know, back when I was little growing up, I don't know, they talk about all the time, but when, you know, when mothers were first getting into psychobabble, you know, my mother and that generation, they were really the first generation of mothers to have gotten deluged with psycho stuff for child rearing. And they talked about, she's just going through a phase. Remember? She's just going through a phase. That would be a way for them to comfort themselves. Ah, it's just a phase. In a way, what John is saying is, you have to understand the phases. You have to understand the stages. You have to understand the process. If you don't see the Christian life as a set of stages and as a process, you'll get discouraged. So you see the two basic arguments. One is, if you're discouraged, you're forgetting these truths. Secondly, if you're discouraged, you're forgetting that the Christian life is a process. Now let's take a look at those three truths first, and then let's say at least something about why remembering the process of growth, that that's what Christianity is, remembering that is also an encouragement. In other words, let's see what John says to those of us who, you know, if you're not discouraged right now, you may be, but if you're not discouraged right now, there will be times, there will be times in which you'll feel, I don't want to do this. This is too hard. In fact, if you're thinking about Christianity, if you're looking at it, if you're exploring it, if you know you're probably not a Christian and you're looking at it, the same problem very often comes up. When you see what Christianity entails, you say, I could never do that. So you see, all of us have to deal with this, and let's see what John says to us. First, here's the three truths. Number one, if you're discouraged about being a Christian and you feel like you can't keep it up, the first thing you're forgetting is because your sins have been forgiven on account of his name. Your sins have been forgiven on account of his name. If you're discouraged, you don't feel like you're up to the Christian life, it means you've forgotten that your sins have been forgiven. They have been forgiven. Now, let me put it to you like this. Very often when you ask somebody, do you believe your sins are forgiven? Are you forgiven? People will say, I hope so. I'm praying for it. I'm working for it. I hope so. A lot of people say, well, I did feel forgiven, but I don't feel forgiven now. When they talk like that, when anybody says, I'm looking for forgiveness, I'm hoping for forgiveness, they show they don't understand the essential message of Christianity. A Christian is not somebody who has access to forgiveness only. A Christian is not just somebody who hopes for forgiveness. A Christian is not just somebody who has a good hope of forgiveness. sins have been forgiven. That's what it means to be a Christian, to know you have been. A Christian isn't somebody who's hoping. A Christian is somebody who's got it. Well, how could that be? It's the way it comes. Christians are people who are certain that they are radically and permanently and completely forgiven past tense. They're certain of that. That's the reason why they're not discouraged all the time. People who are saying, I can never keep it up, betray that they believe that keeping it up is what keeps them Christians. And it betrays that they understand forgiveness is something you can always be losing. That's not what it said here. No, not at all. You're forgiven. And why do Christians have this certainty on account of the name? You see, some people will say, I think I'm forgiven because I repented. Now, listen carefully. You'll say, what do you mean? Are you saying you don't have to repent? Of course you have to repent. But now listen, on account of, what does it mean to say on account of? You draw on the account means you draw on the value of it, the value. And when people say, I think I'm forgiven because I've really repented, generally what they mean is because I worked my heart into a certain condition. I felt this great sorrow. And that's why I'm forgiven on account of my repentance. Now, my dear friends, if you think that at any level, you have opened up a terrible can of worms. Because here's what I want to ask you. If you think about it, you'll see why you get discouraged. You'll see why you really aren't sure about your forgiveness. Because everybody knows that they don't repent perfectly. Nobody's perfectly repentant. Nobody repents as much as they should. Nobody is as sorrowful as they should, right? Nobody's heart is as repentant as it should be. So let me ask you a question. How do you know you've repented enough? How do you know your repentance is sincere enough, huh? Full-hearted enough? How do you know you're over the line? And as soon as you start to think, you say, well, I don't know. And of course, your repentance is always impure. Of course, you say, of course, well, I know that. All right, well, how do you know if God is forgiving you because you worked your heart into this condition? How do you know you've made it? How do you know you're over the line? You see, I'm trying to bring out, I'm trying to articulate something that a tremendous number of people who come to church and have been part of Christianity for a long time, that this is essentially how they operate. I'm trying to articulate something to you. It's the reason why you get so discouraged. Because you don't see, I mean, pardon me, because you think that God forgives me because I was repentant enough. And you're looking at the quality of your repentance and the quality of your heart and the quality of your feelings. Well, go ahead, keep looking, and you'll see why you're so anxious. Nobody can be sure that their feelings aren't good enough, are repentant, or maybe I should say bad enough, are repentant enough. You'll always be upset. You'll always be anxious. You'll never be sure. Okay, well, somebody says, no, no, no, no. I am sure that I'm forgiven on account of God's love. Now, that sounds better. And you say, well, what does that mean? Well, I just believe God's a loving God, people say. I believe I'm forgiven because I just believe that God is a very loving God, that he just loves everyone, that he's not a punishing God. And I say, okay, that sounds better, but it's not. And there'll still be anxiety in your life, and you'll still get discouraged. Because listen, let's think again. Do you really mean to say that you're sure of your forgiveness because God loves everybody? He loves everybody? He forgives all sins? All? I mean, does he really look down from heaven and say, well, Adolf, yeah, you killed 20 million people, but I love everybody. Well, you say, I guess, no, wait, I mean, some people he couldn't just forgive. I mean, and some sins, of course. Oh, okay, so God draws a line. You're saying that God isn't going to just, I mean, if God is a holy God, if God is a good God, obviously he just can't wink at everything. Ah, so now all of a sudden you're saying, well, of course he couldn't just love everybody. So how do you know you're over the line? How do you know? See, as soon as you say, I am forgiven on account that God just loves people, or I'm forgiven on account of my having really repented, you inject into your life all this uncertainty. And you may be going along pretty good, but when you fail, when you get into a situation where you're with somebody who you really, it's very hard to love. You know, like an infant. When you get into a situation where it's very hard to be patient, like in a very hard job situation, and you find yourself, your patience running out, and you find yourself blowing up at people. you suddenly, all of a sudden, you feel like the Christian life is too hard. You know why? You're all discouraged because all along you thought you were forgiven on account of either your performance or your repentance, or maybe some general understanding of God's love. That's not how Christians operate. Here's why. Why are Christians certain? What does a Christian say? Why is a Christian not always filled with fears and doubts? Because a Christian says, I have been forgiven on account of his name. On the account of his name. His name refers to everything he is and everything he does. I mean, you see that in the Bible all the time. When somebody's character changes, their name changes, remember? You know, Abram becomes Abraham, Saul becomes Paul, and all that. I don't want to go into that. But the point is, you don't believe you're forgiven on account of your repentance, and you don't believe you're forgiven on account of some nebulous and general love of God. You believe you're forgiven. You know you have been forgiven on the value of what he has done. He died the death you should have died. He lives the life you should have lived. Just a few verses up higher in the chapter, we didn't print them here, but chapter 2, verse 1 and 2. If you sin, you have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins. So now, how do you know you're forgiven? Don't you see? Your repentance receives forgiveness, but it doesn't merit it. That's very important to understand. Of course, repentance receives it. I flick on the light, and the light comes on. Well, if I didn't flick on the light, the light wouldn't come on. But would you say that the switch is the power to light the light? Absolutely not. The switch has no power of its own. The switch has no electrical virtue. It has no electrical value. It just receives. How much repentance do you need? Any repentance at all. How much faith do you need? Just enough to grab them. Don't you see? If you look at yourself, you're always going to be wondering. And a lot of Christians who are kind of swimming along kind of nicely and feel like, well, I'm pretty good, and you're not discouraged about their Christian life, because you're performing pretty well. And all along, you think you're forgiven because of your repentance, or because of your performance, or because of some nebulous view of God, and then you start to fall down. You say, I can't handle it, because all along you've been looking to yourself anyway. You didn't realize you were forgiven. You have been forgiven. Have been on account of the name. On account of the name. I'll go so far as to say, to be uncertain of your forgiveness. Listen, Christians. To be uncertain of your forgiveness is a sin. You know why? It seems very humble. But what you're really saying is, I don't want bleeding charity. I want to earn it. What you're really doing, when you're uncertain about your sins, is you're devaluing the name. You're devaluing the merit and the power of what Jesus Christ has done for you. Do you understand the power of the name? Do you understand the greatness of the name? If you do, you're not going to be discouraged when you fall down. You're not going to look at the Christian life and say, I'll never be able to do that. You were baptized into the name. You see? You received him, and you were brought into the name, and you'll be bound in shallows and miseries as long as you forget that. Okay? That's the first thing. Second thing. Second basic truth. What does he say? Let's jump down, actually. Young man, because you have overcome the evil one. Now, you know, when he says it the second time, go all the way down to the bottom of verse 14. He says, because you are strong, the word of God lives in you, and you have overcome the evil one. The word of God lives in you. Wow. What's that? All right. Here's the second thing. You say, the word of God? You know, isn't the word of God the scriptures? Well, yeah, that's the written word of God. But there is a number of places in the Bible where it uses the term word of God and the Holy Spirit interchangeably. In Ephesians 5, 21, actually, Ephesians 5, 18, and following, it says, be filled with the spirit, and all these great things will happen. You will make melody in your heart to the Lord. You will do all things with thanksgiving. If you go over into the exact parallel passage in Colossians chapter 3, around verse 16, it says, you are filled with the word of God. It dwells in you richly. And then it says, and as a result of that, you'll sing and make melody in your heart to the Lord, and you'll do all things with thanks. The same effects come from a cause. In one book, it's called having the spirit of God abide in you, and the other one, it has the word of God abide in you. What? In John 3, it says, you're born from above by the spirit. But in 1 Peter, you're born from above. here in the evening service, it says you're born again by an imperishable seed, by the Word of God. Now what this is talking about is simply this. It's just two ways of talking about the same thing. The Spirit of God is the Spirit of truth. And therefore, the Spirit comes into your life, it's actually bringing the truth of God as a vitality. It's bringing the truth of God as a kind of spiritual substance. 2 Peter chapter 1 verse 4 says, we are partakers of the divine nature. Now I don't want to go on too long about this one, but you see why John is bringing it in? When Jesus says, the Comforter will come and live with you. When Peter says, you are born again by an imperishable seed, the Word of God. When Peter says, you are partakers of the divine nature. When John says, the Word of God abides in you. What it's saying is, there is a power, God's very lifeblood, His very nature, the truth somehow of His heart, His blood in some way. Spiritual blood. Or, put it another way, His spiritual DNA gets implanted in the root of your soul when you become a Christian. That's what it means to be born again. That's what it means to be regenerated. In comes this vitality. In comes this power. And you know what it is? It's the nature of God. Because He's loving, it will turn you loving, even if you're grumpy. Because He's truthful, it will make you truthful, even if you have no integrity. If, because it is absolutely controlled, you see, it's completely under the control of the righteousness of God. It'll give you self-control. What's planted in your heart is the very lifeblood of God, His nature, His substance. The Word of God abides in you. Therefore, you are strong. This says, if you get discouraged about the Christian life, you have no idea of the great thing that's come to live inside you. If you're discouraged about living the Christian life, you have no idea what potential you've got, what's incipient within you. It's in seed form, yeah. But there's a, the holiness of God, the truth of God has come into you, and in a sense, it's like an acid. It eats up sin. As it spreads through your life, as it grows out through your life, it changes anything it touches into its own image. It's inevitable, this power, that you will overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil. That's what, that's what the Bible says. Now, John says, and let me apply this, are there things in your life that you've tried to overcome, and you've tried for quite a while, and maybe you've been Christian for quite a while, and you finally said, I'll never change. You know, it's making you miserable, or at least it's making you unhappy. It's making other people around you miserable, or at least it's making them unhappy. And you said, I can't change. Do you know what you've done? Just as a person who's always nervous and anxious, uncertain about their forgiveness, is devaluing the work of Jesus Christ on the cross. Anybody who gives up on themselves, anybody who says, I can never change that. I want to change that, but I can never change that. You are also guilty of forgetting, at best, but the worst way to put it is, of devaluing the glorious thing that's within you. Now, listen, if you're thinking about becoming a Christian, if you're trying to figure out what Christianity is, look at this. Christianity is not hoping for forgiveness, it's having it. But now here, Christianity is not just a function of deciding to do things. Here's a code, here's a regimen, here's a bunch of things, and I pick them up and I do them. Oh no, oh no. You know what it means to be a Christian? Something from outside has come into you, and it's messing with your insides. It's an outside force. It's intervening. The way you know you're a Christian is your life gets messy, because it is not anymore just a function of your power and your planning. Your life is no longer a function of just what you have decided to do. Something's come in from the outside. Something that you can't completely control that's coming in and remaking you and changing you, and you can tell that's what a Christian is. And for you to say, I can't change, is to just ignore that. You've forgotten it. See? You are strong. You've forgotten that. Now, the third thing you've got to know, and I'm going to be real brief on this one. Next week, I'll get back to the stages, and maybe we can talk some more. The third thing is, I write to you, fathers, because you have known him who is from the beginning. And this is the third thing that you have to keep in mind if you're going to keep from being discouraged about the Christian life. If you're going to go for the long haul, you've got to remember, we have three things. One is your position. You're totally forgiven. One is your power. don't just get a position and you don't just get a power, you get a person. What makes a Christian a Christian is not that you know about God, but you know Him. And all this power and all this purity that we've been talking about, in the Christian life, it mediated through personal knowing. In other words, God doesn't relate to us like electricity relates to a light bulb, but God relates to us as a spouse relates to a spouse or a parent to a child. All this great power, all this great cleansing, all the stuff we've been talking about here tonight is only released in personal dealing, in listening and talking and loving and sharing and prayer and in Bible study. Bible study is how you listen. Prayer is how you talk. And if you're discouraged, it's because you have not been cultivating what we've been talking about actually ever since the fall because 1 John's full of it. You haven't been cultivating the personal communion with God. If your Christianity is all just trying to do things and you can't tell me the last time you sat down and prayed and felt you were actually talking with Him and you felt His presence and the immediacy of His presence and you felt His love shed abroad in your heart and you poured yourself out and you came out feeling known and knowing, of course you're discouraged. Okay, now last, last. We said if you remember those three things, your sins are forgiven, you're strong through the Word of God abiding in you, coming into you, and that you have access to the personal knowledge of God, you won't be discouraged. And on the other hand, he says, the other thing that can make you discouraged, and this is what I want to talk about in more detail next week, but I want to say something general about how this is an encouragement. He says, be encouraged, O discouraged people, when you consider that Christianity has stages. Stages. You start out as children. And children, look, a child comes in, middle of the night, 3 a.m., wakes you up and grabs you. Mommy, don't you know that I have a sore throat and I can't sleep? Get up and do something. That's how five-year-olds talk. I don't know if you've never, you know, you were a five-year-old, you've repressed it, I'm sure, but if you don't have any, that's how they talk. What does mommy do? Mommy gets up. Mommy deals with your childishness, okay, because you have a sore throat. I'm not going to let the fever go on up. I have to find out. Oh my gosh, honey, you do have a fever. In the boat, in Luke 8, Jesus is asleep in the storm, and the disciples come in, and how do they pray to him? I just love this. We talked about this in the morning service about three weeks ago. The disciples come in, and how do they pray to Jesus? Master, don't you care that we're going to drown? Don't you care? They're panicking, and they're accusing him of not caring, and so what does Jesus do? First of all, he tells them, oh, ye of little faith. That's true. That's a lousy prayer. Try that sometime, okay? You know, you sit down and say, God, how can you do this to me? You're making, well, you know, people do pray that way. Job prayed that way. Maybe you have. That's not a real good prayer. It's a lousy prayer, and it's little faith, and Jesus called it what it was. You're panicking. You're accusing me. You know, and then what did he do? He deals with their childishness. He responds to little faith. You know, what's the mommy do? Does she say, oh, you're running about 105 fever, but because you have been so childish, I'm not dealing with you. Go to bed. No. Mommy gets up. Mommy deals with the childishness. Okay, you're a child. I love you. I will work with what you've got. You didn't ask right. You didn't do well. You're inconvenient. You're rude and self-absorbed. You're a child, but I love you, and look at what Jesus does in the boat. Little faith, lousy faith, poor prayer, and then he says, peace be still. In other words, he responds to the faith. Of course, you fall down. Of course, you ought to get discouraged sometimes. You say, oh my gosh, look at this. Look how immature I am. Look at how I live. How can, don't you see? God knows you're a child. God knows it's a process. God knows, and he works with you. He will never ignore your little tap, tap, tap at his door. Doesn't matter. Put your hand, your little hand, in his great big hand, and he'll lead you to maturity, to the fullness of the stature of Christ. Be encouraged. It's a process, and he knows. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. Be encouraged. and your little hand in his great big hand and he'll lead you to maturity to the fullness of the stature of christ be encouraged it's a process and he knows he knows that it takes time he'll work with you even in your maturity he understands my dear children you see don't be discouraged you have forgiveness on account of his name let's pray father we thank you that it's possible for us to have this encouragement we thank you that john stopped uh and didn't move on uh too quickly to the rest of his subject but he took this little tangent and he encouraged us father we thank you that you are that kind of god that you work with our childishness that you uh work with us in spite of our little faith and our poor faith we thank you that you have forgiven us you've given us your power and you've given us access to your very presence and heart we ask that you would help us to appropriate these great truths more uh completely so that we might not be discouraged and we ask that you would uh mediate through your holy spirit and appropriate all these uh truths to us so we might have courage for this coming week through jesus in his name we pray amen amen you
