TITLE: Loving One Another
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 2:3-11
TOPICS: God's Love
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/loving-one-another/

============================================================

We're returning to our moving through, we were doing before the Christmas holidays and the breaks and all that, we were moving through the first epistle of John. We're looking at it in series, we're looking at it verse by verse. And I'd like to read to you the passage where we had been before we broke off, and let me read it to you and give you a kind of recap of where we were and where we are in the book. Start here, pardon me, it's 1 John chapter 2, verses 3 to 11, and let me just read verses 3, 4, 5, and 6, comment, and then move into the nub of what we're going to be looking at tonight. Verse 3, we know that we have come to know him if we obey his commands. The man who says, I know him, but does not do what he commands, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But if anyone obeys his word, God's love is truly made complete in him. This is how we know we're in him. Whoever claims to live in him must walk as Jesus did. Now, stop here for a second. When we got to verse 3, we said we've got an incredible claim here. Verse 3, it says, we know that we have come to know him. Now, this is John saying it's possible in the Christian life, it's possible to be sure, to have an inward certainty, to be sure that you belong to him, that you belong to the great God of the universe, that you're his, that you're going to be going to live with him. It's possible to be sure that you're a Christian. Then, starting here at verse 3, we said, stretching out through the rest of the chapter, John lays down three great tests. Three great observable, visible tests by which you can judge whether you really do know him. See, it's possible to know that we know him. And then he goes on, and he shows us these three tests. Now, we looked, I mentioned these before, I'll mention them again, and we're going through them in pieces. Verse 4 to 6, he gives us what we call the behavioral test. And the behavioral test means your character will be changing. There will be changes in the way in which you live. You can say, oh, I'm a Christian, but if from year to year to year, there's no changes. You're not getting less irritable. You're not getting less worried. You're not getting less afraid. You're not getting less selfish. You're not becoming more compassionate. You're not getting more self-controlled. You're not changing. If you don't see your character changing, you see, if you don't see yourself walking more and more like Jesus walked, then you're kidding yourself. See, this is one observable test. If you're a real Christian, there's changes. There's growth. There's progress in the way in which you really are. And if you don't know whether those changes are there, ask somebody that you really know, somebody that you live with, and that's the first test. The second test starts here at verse 7, and we're going to look at that in just one second. The second test is love. You see, dear friends, I'm not writing you a new command. If anyone says to be in the light but hates his brother, he's not in the light. Love, love in our relationships is the second great sign that you're a Christian. And the third sign that you're a Christian is what we call, we have the behavioral test and the relational test, and you have the doctrinal test. And that doesn't come along until later in the chapter, in which we see that a Christian is someone who understands that Jesus Christ is Savior, not just an example, that we're saved through what he has done for us. So there's a doctrinal test, there's a relational test, there's a behavioral test. Now, what we're going to get into tonight is this, the relational test of Christianity. Verse 7, let me read it. Dear friends, I am not writing you a new command, but an old one, which you have had since the beginning. This old command is the message you have heard, yet I am writing you a new command. Its truth is seen in him and you, because the darkness is passing and the true light is already shining. Anyone who claims to be in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness. Whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is nothing in him to make him stumble. But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness and walks around in the darkness, and he does not know where he's going, because the darkness has blinded him. This is God's word. Well, there's a lot to say about this, and we have the Lord's Supper tonight, so I suppose if we don't finish, there's always next week. The wonderful advantages of going through a book of the Bible, verse by verse. Let me point out three things that this tells us about love, loving one another. The first thing it tells us is that there are possibilities. possibilities. that are revolutionary and that you can find nowhere else. There's possibilities for love in Jesus Christ that are revolutionary and you can find nowhere else. Now, look at the way he puts it. It seems very strange, doesn't it? He says in verse 7, he says, Dear friends, I'm not writing you a new command, but an old one, which you've had since the beginning, yet I'm writing you a new command. What? Well, here's what he's saying. First of all, he's saying this command to love your brother, this command to love is not a new command. He says, I didn't come up with it. It's not a specifically Christian thing to say. It's not a specifically New Testament thing. It's not even a specifically biblical thing. Not only do you have it in the Old Testament, not only do you have all through the Old Testament, love thy neighbor as thyself. You know, that's, where is that? Leviticus 19.18. Leviticus. I mean, you know, if it's in Leviticus, it's everywhere, all right? Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. So he says this is not a new command. Not only that, it's not even just a biblical command. But if you go into the back of C.S. Lewis' little book, The Abolition of Man, you'll find where he has a, he pulls out of the writings of all the great world religions, the ethical commonalities that we all have. And you'll see that essentially every world religion, when it comes to talking about the behavior you ought to be following in your life, are very, very, very similar. And the admonition to love one another is not just from, not only is it not just a Christian thing, it's not just a biblical thing. Therefore, it's an old command. But, Now, what he's getting at is this. He is saying, there is a sense in which Jesus Christ gives you a model for understanding love and a power and dynamic for doing love, a power and motivation for doing love. A model for understanding love and a power and motivation for doing love so far beyond anything you can find anywhere else, there's a certain sense in which the command to love one another inside the Christian context is a new command. You see, it's an old command, and yet there's another sense. If you see the truth of this command in him, see, its truth is in him. If you look into Jesus Christ, you get a vision of what love is, and you get a motivation for doing love. See, a model for understanding love and a motivation for doing love so far beyond that which you can see anywhere else, there's a certain sense in which it's a new command. Again, we have, in a sense, revolutionary, unique resources, and as I'll show you in a second, therefore, responsibility to love beyond anyone that any other religion has, that any other faith has. Let me show you. If you think that that's immodest, no, you may not believe Christianity, but you'll see that the claims, if they're true, give you something beyond anything that anyone else has got when it comes to this whole issue of love. What does it mean? He says, its truth is seen in him. You look at Jesus if you want to understand love. Its truth is seen in him. Put it to you this way. No one ever waded through what Jesus waded through for love. No one ever endured what Jesus Christ endured for love. No one ever loved like Jesus. You say, how's that? Well, you know, there's many places, you can see them in your own life, and you can see them in the history of the world, where people have sacrificed for love. They've loved someone even though it was a sacrifice, but no one's ever sacrificed like Jesus Christ. For example, God said to Adam, and he says to all of us, love and obey me. And I'll give you life. But he says to Jesus Christ, son, go to earth and love and obey me, and I'll crush you into the dust. He's never said that to anybody else. When Jesus Christ said in the Garden of Gethsemane, Lord, I don't want to do what you've asked me to do. I don't want to do what you've asked me to do. Let this cup pass from me. But nevertheless, not my will but thine be done. Now, whenever anybody says to God, this is going to be hard, but not my will but thine be done. I love you, Lord, and I'm not going to do my will. I'm going to do your will. God always responds saying, well done, good and faithful servant. Enter into the joy of thy master. And what did he do to Jesus Christ? He forsook him. Here's Jesus Christ loving people who are at best deserting him and at worst piercing him as he loves them. Here's Jesus Christ loving his Father who forsakes him on the cross. Nobody's ever loved like that. Nobody's ever loved like that. to hell to love these people. Ah, eternal torments. That's what he experienced on the cross. I'm going to do that because I love them so much. Nobody's ever loved like that. Nobody's ever sacrificed like that. You know, look, here's a quote from Robert Murray McShane, an old Scottish pastor, and he was preaching, obviously, at the Lord's Supper, like I am, and he says this. He says, Dear friends, let us look into the ocean through which Christ waited for us. For us. He was without any comforts of God on the cross. See, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He was without any comforts of God, no feeling that God loved him, no feeling that God pitied him, no feeling that God supported him. God was his son before. Now that sun had become all darkness. Not a smile from his Father, not a kind look, not a kind word. Nobody ever loved God and got this from God and yet loved anyway. Nobody ever loved people and you got this from people and yet followed through. He went to hell for people. He was with us, without a God. He was as if he had no God. All that God had been to him before was taken from him now. He had the feeling on the cross, he must have had, of being condemned. He must have heard the judge say, Depart from me, ye cursed, you who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power. That's what he heard. He felt that God said the same to him. Ah, this is the hell which Christ suffered. Dear friends, I feel like a little child casting a stone into some deep ravine in the mountainside, listening to hear it fall, but listening in vain. It's too deep. The longest line cannot fathom it. The ocean of Christ's sufferings is unfathomable. He was forsaken in the place of sinners. If you close, if you grasp Christ as your surety and mediator, you will never be forsaken. From the broken bread and the poured out wine, do you not hear the cry arise? My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And do you not hear the answer? For you. For you. Now, nobody ever did anything like that. Nobody ever will do anything like that. Nobody ever faced that and said, I love you, O Lord Father, and you, O people out here laughing at me, mocking at me, you know, jeering me, spearing me, nailing me, running from me. I'm going to stay here. I'm going to endure the hell. Now, you may not believe that. And most people in New York don't believe that. Most people say, well, I don't, a lot of people will say, I don't believe in a God, okay? And others will say, well, I believe in a God, but I certainly don't believe in this primitive idea that, that God poured his wrath out on Christ on the cross and all this stuff you're talking about, okay? And others will say, well, I do believe in a God, but I certainly don't believe that Jesus was the Son of God. I believe he was just a great guy, a great teacher. Okay. You do realize, do you not? You believe that, all right, you have a right to believe that, but you realize, therefore, you do not believe that anybody ever did what the Bible says Jesus did. You don't believe anybody left glory, left bliss, left unending joy, left total satisfaction, and face being utterly cut off. All that a human being would experience in hell must have been, since that's the punishment the Bible says that we deserve, must have been poured out on him on the cross. You don't believe that happened. You don't believe anybody ever loved like that. You don't, certainly don't believe anybody loved you like that. Okay, you have a right to that, but do you understand why John would say, therefore, you're not capable of the same love that someone who knows that he did that, who's seen the truth in him, and who knows he did it for you and for me. If you know that, you have got a model, and you have got a motivation, and you've got a power and incentive to love that nobody else has. You have to admit that. You might say it's silly, but you have to admit, if it's true, of course, and that's the reason why John can say, it's a new command. If you have seen the truth of this in him, if you've seen what he's done for you, then this new command, that love can be more true in Jesus than it's ever been anyone else, and therefore, you see how incredible this is? He says, yet I'm writing you a new command. Its truth is seen in him and you. Who's you? You who believe. Let me just, you know, let me, I got to move on here. There's other things to say, but do you see this first point? Do you realize what you're capable of? If you believe these things, I mean, if you don't believe in God, or you believe in God, but you don't believe that Jesus is the Son of God, or you even believe Jesus was the Son of God in some kind of vague way, but you don't believe in the wrath of God. You can't imagine Jesus having hell poured out on him. You don't believe that he ever did this for you. Do you see that God holds you far more responsible for love than anybody else? Because you're the only ones ever seen this. You're the only ones who know this. That's the reason why there's a sense in which he can say, this is a new command for you. This is a whole new possibility. You're in a new realm. That's the next point. But what does this mean? It means there's a certain sense. We already looked at this at the top of the chapter. In chapter 2, verse 1 and 2, it's not printed here. It says there's no condemnation for those of you who are Christians. Your sins are blotted out, absolutely blotted out. When God sees you, he doesn't see your sins legally. You're not condemned. But there's another sense in which even though you're out from under the law, you're no longer condemned, there's another sense in which God feels your sins worse than anybody else's. Christians, I'm talking to you. God doesn't see your sins legally like he sees the world's sins because you're in Christ. But he feels your sins emotionally, if you can say that, in a way that he doesn't feel anybody else's sins. When my wife says, please don't do this, this displeases me, and I do it, and she is distraught, and I realize what I've done, it's not a legal thing. I'm as much her husband as I was before. It's not a realm of the law. I haven't sinned against love. I've sinned against love. I know what she means to me. I know what she's done for me. I know what she's been for me. You see, it's not a legal thing. I'm not afraid of being condemned. I say, how could I have done this? To be out from under condemnation, to know that God loves you forever and he will never put you into condemnation, that you're absolutely saved and accepted. He'll never leave or forsake you. In a certain sense, because he won't do that, you've got more of an incentive to do what he asks than anyone else has. Even though you're out from under law, look at what he's done for you. He says, because of what I've done for you, if you know that, you will follow this command. He holds you responsible because he won't leave you. Okay, second point. I think we can do a second point. The second point is the reason that love is a sign of true Christianity is because, let me see if I can, how I wrote it down here, yeah. Secondly, Christian love comes from being in a whole new realm. John is saying that love is a sign of real Christianity because love is a sign of being in a whole new realm. Look, he says, anyone who claims to be in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness. Whoever loves his brother lives in the light and there is nothing in him to make him stumble. Ah, wow. Look, what does it mean to be in the light? The Bible says that when you become a Christian, you get translated into a new realm. Let's take 90 seconds to understand that. A lot of people don't understand what Paul means when he says, when you're in Christ, you're a new creation. Everything has become new. Now, that's hard for us because we're Christians and we say, you know, it's funny. I became a Christian in, you know, 1993, let's say. In 1992, I had trouble with a temper and now it's 1994. I still have trouble. I'm better, but I still have trouble with a temper. In 1992, there were tragedies in my life. In 1994, there's still tragedies in my life. What's this? All things become new stuff. Well, the answer is this. What is a realm? A realm is a region in which some influence is ruling. I mean, there's a sense in which if you get drunk, you're in the realm of alcohol. Why? The alcohol is depressing your brain. It's a depressant, I understand. It's not a stimulant. And therefore, everything that you're seeing and doing and thinking and feeling is influenced by the alcohol. Everything. Everything. You're in the realm. What does it mean to be translated, as it says in Colossians 1, verse 13, we're translated out of the kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of light into the kingdom of his dear son? It means now to be a Christian, you're like in a whole new world and you're seeing everything in the light of Jesus. Everything. Oh, you still have tragedies, but you don't look at them at all the same. Not at all. Now you look at a tragedy and you say, you know what? The only real tragedy would be if I was eternally lost. The only real tragedy has been averted. The only real tragedy fell into the heart of my Savior on the cross. And therefore, you know, you look at tragedies different. You also look at successes different. You know, in the past, a success, wow, I finally achieved. But now a Christian says, well, it was a gift. God may not keep it there. This isn't what creates me. This isn't what makes me. Your attitude toward success, your attitude toward tragedy, your attitude toward your sin, the way you behave, the way you look, the way you look at everything is utterly new. You're in a new realm. Everything is done in the light of Jesus. Do you understand? Now, that's the reason why Paul, by John, can say, I keep wanting to say Paul today. That's the reason why John wants to say, if you say you're in the realm of Jesus Christ, if you're and you hate your brother, that can't be. Let me put it to you this way. You cannot think, you cannot focus on, you cannot be looking at everything in the light of Jesus. You can't be thinking about Jesus wading through an ocean of God's wrath for you, even though you don't deserve it, and yet he still does it. You can't be looking at that, focusing at that, thinking about that, and wanting to take somebody's head off at the same time. It can't be done. You can focus on the person and what they've done to you, and you can be sitting there and wanting to take their head off, and you have to block out what Jesus did for you. Or you can look at what Jesus did for you, and then that just ruins your ability to hate. But it's one or the other. You can't do both at once. If you're in the realm of Jesus Christ, you see, if you're walking in the light, if you're looking at everything in the light of Christ, if you're thinking about what he's done for you, if you're thinking about who you were when he did it for you, if you think about all the stuff we've been talking about tonight, you can't want to take somebody's head off at the same time. It's either or. It's one or the other. Don't you see why John can say, this is an acid test. Your ability to forgive, your ability to be gracious, your ability to overlook, your ability to be kind, your ability to be warm. If you're looking at life through what Jesus has done for you, you can do it. If you're not doing it, you're not walking in the light of what Jesus did. You're not looking at everything. You're not seeing the world through it. That's a test. There's people who defend the Christian faith in such a harsh, critical, mean, nasty way. It's so ironic. Here they are orthodox. They say, I believe these truths. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and Jesus Christ, the only Son, our Lord. They know it all. And as they defend it, in the way in which they carry it in life, harsh, critical, mean-spirited, they're actually attacking the faith that they think they're defending. Because they're not looking at anything through it. They're holding it about. They're holding it along with their own pride as if afraid of breaking it. You know, they're carrying it along. They're rigid. They're harsh. They're cruel. That's the reason why John can say, you might have all this great doctrine if you don't have love. That's what Paul says. If you don't have love, you're kidding yourself. You're not in the light. You're not walking in the light. Well, lastly, and I better say something, even though we can do this later before we go to the Lord's table. Lastly, what are the tests of love? What does it really mean to love somebody? And look carefully. It says, whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is, oh, pardon me, whoever claims to be in the light hates his brother and is still in the darkness. But whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is nothing in him to make him stumble. You know what this means? Let me give you two tests. As we go to the Lord's table, I want you to, just like Mick Shane said, I want you to hear the cry of Jesus Christ coming up from the broken bread and the wine. I want you to hear it coming out. My God, my God, why did you break me up like this? Why am I broken into little pieces on these trays? Why am I not whole? Why am I the mess I am? Why? And the answer is, for them. That's why I'm forsaken. Now, as you think about that, you won't be able to hate your brother or stumble. And the two ways you can look and say, you know, am I remembering these things? Look at these two things. It says, first of all, a Christian does not hate. Well, you say, well, I don't hate anybody. Well, don't forget what Jesus said in Matthew. Jesus said, you've heard it said, thou shalt not murder. But I say unto you, number one, you've heard it said, thou shalt not murder. Murder is wrong. Now, I say unto you, number two, if you're angry with your brother, you know, you're guilty of judgment. And then three, it says, if you say to them, raka, you're in danger of hellfire. Now, what he's talking about is, hate can mean, A, trying to harm somebody. That's murder, you know, or we all know that that's wrong. But number two, if you're angry with your brother, that means wanting harm to come. You're not going to do it yourself, but you'd love to see harm come. You wish harm would come, okay? Jesus says, that's murder too. That's not love. It's the same thing out of which murder grows. So the first, you know, level one of hate is trying to harm somebody. Level two of hate is wanting harm to come to them. But level three of hate, Jesus says, if you say raka, which literally means you nobody, and that's called indifference, Jesus says the lowest but most insidious form of hate is indifference, not caring, not concerning yourself whether harm comes or not. To try to harm somebody to wish. whether harm comes or not. All of them is a lack of love. And you can't look at any human being and be indifferent to anyone if you're looking at everything in the light of what he did. But that's not all. A Christian who's not walking in the light hates, but it also says, look, whoever loves his brother lives in the light and there's nothing in him to make him stumble. So the other way in which you can fail to love is not only not love people, fail, it says there's nothing in him to make him stumble. This is a person who's always stumbling. If you're always complaining nobody loves you, if you're always getting bent out of shape, if you're always getting sensitive, you're always so sensitive, you're always complaining, this person has hurt me, you're always stumbling, always. See? It says, whoever hates his brother in the darkness, whoever loves his brother lives in the light and he's not stumbling. That word stumbling really is talking about that very thing. Don't you? There's people who fail to love. They're hating at one level or the other. But there's also people who are always complaining that they're not loved. Nobody loves me. They're always stumbling. You know who they are. You may be one of them. You're always getting upset because this person has insulted you, this person ignored you, this person stepped on your toes, this person was insensitive to you. These people don't come after you. They don't listen to you. They don't call you up. They don't care about you. If you're always stumbling, you also are not walking in the light. Why? You're not looking at life through the joy of the gospel. You're not looking at all of life in light of what Jesus did to you. You're acting like you're empty. You're acting like he doesn't love me. I've got to get love from other people. And if they don't love me, you're always testing people. You're always saying, I bet you still don't love me now, do you? And when they don't love you and they kind of get upset with you, you say, see, if you're always stumbling, you're not living in the light of what Jesus did for you. If you're just being indifferent, if you're being angry, if you're being cynical, if you've got a grudge, you're not living in the light. But think of what he did as we go to the table. That will heal you. That's what he says. Think of what he did. See its truth. See the truth of love in him. And wait till you see. Your grudges will fall. Your indifference will go away. You're always stumbling around and being so sensitive. That won't be important anymore to you. Do you live in love? Do you pass the test? Are you walking in the light? Let's pray. Thank you. Thank you.
