TITLE: Loving and Growing (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 2:9-14
TOPICS: Christian Living and Obedience God's Love Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/loving-growing-part-2/

============================================================

The passage that we're going to be basing our teaching on tonight is printed there in your bulletin. We've been looking at it for a couple of weeks, and again we open it up, and it's 1 John 2, verses 9 to 14. But I'm only going to read to you 9, 10, and 11, because for the last time before we move on here, we're going to be looking at this passage about love and hate. So let me read it to you. There we go. I knew it was capable. 1 John 2, 9, 10, and 11. Anyone who claims to be in the light but hates his brother is still in the darkness. Whoever loves his brother lives in the light, and there is nothing in him to make him stumble. But whoever hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks around in the darkness. He does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded him. And let's end there. That's the reading of God's holy word. Why are we here one more time? We said that there's three tests that John is giving to people who profess to believe in Christianity, and he's saying, how do you know you are a Christian? How can you be sure? How can you be sure that you really belong to him? And he gives three tests. Now, we keep mentioning them, even though we haven't gotten to all of them yet. The first test is, we call it the behavioral test. Christians change in the way they behave. Christians change more and more, gradually, but really into the likeness of Christ in their attitudes, their dispositions, their habits, their behavior. And that's the first test. There's a change. You change. Change in your behavior. The second test is the test we've been looking at here. It's the love test. If anyone says he's in the light, but hates his brother, he's still in the darkness. And the third test we will come to later on is the doctrinal test. And that is that you have to believe the gospel. What's the gospel? That Jesus Christ, the Son of God, became human, came down into human form, and he lived a life, and he died a death, and he was raised, and he's passed through the heavens, and he's opened a way into the heart of God for us. He's dealt with our sins. He's dealt with a barrier between us and God that we all know intuitively is there. And he came down into history, and he punched a hole in the roof of the world, and now he's there at the right hand of God, and he's opened a way to God. That's the gospel. That's the truth. And you have to believe that as well. Now, the thing that we have to dwell on, I think one more time, because it's such an important theme in the Bible, is that John insists that you cannot extract, you cannot distinguish, you cannot separate these tests from one another. A person can't say, well, I got two of the three. You see, if you don't have all three, you don't have any at all. And in particular, I believe John is saying that truth and love have to go together. Light and love, as we'll see. Truth and love have to go together in the Christian life. You don't understand what it means to be a Christian unless you see that the two are in a kind of dynamic, that each one ignites the other. Truth ignites love. Love ignites truth. Truth, they have to operate together. They have to grow together. They're the dual engines, you might say, of the Christian life. If you don't understand this, you don't understand what it means to be a Christian at all. And we have to get this down, because a lot of us are deluding ourselves that we're Christians when we're not. And a lot of people think that though I don't know that I believe in Christianity, I don't know that I believe the truth, but I'm loving. So I have love without your Christian truth, but that's okay. And the Bible says, no, it's not. Because love without truth, you can't really love. And then there's other folks who say, I'm a Christian. I have the truth. I know the truth. I can recite the truth to you. I defend the truth. And yet you see in their lives a harsh spirit, a critical spirit. They're unapproachable people. Nobody in their right mind would share a problem with them. Ah, but they have the truth. No, they don't. That's what John is saying here. See, this, and I know it seems to rule out an awful lot of people, doesn't it? But here you have people say, well, I'm loving, even though I don't believe in the Christian truth. And over here you have people say, I believe in the Christian truth, but you can see by their attitudes and their actions that they're not. They're just not loving people. And John says, you, therefore, don't really understand Christianity. Christianity not only combines the two. the two. Christianity is an absolute mixture of the two. You might say that you have truth, not, you don't have a little bit of truth and a little bit of love, you know, compromise, I'm kind of truthful, I'm kind of loving, you know. Oh no, you have truth to the nth degree and love the nth degree because they feed on each other. They create feedback, if you understand the gospel, they create feedback loops between each other. They build each other, they stimulate each other, they grow each other. Now let's take a look at the two sides, what's wrong with them. Oh, actually, even before I do that, just see how John says it. You see, the word light, you have to remember that the word light essentially means the truth. I mean, we, even in English, we use it that way. I'll never forget some years ago, a poor man in my office years ago, his wife had been telling him for years and a lot of other people have been telling him for years that he was really being a very, very bad husband, a very bad husband. And that if he didn't watch out, his marriage was going to fall apart. And one day his marriage did fall apart. And I remember him in the office saying, I finally see the light, but it's too late. Well, what he meant? He meant, I finally see the truth. I mean, in other words, I was in the darkness, I didn't see the truth, and now I see the truth. And you know, in the Bible, that's what it means. You know, you have Paul, for example, where are we here? In 2 Corinthians 4, verse 6, Paul says, he made the light shine in our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. See, knowledge is light. And so what John is saying is, you say you have the light. A Christian is someone, notice in verse 9, is someone who says, I'm in the light. Verse 10, a Christian is someone who lives in the light. Now, the light is the truth that we're mentioning. Jesus Christ, Son of God, incarnated as a human being, died on the cross, rose again physically from the dead, passed through the heavens, opened away. Okay, so that's the gospel. That's the light. Christians have the light. You can't be a Christian if you don't believe the truth. I'm not saying Christians have all truth. We're just saying as Christians, you're not a Christian unless you have that truth, unless you understand that. You know, Romans 6, 17, Paul says, though you were slaves to sin, you obeyed from the heart the form of the truth that we delivered to you. So you're not a Christian if you don't grasp this truth. But, how do you know you're living in the truth? How do you know, you see, John says, do you live in the truth? Do you live in the light? What's that mean? Well, something like this. If I give you medicine, and I'm a doctor, and I say, take this orally. Take this medicine orally. Take it in. And, you know, two weeks later, you call me up and say, you know, doc, I'm not doing very well. And I say, why? Are you taking the medicine? Well, yeah. Well, are you taking it orally? Well, no. I'm sort of, you know, sort of smearing it on myself. It doesn't seem to have worked. Now, I know afterwards, some of you medical people are going to say, well, some kinds of medicine, that would be fine. You know, I, there's always, analogies are always fall short. You're going to say, well, I'm sure there are some medicines that would be absorbed through the skin. But let's assume that if the medicine says, take it orally, that to smear it on the outside means it's not really going to have its effect. Now, John is saying it's possible to, in a sense, say, I have the truth. I'm orthodox. I'm orthodox. I have the orthodox doctrine. I believe in God, the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, crucified dead and buried. I believe it. But it's possible to smear it, you know, on the outside and not live in it, not have it really affect you, not really have it. You see, when Paul, when John talks about living in the light, he is talking about having the truth dominate everything you say and everything you think, dominate you. You're in the realm of the light. You're in the realm of the truth. And he is saying it's possible to have the truth in a general way, adhere to the truth, even defend the truth, but you didn't believe the truth rightly, and therefore you never took it in, but you've just sort of smeared it on the outside. You didn't believe in it rightly, so you didn't take it in. You just smeared it on the outside. What do you mean? Somebody says, I'm glad you asked. I say, here's some ways that that's possible. It is possible to, in a sense, have the light, understand the light, but not really live in it. And the sign that you smeared it on the outside instead of taking it on the inside is you are not a melted, compassionate, loving heart. Well, now you say, what are the possible ways that you could be orthodox and have the truth, but not... let me give you a couple. Over the years, I've certainly seen people who are firm believers in the truth of the gospel and obviously have smeared it on the outside. There's other reasons than the right reason to believe the gospel. And therefore, you haven't really taken it in. You haven't really believed the gospel. You believe it, but you haven't really. For example, some people believe in orthodox doctrine. I have to say it's out of, in a sense, nostalgia and a sense of security that comes because it's familiar. One of the things I've met over the years, in particular, some of you I'm sure are listening by tape, but in particular in my church down in Virginia, found an awful lot of people who basically were very orthodox. They really believed it all, but they believed it all because this is the way they'd been taught, period. They'd been taught that way. And it reminded them of secure times. It reminded them of times in which things were simpler and things were safer, you know, and the town was a nicer place. And everybody went to church. And my mommy and my daddy always believed this, and I believe it too. If it's good enough for them, it's good enough for me. That's nostalgia. That's a sense of security that comes from the familiar. And those people can really believe that very firmly, but it's smeared on the outside. There's another reason a person can pick up orthodox doctrine. A second reason is out of a kind of intellectual pride. There is nothing like Christian doctrine to give you a sense of moral superiority. There are people who have tidy minds, and they love the logical tightness of Christianity. And when they see the doctrine, they just love it. They love to get into it. They like to think it out, and they like to read books about it, and they like to have all the answers. People love the answers. And Christianity is one of the few sources today that anybody will, you know, most people like to say nobody has the answers. I mean, all the sophisticated people that are put forth in the media are people who say, well, you know, we know that there are no answers to big questions. Of course, Christianity says, yes, there are. And so people are attracted to that. Strictly on the basis of their intellectual pride. They have tidy minds. They like to feel, I've got the answers. Some people love to be parts of an embattled minority. And if you're a Christian, you are part of an embattled minority. And a lot of people just like that. They need to feel that they're in the minority, or they're in the know. They're on the inside. So intellectual arrogance, a tidy mind, and enjoyment of having all the answers can attract you to pick up Christian doctrine and to say, yes, I believe in the gospel. You just smeared it on the outside. You're not living in it. It's not living in you. Here's a third reason people pick up doctrine and orthodoxy, and one that I'm most aware of, because I've seen it over the years. You can pick it up and believe it because you have this tremendous respect for a particular teacher or leader. And there are people who are very good teachers. They're very good leaders. They're charismatic individuals. They don't necessarily have to be public people. But sometimes you meet somebody who's so sure and so together and seems to have it all together. And you feel safe around them. And you feel like, well, you know, if you say so, it must be true. And you feel safe and you feel secure. And you feel, when I'm in this movement, when I'm with these people, when I'm with this group, when I'm under this teacher, when I'm with her or with him, I feel, yes, it all seems to make sense. And so, because you admire and respect, and you kind of get into it, you're so dedicated. And there's almost a kind of adoration of this particular figure. You seem to get strength from being near this strong person. You adopt the doctrine of this strong person. Now, I know I'm getting close to home. I hope I'm getting close to home. Because there's lots and lots of people who say, I am an Orthodox Christian. And yet, their lives are not transformed. The truth is on them, but not in them. You do not see this melted, compassionate heart of love. You don't see people just streaming to you out of a desire to talk to you about their problems. You don't see transformation of character and all the other things that John talks about. No. You're Orthodox. And you can argue it. And you can articulate it in many cases. And you can push it on other people. Yet, very often you do it in a spirit that contradicts the whole idea here that John says. Some people very often defend the faith in a way that absolutely undermines the faith at the very same time. Because it's done without love. Now, somebody says, oh, this is a little bit frightening. Yes, I hope it is. It's supposed to be. That's what John is doing here. If you're a person, You've been watching this pretty much for sure, so I'll kill you, and come from one of my 많. But after him, don't let until you realize and leave your time in from 2 to 10 seconds , I acord miles away from 3 in the Now, somebody says, oh, this is a little bit frightening. Yes, I hope it is. It's supposed to be. That's what John is doing here. If you're a person, for example, who's picked up Christian orthodoxy and doctrine out of a sense of nostalgia and security from your past, you know, this is the way I was raised, I feel good about this, this is the way I identify with my family and so on, you will be an un... First of all, you will not like to think about this stuff. You won't like to question it, and you don't like other people questioning it either. You'll be a rigid person. There's a staticness about it. I've seen this in people around the world, but in particular, I've seen it down in my small town in the south where I was a pastor for so many years. They don't like to think about it. They never ask questions about it. When somebody else raises doubts, you say, no, no, no, no, that's not the way you do it. I just believe it. I believe it. It's settled. They don't like other people thinking about it either. And you get the sense that there's really been a kind of brainwashing going on. There's not an organicness about their faith. It's an artificial thing. If, on the other hand, you've picked up the doctrine for the second reason, which is intellectual arrogance, you do enjoy questions. You do like an argument. You love an argument. You love a debate. But there's an arrogance, and there's a condescension. And you might win battles when you talk to people, but you never win the war. You never win their hearts. Never. Yeah, you have, you know, your faith is as beautiful as a snowflake. Beautiful, intricate, logical, symmetrical, and freezing. And people know it. And go, you know, if you have the guts, find out. Go ask somebody. The third thing, if you pick up the gospel because of a love for the, for a leader, a leader, adoration for a leader, you know, that person makes you feel strong when you're around them and so on. Basically, I think what happens in that case is you're, there's an anxiety always. Underneath, you're, there's really, in a sense, you're after their approval. You need the approval of the group. You need the approval of the leader. And in every case, here's what's wrong with this. In every case, you're taking up, boy, this is so subtle, you're taking up orthodoxy. And you're taking up doctrine as a substitute for taking up Jesus. Because in every situation, you're using the doctrine to make yourself feel worthy of God. You see? You say, in the first case, you pick up doctrine because you're being true to your tradition, true to your family, true to your town. True to your culture. Hmm? You say, well, I, of course I'm a Christian because I'm of this family, this tribe, this clan, and so on. But you see, in that case, you're, you're picking it up because that's how you feel good about yourself. You know, it's part of your, you might say, cultural identity. In the second case, you pick it up because by feeling smarter than other people, being more tidy, by always having the answers, you're feeling good about yourself. In the last case, you're deriving a sense of worthiness before God from being part of the group that believes like this and being a follower of this great teacher. In all cases, you are using truth as a substitute for Jesus. Well, somebody says, why should I? Okay, what are the, what's the right way to take up the truth so that it goes in? What's the right way? And here's the right way. Actually, I guess there's two steps to this. First of all, you have to pick up the gospel and doctrine and believe it. First of all, because it describes in an uncomfortable way your particular condition as a sinner. You have not really believed the doctrines unless you've wrestled with it. In fact, unless it's come home to you and particularly shown you that you're a sinner. Now, listen here. See, there's many people who like to say, yes, I believe in Christian orthodoxy because it says that humanity is sinful. And look at that. That makes sense to me. Look at the way people treat each other. Yes, I believe it. That's not what I'm saying. I'm not talking about humanity. I'm talking about you. I can remember this part. Boy, you know, when you get as old as me and you've been a Christian as long as me, sometimes your memory of the origins of your own Christianity start to fade out. But as I was preparing this, I remembered something pretty clear. You know, I went to college and I was orthodox but not a Christian. I was orthodox in that I was in a family who had moved into a church that was teaching me this basic gospel and I had picked up the orthodoxy. But when I got to college, I started living a different kind of life. You might say a double life. So I was being a hypocrite. And as a result, I was about to chuck the orthodoxy. Because, you know, if you're not living it out, it all looks pretty flimsy and unrealistic. And I had Religion 101 and Philosophy 101. And boy, there's, you know, the great things. I mean, there's your tuition's worth, you know. You get at least in every one of those 50 good reasons why you can chuck orthodoxy so you can live the way you want. You know, now there's your money's worth, right? And so... of Philosophy 101. I was ready to chuck it because it didn't make much sense. And I remember there was a senior student, a college senior who was a student, and he would say, let me give you something that really helped me become a Christian. Of course, you already are, he said, because I told him I was. And he says, now, and I remember his fiancée also, they gave me two books. One was Screwtape Letters by C.S. Lewis, one was Mere Christianity. And I remember the girl, the woman said, you know, Screwtape Letters sort of teases you with it. Mere Christianity hits you right between the eyes. Read especially the chapter that brought me to faith called The Great Sin. And it was about pride. And I remember when I read the thing, it hit me so hard because I, you know, I'd always known I was a sinner in general according to the doctrine. But I'd never really seen why I was so miserable, why I was so super sensitive, why I was so afraid of how I looked, why I was always so worried about what crowd I was in, why I never felt that people were really appreciating me. On the other hand, having this deep fear that maybe they didn't appreciate me because there wasn't much to appreciate. You know, you're back and forth on this. It's why you're the nervous wreck you are in college, in other words. I, it was sin, but in general, I knew it. But this thing nailed me. Pride, self-centeredness, self-absorption. For the first time in my life, I said, oh my gosh. Orthodoxy is the only thing that accounts for the mess that I am. And it's very uncomfortable. You don't say, wow, this is great. All the answers. Nor do you say, wow, you know, it makes me feel secure. Oh no, there's nothing that more makes you feel insecure than really listening to the gospel. The way you know you're taking it inside is you kind of hate it as you love it. You kind of say, this has got to be true, but I wish it wasn't true. And in it comes. And you wrestle with it, you know. You question it, but not in an arrogant way. And then, the second thing, not only does the gospel have to tell you who you are, it explains you, and it's the only way that you can understand yourself. It shows you your own sin. But then, the second thing, is it brings you the joy of discovery that God loves you anyway. And there should be some struggle there. If you've really taken the gospel in, that is not an easy thing to accept. To really come to grips with the gospel is to say, this can't be true because it's too good to be true. It can't be this easy. It can't be this wonderful. It can't really be. Surely, I have to earn it. You have not asked, you have not come to grips with the gospel unless you say, this is too good to be true. Anybody who says, well, of course, I've always believed it, has never believed it. I think. Oh, my. I've got to be careful on that. But that's what I think. A person who is arrogant in talking to people, saying, ah, you don't know the truth. I know the truth. I mean, they might not say that, but that's the attitude they have. They don't get it either. You know why? Do you believe the gospel? Do you believe that you're a sinner saved by grace? You're not saved because of your works, your performance. You're not saved by your moral character, but surely because of the grace of God. But then the person you're talking to who doesn't believe the truth, you have to realize the only difference between you and that person would be grace. Not only that. If you understand the gospel, you know that it's a very, very good likelihood that that person is a moral superior to you. We're talking about this in the question and answer this morning. If you're a Christian who understands the gospel, you know that there's all sorts of people who are not Christians who are more patient than you or more courageous than you or more loving than you. They've got better character. Well, how could that be, you say? Well, if you understand the gospel, you know there are all kinds of people like that. You're a Christian because you admit that you can't save yourself. You admit that you're a moral failure. There's all sorts of people around who aren't Christians because they won't admit that they're not moral enough. They may be morally superior to you, but they won't admit they're sinners. That's what makes them not a Christian. Not that they're worse than you, but that they won't admit they're a sinner. That's the only problem. That's the only reason they're not Christians. All you need is need. All you need is nothing. But most people don't have it to give God. Their hands are filled with things. I'm a pretty good person. I've tried very hard. I've believed for a long time. I've been in church. You come to God with things in your hands, and you can't be a Christian. They come between you and him. And therefore, when you find somebody who's not a Christian, you're talking to them. You're talking to them. You know that they might easily be morally superior to you. The only difference is they won't admit that they're sinners. That's all. And you know the fact that you admit it doesn't make you more humble. You know that that's a gift of God, too. You see, if you've taken the gospel inside, there is a humility about you, and there is a gentleness about you, and when you talk to people, there's a hopefulness about you. don't, if you're not well-known amongst the people around you, Christian and non-Christian, for being a loving, kind person, a caring, vulnerable, compassionate person, you really haven't taken the truth in. It's smeared on the outside. See, here, do you know that you're a sinner saved by grace, and that you're saved sheerly by grace, and therefore the only reason you're a Christian is because of an absolute miracle? Then whoever shows up at your doorstep, whoever comes to see you, whoever you're talking to, you will always treat with incredible hopefulness. Why? Because you say, if me, why not him? If me, why not her? And they can tell. They can tell that you are treating them as a potential god or goddess, in a sense. You are always treating people as potentially incredible moral beauties. Because look at what God's done for you. That though you're a sinner, he saved you. And now, in his sight, you're righteous. And it's a complete miracle. So when you see people around, not only is there no sense of superiority, so there's a kind of condescension and sweetness, not only is there no need anymore to put up an image, right? So there's a vulnerability, but there's a hopefulness. And people sense that you're not standing on your dignity, that you're not looking at yourself, that you know that you are what you are by the grace of God, and that they can be too. And there's nothing freezing about your faith. There's something warming about your faith. Do people seek you out? Do people sense that you treat them with humility, and with sweetness, and with gentleness, and with hopefulness? You know, if you do not, at the moment, you're forgetting the truth. He who says he lives in the light, but hates his brother, is indifferent to his brother, is not living in the light. And the one who's living in his light is filled with love. I ought to be honest. I mean, it wasn't that long ago at a conference. Let me just show you how this operates. Just here to close up. I was at a conference not a real long time ago, and I was doing a self-pity party for a while. Why? Well, you know, I love it here in New York, so I had to leave New York. It better be good. But, well, the accommodations weren't very good. You know, surely you treat a speaker with a little more respect than I was being treated, you know. And I also knew that the honorarium wasn't very good. That was, I mean, I wouldn't want to admit that that had any influence on what I was doing at all. And it wasn't, and the people didn't seem to get a lot of what I was saying. They didn't seem to, you know, say, wow, this is great. They said, wow, this is okay. And so, in general, I was being grumpy. And I was saying, now, you know, and those of you who were here this morning know there's a kind of connection here. I was feeling a sort of, you know, I deserve better than this. I deserve better than this. I work hard. You know, I've got things to say. I deserve better accommodations. I deserve better treatment. I deserve better reception. I deserve. And I remember, because I was in the midst of that forgetting, the grace of God in my life, one night, a guy came up to me who was kind of an irritating person and started to talk to me about a problem. And I brushed him off. Next morning, I was running and, you know, I suddenly realized there was virtually a voice. You know, Pentecostals hear voices, but Presbyterians hear virtual voices. And I virtually heard God say, you have forgotten that it's all a gift. It's a gift that you're here. It's a gift that you've got anything to say. It's a gift that they even want you. It's a gift that you're in a position to help anybody at all. It's a gift that you're not the person all messed up with the problem that nobody likes. It's only, it's a gift of God that you're not in that position that you've been delivered from an awful lot of your own particular problems. You've forgotten that everything in your life is a gift. You've forgotten that everything in your life is of the grace of God. And the minute I realized that, not only was I humbled, but I wanted to go find that guy. Because, you know, there's nothing that makes you loving and generous to know that it's all a gift. And there's nothing that robs you of your ability to love people than to sit around saying, I deserve more than I'm getting. And of course, when you say that, you've forgotten the gospel. You've forgotten that if God gave you what you deserved, you'd be in hell now. That everything you enjoy today that is better than hell is a mercy. Christians and you're thinking about Christianity, if you find that awfully strong medicine, this is what makes Christians tick. I'm just, just look on the inside, look at our hearts. I went to find the guy and I sat down and said, tell me more about this thing. And we had a great time and we both wept because our hearts were touched at the time. If only I could keep breaking the ice over my heart. You see, sin puts ice over our heart and it forms as fast as ice forms in a bucket of water outside on a day like tonight. Because you keep forgetting the light, you keep forgetting the truth, and it just sucks the love out. You can be a kind of person that people come after. Every single Christian is a shepherd. Every single one. Every single one of us should be people out there amongst the lost sheep and the found sheep of the world. And we should be looking at them. And we should be listening to them. And we should be taking the truth of the gospel, letting it affect us, and reaching out in love. If you say you have, you're living in the light, but your life is not characterized by love, you're not listening to the truth. Let's pray. Our Father, we do ask that you turn us into people who love the way Jesus loved. We begin to see here tonight how simple and yet how complex it is. We thank you that the truth of the gospel leads to love. And our experience of your love makes us understand the truth. We realize, Father, we can't really love people without telling them the truth. We also realize that we can't love people now that we see this without believing the truth. Let us be as characterized by the love that Jesus walked with that we too might find ourselves reflecting his character so people can see in us what he is like. We ask this in the name of the one who came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many. Amen.
