TITLE: Making Peace
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 6:14-19
TOPICS: Salvation Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Spiritual Warfare – The Armor of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/making-peace/

============================================================

Therefore, put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand. Stand firm, then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place, and with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace. In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one. Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and pray in the Spirit on all occasions, with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints. This is God's word. Now, you remember that this one phrase that we've been looking at, it's really a very, very deep and profound statement. It says, with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace. Now, we said there's actually three things that I think this teaches, and we looked at the first two, and tonight we're finishing the third. First of all, it says that there's a readiness that we can put on ourselves as Christians, and the word readiness, we said, is actually referring to a kind of spiritual joy. The word readiness is talking about a spiritual joy that is parallel to athleticism in the physical realm, that there's a joy in the spiritual realm that corresponds to what it means to be a great athletic athlete in the physical realm. A great athlete has tremendous balance. A great athlete is adroit and nimble. A great athlete defies gravity, actually, is able to put off the kind of gravitational pull that most of us have to put up with. And we said, in the same way, there is a prospect here for Christians to live in a way that corresponds to that, not only in the spiritual realm. To be a person that always emotionally and spiritually keeps balance. To be a person who finds that you are able to defy many things that pull you down emotionally, you're finding yourself buoyant. There's a joy that is remarkable. There's a joy that is unusual. There's a joy that is unconquerable. There's a joy that it does not go away when circumstances are down, and we talked about that. Now, this joy actually comes from using the gospel on our hearts in such a way as to bring us peace. Now, the first kind of peace that the gospel brings we talked about, and that is a peace with God. And we said this peace with God came because we, deep in our hearts, we believe that God makes unreasonable demands on us, and we also believe that God makes unreasonable plans for us. And so we're mad. You see, when we become Christians, the gospel, first of all, shows us that he has satisfied all of those unreasonable demands in Christ, and he wants us to receive him. And he is not someone who is saying, I demand that you, on your own effort, fulfill all the requirements of the law. That's why Luther was angry at God until he understood the gospel, and then suddenly he realized that he was angry at God for the false reasons. And secondly, the gospel also shows us that we're children, that God is our Father, that he's great, and therefore his plans are not unreasonable. It's, we're unreasonable to think we know better than he does about what should happen. And we talked all about this, and the gospel pulls away that hostility. And until that happens, there's no real joy, and there's really no ability to live an anxiety-free life. But we said secondly, and this is what we want to talk about tonight, and get ourselves ready for the Lord's table. Secondly, the gospel brings peace, not just between God and me, but between me and others. If you use the gospel on yourself properly, it brings tremendous peace between you and others. And I'd just like to show you tonight, by drawing on the rest of Scripture, how the gospel can bring peace into your life, and why it's possible that it's your relationships with other people that are the real culprit in why you're living such a joyless life. Why aren't your feet shod with the joy of the gospel? You might say, my relationship with God is okay. However, the gospel also is there to deal with your relationship with other people. Let me tell you three things. The gospel creates peace between Christians. The gospel promotes peace between Christians and anyone else. And the gospel repairs peace. It creates it, it promotes it, it repairs it. Let me show you what I mean. First of all, the gospel creates peace between Christians. How does the gospel create peace? How does it create tremendous unity and love? be experiencing more of this is because the gospel isn't, you're not using it in your life in this way. Now, the gospel creates peace this way, first of all. The gospel creates peace because it changes radically your view of yourself. Any counselor will tell you, your relationships hinge on your own self-assessment. They hinge on your attitude toward yourself, right? How about anybody will tell you that? It depends on your assessment of yourself as to how you relate to others, all right? Well, in the same, therefore, the gospel changes our relationships because it so radically affects our understanding of ourselves. Every Christian, through the gospel, is convicted of sin. Now, what does that mean? That's the change. What does it mean? A lot of people think conviction of sin means Christians believe that they are totally worthless, unworthy people. Failures. And, you know, there are so many people that already feel that way that they do come and listen to the gospel and instead of listening carefully as to what it really says, they assume that that's what the Bible teaches. And they move right on into Christianity saying, yep, I agree, I must be a Christian because I feel terrible already. I already think I'm a failure. I already think I'm worthless. And that's just what the Bible teaches about human beings. We're all depraved. We're all, you know, we're just scum. And therefore, you know, I didn't realize I was already a Christian. I've always felt that way. That's not what the Bible teaches. As a matter of fact, if you're depressed, full of self-loathing and self-hatred, you haven't been convicted deeply enough of sin. No, look. What the Bible teaches, what the gospel does when it convicts you of sin, is it shows you, not just that you're worthless, it shows you actually something deeper than that. It shows you that you're conceited. It shows you that you have a God complex. Now, the best way to put it is, and the Bible teaches this in a number of places, sin, and the conviction of sin means simply the Spirit shows you what's really going on in your life. It shows you that you have a God complex. You want to be two things. You want to be your own Lord and you want to be your own Savior. And until you're convicted of that, you're going to feel lousy. You see, when you begin to realize that you're trying to be your own Savior, that means that you're trying to earn your sense of worthiness. When you're convicted that you're trying to be your own Lord, in other words, you believe that you know what's best for yourself and how the world ought to go. And the reason that you hate yourself so much and the reason that you're so depressed and you're always wringing your hand saying, oh, I'm just so unworthy and so full of self-loathing, is because you haven't yet seen that that is actually an expression of that conceit. I haven't lived up. When a person is really convicted of sin, you stop your blubbering. Those of us who really had problems with self-esteem, when the gospel finally hit home, we suddenly realized that all of that, all of that discussion of how inferior we are and how bad we are and how we hate ourselves and how we're unworthy, we began to realize that was all part of the pride. It was just an expression of the conceit. It was a way of continuing to keep control and to continue to say to God, I will not be saved by grace. I will be saved by my performance even though I haven't been able to come up to it. You see? I will be saved by my performance or I'll be damned. I won't be saved by grace. It's a way of staying in control. It's a way of continuing to say, I won't be saved by grace and I refuse to see that the things that I haven't been able to get would have never satisfied me anyway. So there's a stubbornness as a refusal. That kind of depression, that kind of low self-esteem is pride. And a person who's convicted of sin sees it and says, this is ridiculous. What am I doing? This is just another expression of my desire to be my own master and to keep control of myself. You haven't been convicted deeply enough if you're depressed. And you see, that radically changes your view of yourself. And anybody who has experienced that, don't you see? Until you've experienced that, anybody that has experienced that has such a completely different view of him or herself. Because suddenly, you begin to look at people. As Becky Pippert says in her book Out of the Salt Shakers, she says, the only way you can be destroyed by a lack of approval of people is if that approval was your salvation. And it's not until you say, here I am, trying to be my own savior. Failing to please and to say, I'm finally free from you. You know, until you're free from people, you will never be free for people. Until you're free from them, you can't really love them. All you can do is use them. you know, want them to do. Until the gospel frees you from people, there's no peace between you and them. None at all. Can you see, though, how it completely changes your relationships? It completely changes your way of looking at yourself. The freedom of finally knowing in the gospel that I no longer should be sitting around just rubbing my, you know, licking my wounds how bad I am and being mad because people don't like me the way I want them to like me or love me the way I want them to love me. I'm free from that because I'm finally being convicted of sin. Therefore, the gospel changes your relationship. It gives you peace with people because it changes your view of yourself. But also, the gospel creates peace because, secondly, it changes your value system. You see, relationships, I would say, are based, first of all, on your self-assessment. Your relationships are based a great deal on your self-assessment. The people you relate to and the people you reach out to have a great deal with what you think of yourself, no doubt about it. It's the reason why you refuse to go near some people. And you see, you're controlled. There's certain people that you want. There's certain people that you want to have friends. There's certain people that you refuse to be anywhere near because you're so jealous of them. You know, without the gospel, until you're freed from all of that, you can't have peace with people. But secondly, your relationships, I think, are very, very much controlled by your values. Remember I mentioned before that in C.S. Lewis's book, The Four Loves, he talks about eros, you know, romantic sexual love, and philos, friendship love. And he says, if you diagram them, eros, if you diagram it, it's two people looking at each other. But if you diagram friendship or philos, it's two people standing side by side looking at the same thing. They're friends because they have the same passions. They have the same mythos. They have the same values. They have the same loves. They have the same vision. And so to a great degree, friendship and relationships is based on similar values. Well, let me tell you, the gospel creates peace because the gospel creates a paradigm shift. What's a paradigm shift? You know, Scrooge in A Christmas Carol undergoes a paradigm shift. Three ghosts take him and so fundamentally change his understanding of reality that he no longer can look at money the same way or anything else. Now, let me, one of the most important books I ever read, I was originally assigned to read it in a freshman history class in college. And I'll tell you for the life of me, a freshman in college, I had no idea the first time through what in the world he was talking about. It was a book by Thomas Kuhn called The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. And what time, what in the world I was doing reading that at the age of 18, I don't know, but it's a fine, fine, fine book. And this is what Kuhn says. In it, he says, basically, we don't look at reality objectively. We look at it through a paradigm. A paradigm is a structure through which we explain the data. And very often we have a paradigm shift. And when we look, when our paradigm shifts, we look at all the data afresh through the new paradigm. Here's the perfect example. As soon as I mention it, you'll see why, what he means. He gives in the book an example of a paradigm shift. He said, for a long time, all scientists believed that the earth was the center of the universe, that everything revolved around it, that the planets and the sun, that makes sense. Look, there goes the sun. I mean, you know, it's really logical. You know, there goes the moon. But here it comes back. It's going around in a circle. Well, we must be the center. And we're, we must be the center of the universe. The trouble was that some of the facts didn't quite fit. What happens when a fact doesn't fit the paradigm? Well, you sort of, very often, you just sort of work it in any way. You know, well, it's probably because of that. You know, so you stick it over there. In many cases, though, sometimes they just don't fit at all. Some of the things just don't fit. And so what you do is you sort of lay the facts over here on the side. You know, the unaccountable facts. And you lay them here. What happens is that they get bigger and bigger. This pile gets bigger and bigger. So many facts don't fit that it finally creates a crisis. And you shift to a new paradigm. And you say, well, let's see. Maybe this isn't right. Maybe. And you shift over and say, maybe the earth revolves around the sun. And as soon as you change that, now you look at all reality through this new approach. And you say, well, if that's true, then this means this, and this means this. And all the facts you were looking at before are now completely reinterpreted. And now suddenly you say, ah, the facts, there's, you know, more facts are accounted for. In fact, every fact is accounted for. This must be it. Now, Thomas Kuhn borrowed. of his understanding of paradigm shift from the language of Christian conversion, because Christian conversion is the ultimate paradigm shift. What happens when you're converted? You sit down and you suddenly have a new way of looking at reality. It's not like, well, I always knew, for example, that I always knew that cows give milk, and I always knew that you can ride horses. I always knew these things, and now that I'm a Christian, I still know those things. Not quite. What happens is when you sit down and you get a new paradigm, the paradigm of the gospel, and you say, if it's true that Jesus is who he said he is, if it's true that I'm really ultimately forgiven, if it's true that I'm holy and blameless, if it's true that now the God of this world is my Father, what does that mean? You look at everything through that paradigm, and everything has changed. Here's a problem you always had, but if my Father's behind this, if the one who is allowing this is a loving Father, you see, if you look at your gifts and you say, well, I always know I had talents, but if my Father gave these to me, so there's a purpose for it. You look at your sins and you say, well, I looked at it one way, but now I realize I have to stop this because I have got a Father in heaven who's done all these things for me. What happens is you look at everything, I mean everything differently. Look, look, there's a complete paradigm shift. So you look at everything differently. The values are totally skewered and changed as far as the world's concerned. So, for example, how do you look at money? It doesn't take long by looking at money through the paradigm. You know, you always say, all right, money looks the same, you know, five dollars, ten dollars. I mean, I still count money the same way. Oh, no, you don't. Through the paradigm shift, you find that it becomes much less important to you, and you find yourself giving it away in unusual proportions, and people who don't have the same paradigm look at you and say, they're looking at the same world out there, and they're saying, are you crazy? What is wrong with you? And the IRS will come and audit you because they don't believe that you really, people really do that. They really, you don't give that kind of money away. Are you kidding me? Come on, show me your receipts. Oh, my word, look at that. Different, two different paradigms for sex. What happens in the Christian paradigm, and we've talked about this before. What happens is, a lot of you have been raised in the idea that sex is dirty, and a lot of you that then come into an understanding that sex isn't dirty. It's, it's deity. It's, it's deified. It's, uh, it's extremely important. Christianity demystifies sex, and you begin to realize that it is meaningless outside of a, the context of complete commitment and knowledge and understanding, and it desexualizes the way you look at people. When you look at a relationship, sex speaks something way down the list, and you say, I know this is going to be great if I love this person, this person understands me. Sex isn't up there at the top. It doesn't control you like it used to. Or look at honesty. A lot of people say, it's impractical for me to be dishonest, but a Christian has a new paradigm. Hey, you're only going to be living here 40 or 50 more years, and then you're going to spend eternity in the face of the Father. I mean, what is really practical after all? I can show you. I talked to a man this week, actually in California, and we talked about something of great interest. Three or four years ago, uh, this man, who's about 60, left his wife. Why? Because she wasn't pretty anymore. And actually, she hadn't been pretty for a long time. Uh, she had aged, of course. She had, uh, she had lost, uh, the youthful loveliness, and so on. And for, for a number of years, he'd been grumbling under that, and he realized that being a man, he probably could, noticing a few other people had done the same thing, find a younger woman who looked better. Finally, he left. Left his wife to take up with another woman. But somehow, in the middle of all of that, both he and his wife, his real wife, got converted. And he says, I'll tell you what happened. We're back together, and here's what happened. I began to realize something. Things really, really changed in the way I thought about things. I went to a conference, and I suddenly realized that we're only going to be here for a while. For 40 or 50 years, we've got adult bodies, and of course, near the end of that time, uh, they go baggy. I began to realize something. I'm a Christian. My wife's a Christian. In the only, in the eyes of the only one that counts, she is gorgeous. She is holy and blameless without sight. And so am I. Am I going to be controlled by the temporary, he said? In God's sight, we're both gorgeous, and in actuality, we'll be gorgeous truly again. Just temporarily have we gone to seed. He said, I am not going to be, I am not going to be controlled by this reality. He stood back, and he says, I'm not going to be controlled by this temporary, and it's not going to be controlled by reality. And he says, my love began to flow back in when I began to realize what she looked like to Jesus. I began to realize what she looked like in Jesus. I began to realize what we were going to look like together before the. you imagine somebody else, anybody else, beginning to think like that? No way. You look really weird to anybody who doesn't share the same paradigm. And yet you do find that other people that share the paradigm with you become your brothers and sisters in a fundamental way. Look, if you're a Chinese Christian, you're a black Christian, it doesn't mean that you stop being black or Chinese. You still see things that non-black and non-Chinese people can't see. And yet, when you become a Christian, you adopt a new way of looking at reality. There's a paradigm shift that's even more fundamental than your ethnic paradigm, your racial paradigm, your class, your educational paradigm. And you immediately sense that unity with other Christians. It's profound. It's deep. It brings peace. The gospel brings peace. The gospel brings intimacy and unity between Christians because of a radically changed view of yourself and a radically changed view of other values. Now, the other thing I just want to tell you is, not only does the gospel create peace, but the gospel repairs peace. Now, here for a minute, let me just, just to close, and I want to close so we can go to the Lord's table. Let me tell you how a Christian looks at people who may or may not be Christians. Because of our paradigm shift, we have a higher view of people without Christ than they have of themselves. If you're here tonight, and you're not sure whether you're a Christian or not, I just want you to know, if you're not really sure what you believe about God, you're not sure really what you believe about religion and so forth, I'd like you to know something. We think better of you than you think of yourself. What do you think you are? Have you just evolved? When you die, are you going to rot? Or when you die, do you maybe think somehow we're all going to kind of go back into the great one mind and that sort of thing? You don't know who you are. Hey, listen, your Christian friends have a much higher view of you than you do because of the paradigm change. That's the reason why Lewis says this. He says, it is impossible for us to think too much of our neighbor's glory. The load or weight or burden of my neighbor's glory should be laid daily on my back, a burden so heavy that only humility can carry it. It's a serious thing to live in a society of possible gods and goddesses. He's talking about the fact that every human being has been built with the secret fire of the image of God. Every human being was created in the image of God. And every human being has the potential to live and rule and reign with God forever as immortal, beautiful, radiant creature, see? And that's why he says it's a solemn thing to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship. Or else, if cut off from God, a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if only in a nightmare. All day long we are, in some degree, helping each other to one or more of these destinations. There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilizations, these are mortal and their life is to ours is the life of a gnat. But it is immortals with whom we joke, work, marry, snub and exploit. Immortal horrors are everlasting splendors. That doesn't mean that we're to be perpetually solemn. We have to play. But our merriment must be of the kind, and is in fact the merriest kind, which exists between people who, from the outset, have taken each other seriously. No flippancy, no superiority, no presumption, and our charity must be a real and costly charity. A real and costly love with deep feeling for the sins in spite of which we love the sinner. No mere tolerance or indulgence, which parodies love, is flippancy, parodies merriment. Next to the blessed sacrament itself, your neighbor is the holiest object presented to your senses. Now, you know what he's saying? When the mountains have worn down to be pebbles, when the sun is so old, is about to cough and die, every human being in this room will still be alive. Maybe not physically, but nobody goes, you see. The person in the pew in front of you will still be around. And what does that mean? Friends, if you don't know whether you're Christians, if you don't know what you think about religion, we know who you are. We have a higher view than you do. You are kings and queens with amnesia. You don't know that unless you go to the Father through Jesus Christ who can give you your memory back, what you are was you're meant to rule and reign with him forever. We know who you are. We've got the paradigm to show you. And Christian friends, does everybody realize that that's your view of them? Do you realize because of your paradigm, you make no distinctions? You know that the mousiest paperboy and the greatest king are both the same. They're both immortal. They're both in the image of God. They are both people who can be here when... could be immortal splendors someday if they give themselves to Christ. You see, discrimination is impossible, but you must be treating everybody with fear and trembling, knowing that these people are so incredibly precious and valuable, every single soul, every single body, every person. Do people know that you feel that way about them? Do they sense that you treat them with this preciousness, or are you harsh, or are you abrupt? And lastly, a Christian. The gospel repairs peace because Christians deal with enemies the way God dealt with his enemies. Don't forget, and this is my last but most important point, a lot of people think, without the conviction of the Holy Spirit, that what it means to be a Christian is, I'm not good enough, I really should be better. Jesus died so I could be forgiven and be a better person. A Christian is somebody who realizes it's not just that I haven't been good enough. A Christian realizes that I have been in rebellion against God, that by trying to be my own master, there's been a vicious, intense rebellion against me, and Jesus died for me while I was an enemy. Remember the illustration, or something like it? Can you imagine if somebody was drowning and you went out to save him, and as you were trying to save him, he got out a knife and started to stab you, and say, I'm drowning because of you, get away from me. What would you do as you're trying to save him, and he's trying to stab you and kill you, and he calls you names, what would you do with him? And he'd say, forget you, buddy. I'm not going to save you. Why should I save you? What's the matter with you? That's the normal response. Thank God God's not normal. Because what did he do? He died for enemies. He says, I have held out my hands all day to a disobedient people. He says, the ox knows its crib, and the bird knows its nest, but my people do not know me. He says to Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, if only you knew the things that pertain to your peace, but now they're hidden from your eyes. These are the ones that are about to kill him. Don't you see? You want to know why the cross of Christ has not given you peace yet? Do you want to know? A lot of people say, well, I believe Jesus died for me. It hasn't given me power. It hasn't given me this incredible paradigm shift. It hasn't given me a complete control and power over my enslaving habits. It hasn't transformed me. You know why? Because you think you're kind of a bad person that Jesus died for to make you better instead of seeing that you're an enemy. And he died for you anyway. You would never die for somebody. You'd never try to pull in somebody drowning. He was stabbing you. But that's exactly what Jesus did. He came, and we killed him. We pulled him off his throne. We put him on the cross. And as he died, he said, have you done this for me? And he said, yes, that's what I did it for, even though you were an enemy. When you see that, you will never, ever, ever, ever again treat irritable people the way you did before. You will never treat opponents the way you did before. You will never treat enemies the way you did before. I don't know. Romans 12 tells you how to deal with people who have mistreated you. First of all, remember how God has treated you. Then secondly, get rid of your God complex. If you want vengeance, you're forgetting that only God knows what those people deserve. You don't know what kind of life they've had. And secondly, only God has a right to give people what they deserve. But before you tell yourself that, remind yourself of what he did for you. Let it melt away. Let it melt away. And they no longer can beat you, because the only way they can really control your life is if you stay mad at them. But finally, you're free from people so that you can be free for people. The gospel brings peace. The gospel will enable you to overcome your enemies. The gospel will enable you to see every human being as infinitely precious and change your relationship to all of them. The gospel creates this incredible peace and bond between Christians. Are you letting it do that? Look at yourself as we go to the table. Make sure you're remembering what he did for you, so the hard feelings toward other people and unreconciled relationships can be wiped away. Let's pray. Father, we do come to you now. We do approach you, and we ask that you would help us if there's any way in which we're not using the gospel to bring peace between ourselves, to bring peace in our relationships, to melt away the anger, to create a love and a care. Then, Father, help us as we go to the table to see that, to recognize that, to be cleansed, to have our intentions and our love for other people renewed. We ask it now in Jesus' name. Amen.
