TITLE: Male and Female – Sex and Gender in the Community (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Life Together in Gospel-Community (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/male-and-female-sex-and-gender-in-the-community-part-2/

============================================================

Let me read you from Psalm 72. That's okay. Take your time. Psalm 72, on which the first hymn is based, it's a famous Isaac Watts hymn. Endow the king with your justice, O God, the royal son with your righteousness. He will judge your people in righteousness and the afflicted ones with justice. He will endure as long as the sun, as long as the moon through all generations. He will be like rain falling on a moan field, like showers watering the earth. That's one of my favorite verses, believe it or not, even though I've never preached on it, that the kingship of Jesus Christ is like rain on a moan field. In other words, you've heard me often say, the more we're under the kingship of Jesus Christ, to the degree we're under his kingship, to that degree we blossom, to that degree we...that's what we need. That's where we grow. That's what brings out who we are. He will be like rain falling on a moan field, like showers watering the earth. He will rule from sea to sea, from the river to the ends of the earth. The desert tribes will bow down before him, and his enemies will lick the dust. All kings will bow down to him, and all nations will serve him. Praise to the Lord, God, the God of Israel, who alone does marvelous deeds. Praise to his glorious name forever. May the whole earth be filled with his glory. Amen and amen. Let's stand. Pray with me. Our Father, we thank you that you've given us access to your throne, so that because of our great high priest, whoever lives and pleads for us, we can say now we want to draw near, we want to draw closer, we want to be ever nearer. And we ask that you would help us to realize what we have available to us. We thank you for the objective truth, that we are able to come into your presence through our high priest. Now we ask that you'd help us to subjectively realize it, not just through our time together here tonight, but increasingly as we pray, as individuals and as a body, so that we can become more and more conformed to the image of your Son, whose name we pray. Amen. Have a seat. What we're doing this year, what we're doing this year, is we're looking at what the Bible teaches about community, and it's a very, very big, it's so much more than just how to have fellowship with each other. And we have said that those last couple of months, these last few months, believe it or not, it's April, then comes May, then comes June. There's really only two more, three MCM meetings before summertime. And what we're doing is we're looking to see how the gospel creates a church, creates a community that is very different than the world community in terms of several issues. Actually, I've been thinking about Galatians 3.28, where Paul says, in Christ there is no male or female, slave or free, Jew or Gentile, or Jew and Greek. And what we've been saying is that that's sex, money, and power. So what we started doing last month, and what we'll do next month and the following month, is we're looking at sex and gender, how in the Christian community that's supposed to be different than in the world. We're supposed to then secondly, money, which we'll look at next month, and possessions, and lastly, power and justice. Now, I ought to tell you that we're going to do two months, last month in this session, on sex and gender. One reason is because I wanted to go on a little beyond where we were last time. And I have, though. I got absolutely deathly ill on the day or two days that I had to put in a few extra hours on this, and therefore I didn't. There was really going to be a last section that I just didn't get to. But this is still more specific than last time. If you were not here, I'm sure that there's been so much buzz, and I've gotten so many very, very helpful comments and insights, most of which I've at least referred to in here, so that this can be something on which we build in the future. Nevertheless, I wasn't able to get as far as I wanted. But this way, everybody's on, those of you who weren't here last week, last month, get a bit of a review. Those of you who were there, show that we can take it on a couple of steps further. Let me give you the background. Look at these first two items under background for the teaching here. When you think of ethics, and I have to admit this is a fairly new, these are fairly new principles for me. When you think of ethics, we make two mistakes. When we say, what does it mean to live a Christian life? When you think of Christian ethics, Christian practice, we make two fairly important mistakes. The first one is, we think in terms of only the law, but not the gospel. When it comes to behavior and how we're supposed to live, we think of the law, right? The gospel is for getting saved. a right relationship with God, the law tells us how to live. That's too simple. And as I put down here, the law warns us away from false and wrong actions, but the gospel also calls us away from false and wrong hopes. The gospel warns us that we make good things into ultimate things, idols, ways of justifying ourselves. I'm sure that shouldn't be news to you if you've been around Redeemer for any long time. Therefore, when you're exploring Christian ethics in a given area, it's not enough just to ask, what are the rules? What must I not do? But you also have to ask, what are the idols? What would or should I be, how would or should I behave if I was free from them? Now, by the way, a perfect example of this is, in the area of rules only, no matter how much you make, as far as we know from the biblical rules, if you give away 10%, that's it. You're in compliance, right? So, you know, if you make $100 million a year and you give away $10 million, there's nothing wrong with spending $90 million on your furnishings. Well, right, that doesn't sound right, does it? And yet, where's the rule, huh? You see, the point is, it's not enough to go just to the law to get at ethics. You have to have to go to the gospel. You also have to ask, if I was free from self-justification, if I was free from idols, how would I be living? And that's actually a whole lot, one of the reasons we stay away from that question is because it's just too imprecise. And a lot of us, especially in the Northern European, Western, you know, German, British mold, we like things precise. We like the law. The gospel's kind of too murky or something. So that's one of the first mistakes we make. We only ask the law, not the gospel, how we should live. Second mistake we make is we only think in terms of individual ethics, not community ethics. And I have to say that it's really this year, it's forcing my, by working on this material for you each month, that it's, that's even started to clarify in my mind. The church, we've said, we started this the very first week, the very first month back in September. The Bible says the church is supposed to be an alternate city. We're a city set on a hill so the whole world can see our light. We're an alternate nation. We're a new humanity. Remember, we saw all those various times. You know, which means we're supposed to be a place where the world can see what a society would look like if Christ was the ultimate value rather than sex being an idol or money being an idol or power being an idol, okay? In the Bible, and this is something we talked about, but this is still, like I said, this is review. One week, if you've kept your handouts, you'll see that in the Bible, there's a particular word for a corporate idol. A corporate idol is when a whole culture makes an idol out of something and it exerts a tremendous amount of power. Like, you know, for example, some cultures make an idol, I would say, out of the family. Some cultures make an idol out of the military. Some cultures make an idol out of individual or sexuality and so on. In the Bible, usually, especially in the New Testament, a corporate idol or a cultural idol is not usually called an idol, but it's called a power. And there's a lot of places where the Bible talks about the fact that Jesus Christ unmasks the powers, and we talked about that. Therefore, it's not enough to discuss Christian living simply in terms of individual ethics. You also have to ask how the church is a community living out gospel values corporately. So as we're going to show you almost immediately, it's not enough, for example, individual ethics, when it comes to sex and gender, we have to say, okay, what does the Bible in the law say is right and wrong, but you have to go beyond that because it is typical in the church today for us to look at the law and look at individual ethics and say, in the area of sexuality, okay, I'm not sleeping with anybody I'm not married to, therefore, I'm in compliance. And as I'm going to try to show you, that's not the same as having a church, a community, in which sexual attractiveness and sex and gender is free, is really being lived out in a way that shows the world that we are really utterly different. So it's one thing to say, are you individually in compliance? Another thing to say, are we as a church modeling for the world a completely different and unique and gospel-oriented approach to sex and gender? That's a much bigger question. So now what we're going to do is we're going to take the three principles that I pulled out of, I won't even read you this section here. Last time, what we did was we went to Genesis 1, verses 26 and 27, where it said, God said, let us make man in our own image, and it says, in the image of God created he him, male and female created he them. And we pulled out of there, in the vicinity, three basic principles that the Bible gives us about sex and gender. What I'm going to do is I'm going to look at every one of the three over the next 25, 30 minutes, at the most, and we're going to ask, what is the individual, what is the principle, what is the individual ethical implication? would we live this principle out as a community? And I've taken a lot of your advice, but on the other hand, again, this is still very sketchy in many ways. So let's take a look at the first principle. Here's the one that you certainly have heard. The first thing that we talked about is that in the Bible, sex is in covenant. Sex must take place in the context. See, sex is not decontextual. It's got a context in the Bible, and it's always in a covenant. Here's the principle. Sex is a covenant renewal ceremony. Did I say that last week? It's a way to say to another person, I belong completely and exclusively to you. And in the Bible, covenant renewal is an enormously important thing. Deuteronomy, by the way, is itself a covenant renewal ceremony. The whole book of Deuteronomy is a renewal of the covenant made at Sinai. The Lord's Supper is a covenant renewal ceremony, renewing the covenant you make in baptism. In baptism, you're entering in. Baptism is like getting married. I can't believe I'm saying this. Am I on tape? Well, okay, the fact is that here's the metaphor. Baptism is like getting married, and the Lord's Supper is like sex. Okay, I said it. Okay. Well, actually, it is, because what you're doing is you make a covenant, but the Bible knows that our human hearts need to be constantly having the covenant renewed. It has to be reenacted. You know, if you go back and look at all the places, there's many places. When Ezra brings the people back from exile, they do covenant renewal ceremonies. There's numbers of them. I'm trying to remember, I'm missing some of them. When they built a temple, they, a covenant renewal, well, what is a covenant renewal ceremony? It's a reenactment of the original covenant. It's a reinvigorating of your heart. And that's the reason why the Bible never, ever, ever, always, always, and I'm not laying this all out for you as I could, you know, over and over the Bible will say, in the Old Testament, there's a number of places where it says, if a man and a woman who are not having, are not married, are having sex, and you catch them having sex, they got to get married. Have you seen that? And that's not the shotgun marriage thing. What that just means is, if you have a covenant without sex, that's, by the way, a sin, according to 1 Corinthians 7, as we're going to see. If you're having sex without covenant, that's a sin too. I mean, that's the ethical principle. Because what you're having, you can't have a covenant without covenant renewal, and you can't have a covenant renewal, obviously, without a covenant. You can't renew something that doesn't exist, okay? You know, that's like sewing a pair of pants without the pants. Very hard, okay? It is. I'm going to get serious here. What is going on? So what I put down here is, sex is an acting out, physically, of the inseparable oneness in all other areas, economically, legally, personally, psychologically, that's created by the marriage covenant, okay? So that's the basic principle. Now, what is the individual ethical implication of this idea of sex being a renewal of binding covenant? Now, we all know what the individual ethical implication is. I'm not even going to go into it. And the ethical implication is that that means in the Bible, you don't have sex outside of a covenant of marriage. That's, I know that's unbelievably primitive to some people, but, I mean, it's enormously sensible when you begin to understand the principle. However, what I want to talk to you about for about five minutes or so is that you can be in compliance on that as an individual and the congregation not be a community that is really showing forth the gospel shape of sex and gender in the community. What do I mean by that? All right, what's the opposite of marriage in covenant? And the opposite of marriage in covenant, where you're giving yourself, you see, you're submitting yourself, is an individualistic approach to sex in which the purpose of sex is self-fulfillment and self-maximization. Put this down. Last time we made mention of it, but I'm going to draw it out a little bit. It's what I call a consumerist model for sex. Consumerist idolatry, where you're actually making sex as a way of individual self-maximizing rather than a way of covenant service. You know what, just to give you a perfect example, you know, you never know. I'll write this up first draft. To show you what I mean, turn over to the biblical case study under this. Turn over to the second page. See the biblical case study? Then maybe that, it'll be easier for me this time to show you that, then I'll come back to the idolatry. Let me show you a perfect example of how Paul's approach to using this principle really undercuts the modern approach to sexuality, which is... really for individual self-fulfillment. Here's a very interesting passage in Paul, 1 Corinthians 7, 3 and 4. Let the husband give to his wife what is owed her, and likewise the wife to the husband. Well, what's he talking about? Well, he's talking about sex in this context, and here's what he says. He says, for the wife does not have authority over her own body, but the husband does. Okay, you stop right there, and boy, all you have is old traditional culture, but that's not what he says. He says, and likewise the husband does not have authority over his own body, but the wife does. I cannot tell you how radical that is. Look at the commentary. This is a radical confrontation with the consumerist idolatry, which says sex is for personal gratification. It's my body. It's my sexuality. The emphasis on mutuality is striking, especially considering the universally patriarchal culture in which the Christians of Paul's days were living. I mean, where Paul got this idea, I have no idea. It must have been from God, because he could not have possibly derived it from the surrounding culture. Each person's sexuality belongs to the other person in mutuality. So, there's no oppression here. Contrary to traditional culture, the man doesn't have a greater right to sexual pleasure. But, contrary to contemporary culture, there's absolutely no sexual autonomy. You see the difference? Critics of traditional patriarchal heterosexuality often recommend either sexual autonomy, that means every individual taking charge of your own sexual pleasure, or homosexuality. And the reason they recommend it is because they do not see any alternative to patriarchal oppression. But Paul gives it to you. Paul critiques both consumerist and, as we're going to see in a minute, traditionalist idolatries. I haven't even told you either of them yet. But with a model of mutual sexual servanthood, because when you enter into a covenant now, the whole purpose of your sexuality is to support that covenant. It's not yours anymore. It belongs to the other. It belongs to the covenant. Now, to show you what I mean, turn back and I'll give you this. So, what's a consumerist idolatry? A consumerist idolatry means sex as a way of individual fulfillment, rather than a way of covenant service. Now, let me give you two forms of this. One form is where you idolize physical beauty, physical youthfulness, attractiveness. And when the church participates in that culture's idolatry of useful sexual attractiveness, what is the result? Here are some examples of this. And plenty of churches, in plenty of churches, people are acting this out. See, they may have the ethical, they may have the individual ethical principle, I can't have sex outside marriage. But that's, see, the ethical principle arises from this idea that the purpose of sexuality is this mutual covenant service, as opposed to a way of sort of maximizing my power. It's a way of giving power. It's not a way and empowering the other person. It's not a way of maximizing my own power and my own pleasure in the society. So, the first form is you idolize physical youth and beauty and attractiveness. Sex is a way, if I'm cultivating beauty in myself or in other people, it's really a way of getting power in the culture. And here are some ways in which, in the church, people can actually participate in this idolatry. An over-concern for physical beauty in yourself or your partner. Okay? In other words, too much worry, too much time, too much effort into how you look. Too much time, too much effort, too much money, maybe, into how your partner or your would-be partner will look. Way too much. Number two, an over-concern for physical beauty in your friends, by the way. In other words, in the church, do you have a segregation of people within the congregation to groups of the cool-sleek and the uncool-unsleek? Sure you do. I'm not talking about Redeemer so much. And maybe it's there. I haven't been looking. But the point is, that is part of the idolatry in which you're taking sexual attractiveness as a way to put you in a certain spot in society. That's not the purpose of sexuality at all. But, you know, Christians can participate in it. Here's a third way. Lying about your age. I was trying to get real, real personal. I mean, this isn't it. This isn't all. I'm just trying to show you, have we really thought this out? I mean, in New York, did you see the article? It was in, wasn't it the city section? Didn't you see an article in the New York Times about lying about your age? You didn't see that not too long ago. Did people just do it? It was a style section. Yeah, it wasn't that long ago. But you see, the lying about your age is not, it's not a problem with lying. It's a problem with the idolatry of youth and beauty. Number four, or what, it's not a number, who cares? Ruling out potential mates strictly on the basis of weight or looks. Does that happen in the church? Of course it happens in the church. And that is actually making an idol out of the physical attractiveness. There's no doubt about it. Yes. There's no doubt about it. There's no doubt about it or not. What you think is … looks. Does that happen in the church? Of course it happens in the church, and that is actually making an idol out of the physical attractiveness. There's no doubt about it. It happens all the time. Are we different? Not particularly different, so we're not really modeling this. Next, general perfectionism in dating and looking for a mate, which can be either. See, the perfectionism comes from a consumerist model on sex. I want perfection. And there's two possible reasons for it, as I'm going to show you. It can be a function of the attractiveness idolatry or it could be a function of the consumerist fear of any kind of covenant commitment. I'm an individual. And a lot of people who are just absolutely that afraid of commitment or marriage in general is because they want to make sure that they keep all their options open. They want to maximize. Next, a second form of consumerist idolatry where sex is not idolizing sexual beauty as much as sexual pleasure itself. Now, how do you do that? Well, in other words, sexual pleasure is easily made into an idol. One of it is pornography. And I, even though we didn't talk about it last time, I don't think, but one of the things that I think in a Christian community you'd have to do is people, at least in same-gender relationship friendships, you need to be, I think, frank with one another about the pervasiveness of pornography, especially on the internet. It's huge. It's unbelievable. It's got to be people who have turned sexual pleasure itself, the actual sexual experience into an idol. And that's something in our church we've got to be careful about. That's not the sort of thing that somebody's going to see from the outside, but it would be eating us up inside spiritually. Number two, I mean, it doesn't kill your Christian faith. It just, it just, it doesn't kill it immediately. It just a slow leak. It just deflates you. Another one is constant sexual awareness and constant sexual evaluation in your thoughts, your looks, and your humor. Again, some of this is a little bit, uh, is not real visible from the outside, but, uh, in our culture, we, everything, there's sex in everything. Sex is selling everything. Sex is everywhere. And one of the ways in which we don't participate in it is we have to be careful yourself about when you meet new people, when you just see them on the street, are you constantly doing sexual evaluation and thoughts and looks, are you doing it with your friends? Are you doing it in your humor? Uh, another form of idolizing sexual pleasure is quickly sexualizing the dating relationship. Um, I know plenty of Christians who not only are actually breaking the individual ethical rule, but, but, uh, plenty of Christians who really do it, you know, do something short of intercourse, which, uh, there's still a fairly, fairly, uh, you know, creative, uh, array of things that seem to be short of intercourse and their source somehow. And I, I, my guess is that Christians might be worse at this than most because I think the average person may be not feel, you know, penetration is, is intercourse. So what? Okay. Well, you know, but I think since Christians have all these kinds of scruples about it, my guess is that they're, uh, in your dating relationships, you're sort of going around that edges, everything but, and that could be idolizing sexual pleasure itself. Uh, next in general, if you let eros rule rather than balancing the erotic attraction with store, gay, philos and agape in the relationship, that's from the four loves that participates in the idolatry, a lack of joy in celibacy. Now here's the last one. And you know, the problem is this one should be pulled right out. This one should be broken out. I'm sorry. But the fact is a lack of joy in celibacy can come from a consumerist idol. It can also come from a traditional side of this. I'm going to show you a lack of joy in celibacy comes from the consumerist title. Why? An inability to see celibacy as an honorable call to rely in a special way on the spousal love of Jesus Christ. Our inability to see the call to celibacy, if you're a single person or, or even if you're not, if you're called to celibacy for some reason, there's no righteous way for you to be having sex and you're, that's a call to celibacy. Can you see it an honorable call? Can you see it as a, as a, as a, a call to a special relationship and reliance on the spousal love of Jesus Christ? And can you receive with joy? That's tough because we've said before that marriage is a very natural thing and therefore wanting to be married is a natural thing and wanting, and really, really, really wanting to be married is a natural thing. But you know what? That doesn't mean, by the way, that you can't receive a call with joy. Those are not, those are not, it's not like, well, I'm going to have to stop wanting to be married if I'm going to receive a call with joy. No, why not? You know, it's actually celibacy to some degree is a form of suffering. And yet the Bible says, uh, for some people, not for everybody, but the Bible says, uh, many places it says, uh, receive suffering with joy, right? And usually it's not talking about celibacy. Usually when the Bible says receive suffering with joy, it means, you know, the plunder of your house, uh, the imprisonment, your imprisonment, receive it with joy. Okay. Okay. Can you? Well, now I know a whole lot of people who say I could receive that with joy. be. Well, get it straight. If you can receive that with joy, you can receive this with joy. And it's a very, very important way in which we're showing the world a whole different approach to sex and gender. A lack of idolatry. The inability to be joyful about that or receive it with honor is really failing to exhibit this to the world. So, sex in covenant versus a consumerist idolatry. Not just a matter of not refraining from sex outside of marriage, but how do you create a community in which the consumerist idolatry of sex is not ruling? Second, the second point is we said not only does the Bible say sex is in covenant, only in covenant, but it's for sanctification. Sex renews a covenant, but what's the covenant for? You know, if you only think that the, if your sex ethic is only, oh, sex outside of marriage, that's a negative. That's a negative. It's saying don't have sex outside of the covenant. Okay, but what's the covenant for? Covenants are contracts. The covenant's got to be for something. What is it for? And the Bible's answer is, and this is a pretty big deal, sex and gender are given to both for partnered growth in glory and partnered culture building. Dear me, I haven't, this is really great, but on the other hand, I've got 15 minutes here. What I mean is this. Covenant renewing power of sex. See? Sex has got a covenant renewing power. It remarries you. It is remarkably, you know, in a good marriage, it has an amazingly powerful effect. It's got covenant renewing power. And it also, as we're going to see in the last point, if I time myself okay, it also has complement renewing power, which we're going to look below, which means it gets you in touch with a side to your gender that you wouldn't get in touch with otherwise. That's very mysterious, but there it is. So, you have a covenant renewing power and a complement renewing power, but what is it for? Just to make us cooler people, cheaper, richer people? No, not at all. According to the Bible, the purpose of it is always to serve, is not just to build yourself up, but secondly, it's not simply to serve the other spouse either. In other words, it's not to maximize yourself, that's the consumerist idol, but it's also not just to fulfill your spouse. That's the doormat approach. I'm not here for myself. I'm just here for the other person. I'm just here. No, that's the traditionalist idolatry, where you basically say, I belong, we're going to look at that in a minute. It's oppressive, because in a sense, you're doing everything for the other person. Instead, the power of sex and gender is a partnership for a lofty goal, divine life-giving, kingdom of God-building. For example, if you go back, in terms of creation, if you go back to Genesis 1, 26 to 28, it says, God gives the gift of sex and gender so we can fill the earth. So one purpose, if possible, is bearing and forming children into the world. Now, not everybody can do that. I mean, there's plenty of people who can't, for various reasons. But you see, in terms of redemption, I look, in terms of redemption, the power of sex is used to bring one another into the glory we were meant for. Some of you, if you remember one of the sermons in my marriage tapes that I preached in here many years ago now, that, you know, a series of nine, I said, the purpose of marriage, the purpose of marriage is a commitment to the other person's glory, seeing what God is making, the beautiful thing God is making. And therefore, the purpose of sex is not, it is for sanctification. That means the purpose of sex is to get into a partnership with somebody else in order to bring life, physical life, spiritual life, or maybe both, into the world. You've got to, you've got to ministry together. You've got to have a common vision for some way in which you're going to bring God's life into the world. That's what it's for, believe it or not. Now, here's what that does. Individual ethical implications, quickly. In the Bible, even in the Old Testament, where it's a little muted, there's a breaking away from traditional culture's understanding of marriage. Traditional culture's understanding of marriage is always for the purpose of building up the male status and substance. There is no doubt about it. In traditional cultures, the purpose of marriage is how do I, how does the man get a woman who will help him have children, who will help his estate get bigger, will help him, you know, the family increase in power. There's no doubt about it. Whereas, the biblical understanding is marriage is a partnership for building God's kingdom in each other and in the world. Now, one of the ways you see this laid out in ethical implications is, in the Bible, unlike the rest of Near Eastern ancient culture, men and women have mutual rights in divorce. Men and women have mutual property on them. There's all kinds of see in, you know, there's a certain egalitarianism in biblical ethics you don't see in the surrounding Near Eastern cultures. Not because, not because the Bible is somehow more democratic, but because it's understanding of what the purpose of the power of sex is for. It's for partnering to get something done for God in the world, not coming in and helping the man have the life he really wants to have. Now, the community ethical implications are these. The traditionalist idol. The traditionalist idol is exaggerating gender differences and making rigid gender roles an end in themselves. We talked a little bit about this last time. Rather than a means to an end. See, that's what an idol is. An idol is a good thing that you've turned into an ultimate thing. Gender differences. And they're there. Did anybody read the cover article by Andrew Sullivan yesterday in the New York Times magazine? Extremely interesting. A little bit overdone, but good. Good. In which he talks about, you know, the innate differences of, you know, biology in men and women. But the traditionalist idolatry takes the differences and instead of a means makes it an end. It overemphasizes it. It idolizes them. And what it does is, therefore, it makes women a means to the end of male power and prosperity. So rigid gender roles tend to pin everybody's identity not on Christ, but on living up to a long list of gender stereotype traits. Now, how can a Christian church participate in this idolatry? You might say, boy, I know some churches that are, well, I'm going to think about Redeemer for a minute. I'm going to think about not churches that are super patriarchal anyway, you know, where women are never allowed to speak in any meetings and so on. I'm just talking about a church like Redeemer. How can we still participate in traditionalist idolatry? And here we have some. Number one. I've got several here, yeah. An over-concern to be married. See, the consumerist idol leads you to an under-concern of being married. The consumerist idol is scared of ever losing control because that's what the consumerist idol is. Sex is my way of maximizing my individual self-fulfillment. But in traditional, the traditionalist idol says you're nobody unless you're married. You've got to be married and you have to have a white picket fence and 3.5 children and so forth. And therefore, the traditionalist idol leads to an over-concern to be married. Just as a fear of commitment may be tied to consumerist idolatry. Just, I've got to be careful. I'm not saying it's wrong to want to be married badly. It's just another thing to be totally cast down and devastated by it. Another one. Another way that we might be participating in a traditionalist idol is men looking for, we said this last time, men looking for gorgeous thin women of a particular class. Whoops. Well, I'm sorry about that. You know what? I didn't write these in complete sentences. These are my notes to myself. Men looking for gorgeous thin women of a particular class as part of a portfolio. In other words, I'm putting this, I need a beautiful wife looking at a certain, there's a certain kind of, you know, look that she's got to have. It's all part of the portfolio of success to go along with the right degree of good salary and living in the right neighborhood. Christians aren't supposed to be into that. Christians are not supposed to be after that. On the other hand, women looking for men with that portfolio is the other way you can, and under concern for partnership. And under concern for partnership, the important thing is where do I get a good looking spouse who puts me in a certain position in society? That's a traditionalist model, as opposed to partnership and kingdom building. I need somebody who's going to help me in kingdom building, not just somebody who can give me that place in society I have always wanted. Well, that's really, really critical, and I don't know that Christians are necessarily able to make those distinctions. You follow me? Next page. A lack of healthy desire to be married. Now, here's what I mean. Why should you be married? Somebody emailed me. I forget who you were. Well, never mind. I don't need to. He said, okay, well, what does a, if the traditionalist idol can make you want to get married, if even a consumerist idol can make you want to be married, you know, as long as the person is really, really, really hot. If, in other words, if you have these wrong, what's a healthy reason? And here we are. Let me just give you three. A desire for a deep cross-gender friendship that profoundly stimulates my growth. I'm going to get to this under the next one, but the fact is, do you know that as a male or a female, you need discipling by somebody other gender? Because there's things that you don't see and understand about the world. Do you believe that? Do you understand that? Is that something you really want? Secondly, a desire for greatly enhanced mutual ministry, including maybe the discipling of children, which, by the way, is you should think of as a ministry. It's a way of bringing both spiritual and physical life into the world. You should think of child-rearing like that. And then thirdly, and or, because it might be, a desire for partnered cultural... really help me do a better job of bringing the kingdom into the world in general, you know, in our job or work or something like that. And when you're passionately looking for somebody of the other gender to help you in those three areas, then you've got a healthy desire for marriage. Got to be careful. You know, is your desire for marriage really simply just because all your life you've always known that you're really not, you know, anybody unless you've reached a certain spot in society because you have the right kind of spouse. Next, men interrupting women. By the way, here's a traditionalist idol. So I'm trying to get down. Remember the idea about lying about your age? Here's another one at that level. Men interrupting women's conversations, but women don't interrupt men. Men disregarding women's opinions, ideas, and concerns. I mean, it's very easy for that to happen, even amongst people that consider themselves, you know, liberated and egalitarian. I'm telling you, things that you can do in a church in which you're actually participating in the idolatry of part of the culture. Here's another one. A lack of joy in celibacy from the traditionalist angle. Now, I told you there's a lack of joy in celibacy from the angle of the consumerist who just feels like sex and sexual pleasure and sexual experience you've just got to have. You've made it an idol. It's just got to be there. So you can't receive the call of celibacy with joy. However, from the traditionalist idol, an inability to see celibacy as a call to rely in a special way on the spousal love of Christ to confer honor. Between this and my last time I said that. Out of the consumerist idol, you can't receive celibacy as a joyful call to rely on the spousal love of Christ for your joy. In this case, you have to rely on the spousal love of Christ for your honor. Because a traditionalist idol seeks marriage not for pleasure, but for a sense of honor, a sense of being recognized. Last, or second last, the church, when the church just treats sex as a necessary evil, that's the traditionalist model, rather than as a good gift and a joy. When the church or when Christians hold people accountable for celibacy with guilt and condemnation, rather than with a call to mission. Do you just, you know, do you make people, when you realize they're sleeping together, do you just, you know, throw guilt and condemnation on them as if sex is a worse evil than any other kind? Certainly a lot worse than spending too much money on yourself. That's all the traditionalist model in which rigid gender roles are lifted up and idolized. And here's one more thing, but I'll mention that below. Christian couples have to work out headship according to a cookie. Well, I'll show you this in a minute because I've only got five minutes to show you the last one. No, I can't completely. Look at the biblical study. Sorry, this is it. You can read the rest of it. If I don't, I mean, at eight o'clock, I'm just going to stop. I can't help it. But here's a great biblical case study. Some of you may have heard me talk about this once before. If you want to see a biblical case study that deconstructs the traditionalist model, just like 1 Corinthians deconstructs the consumerist model of sex as an idol, as opposed to the traditionalist. Am I killing it? Okay. Sex is a way for honor and status. Ephesians 5.22. You may think you've known everything about that. That's the place where it says, wives, submit to your husbands. Husbands, love your wives and give yourself as Christ loved the church. Okay. Well, that's a very controversial passage. But let me tell you something interesting about it. Look at these two things. I believe that that passage undermines the traditionalist and the radical deconstructionist idol, which says there are no gender differences. Why? Because on the one hand, on the one hand, Ephesians 5 calls the couple to recognize male headship. It does. It posits a gender difference that's there. But on the other hand, neither Paul nor any other part of Scripture defines the content of what that looks like. There is no place does the Bible say what male jobs are or what female jobs are. There is no place where it says the husband makes the decisions. There is no place where it says, well, the husband makes half the decisions or the big decisions or 20%, the big ones. Nowhere, there is no place ever that it is defined what that headship is. Now, you know what that means? Any man who says, look, honey, I'm the head of the home. That means you better shut up because the fact is you don't know what that means all by yourself. There is nothing in the Bible that tells you what that means. You and your wife have to work out what that means. Every couple, every temperament, every culture has to work it out. See, nobody wants to hear this. If you're, in a sense, a liberal, you don't want to hear there's such a thing as headship. And if you're conservative, you don't want to hear that there is absolutely no guidelines in the Bible as to how that's worked out. Because what that means is every couple has to work out what male-female rules mean in their situation. impose a former pattern of authority on a new marriage, anybody that picks up, this is the way my father and mother did it, anybody who says this is the way it was done in the old country, we're going to do it that way. You have no right to do that. But together you have to decide how you're going to work that out. Because anybody who says this is the way you do headship and submission, when it's not in the Bible and you're saying this is the way my parents did it, this is the way we're going to do it, it's a very serious sin. The Bible says whenever you elevate tradition to the level of Scripture, it's a very serious sin. Jesus says that in Mark 7. And that's the reason why I said, and we're going to have to finish, I'm sorry. Well, I'll tell you what, I'm going to come back. And if you can remember to bring it back, but I'll probably stick this on a single sheet so we can pick it up next time and then move on to money. We have to do this last one, it's pretty important, but we can't tonight. But look back up on the last little bullet point at the top under traditionalist model. Christian couples, this is on the, no, I'm sorry, this is the top of the third page. Sorry, my last 30 seconds. Christian couples all work out headship according to a cookie cutter, one size fits all pattern. Pardon me. There's many, many churches where that happens, where the church works it out and says, this is what headship and submission is all about. And they tell you, how dare you do that? On the other hand, if you have a church, and people is working that out, but on the other hand, doesn't deny the fact that there is such a thing as gender difference, that there is such a thing as headship, you'd have a unique church. I haven't seen one ever, and Redeemer isn't one at this point.
