TITLE: Male and Female – Sex and Gender in the Community (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Life Together in Gospel-Community (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/male-and-female-sex-and-gender-in-the-community-part-1/

============================================================

Let me just read from Psalm 95, and we're going to stand and sing. Come, let us sing for joy to the Lord. Let us shout aloud to the rock of our salvation. Let us come before him with thanksgiving and extol him with music and song. That's the first part of our worship service, praise. Then, further down in Psalm 95, come, let us bow down in worship. Let us kneel before the Lord, our maker, for he is our God, and we're the people of his pasture. That's the second part of our worship service every week. That's repentance, that's renewal. And then finally, today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts. That's the third part, listening to the word. And so what we're going to do here is just go through a little version of that right here for a couple of minutes as we sing, and then listen to the word again. So stand, and let's praise the Lord. What we've been doing this year is we've been saying Christian community is not just a place where we get together and sort of care for each other and love each other and support each other. Christian community is, according to the Bible, an alternate city, an alternate nation, a new humanity. In other words, the Christian community is supposed to be a little mini-human society in which the normal idols, sex as an idol, money as an idol, power as an idol, race as an idol, that those idols are taken away. And when Jesus Christ is supreme, what does that make human society look like? That's what our job is, to build a society like that in our church, our Christian community. And what that means is we're asking ourselves, how will Christians, how will a Christian community look unique and different than any other part of society in these areas? And what we're going to do these last four months of the, well, you know, I realized today as I was looking at this, there's just no way I can finish this at all this year. Because, you know, we only have a March MCM and an April and a May and a June, and then we take two weeks, two months off. And in these last four months, we're going to look at the big three, sex, money, and power. And we have to, when we look at these three, what we're asking ourselves not just is, what are my individual ethical do's and don'ts? As a Christian, what must I do with my money? What may I not do? What may I do? What must I do? What may I not do in sex? You know, and that sort of thing. That's missing the forest for the trees. There are, of course, ethical guidelines that the Bible gives. But we're supposed to be trying to build a Christian community that looks really unique in the way in which we regard sex and use sex, money, and power. Now, tonight and next month, I remember thinking I've got to do this all tonight, but I just gave up. And I realized what I'm going to do tonight is I want to lay down some real basic principles that will help us understand how do we build a Christian community that's uniquely, distinctively, gospel-centered and Christ-centered in the way in which we deal with the issue of sex and gender. That's not quite the—I have never really tackled that. I'm sorry to say. I've never really taught on that. I mean, I've taught sex ethics and what the Bible says we're supposed to be dealing with sex. But when we start talking about our community, that's different. I'm very excited, but I want you to know what I'm doing here is fairly rudimentary. And even tonight, I want to—at the end, I want you to give me some ideas for next month. Most of what you really want to hear is next month. But if I would get to it too quickly before laying down these basic principles, it wouldn't be illuminating or helpful. But here's what I want to do. I want to lay down three basic principles that the Bible gives us in the very, very beginning. The first place and the first spot that sex is ever mentioned in the Bible, which is Genesis 1, 26 to 28, we have three very important principles that I want to show are fundamental for our getting a Christian grip on sex and gender. So let's take a look at what these three foundational principles are. Go down to where it says foundational principles. And the first mention of sex and gender in the Bible occurs with the first mention of humanity. Now, all by itself, that's very significant. Here it is. In verse 26 of Genesis 1, God says, Let us make man in our own image. And then verse 27 and 28 reads this. In the image of God created he him, male and female created he them. That little semicolon, of course, there's no semicolon. There's no punctuation at all in Hebrew, in the ancient Hebrew. What that simply means is these are two parallel statements. They are identities. They are saying the same thing twice. They're two different ways of saying the same thing. They're not two different things. You see? It's just like when Jesus says, Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your strength. I can think of when Jesus says, all your mind he's really not talking about four different things just four different ways of saying the same thing and the same thing here when he says in the image of god created him male and female created him them are just two ways of saying the same thing that's extremely significant why it means that sex and gender is not incidental to our humanness it's the very very essence of who we are it doesn't in other words as soon as god began to create he created male and female immediately it happens that way it means he does not create general persons but he creates male and female persons and this sentence shows a nutshell what the rest of the bible unfolds and it's these three things number one it means that male and female are absolutely equal in dignity both are in the image of god from the beginning and not only that but both not male just males are given the dominion over the earth in the very next verse see verse 26 let's make man in our own image verse 27 male and female he created he them and verse 28 he says now be fruitful and multiply and have dominion fill the earth and subdue it and he's giving it to both which is a very interesting he's telling not just men but women to rule very important and it means that only as male and female together in full participation can we carry out the mandate to build civilization and culture and i put down here just you know we're going to get to this a little later compare that with this with traditionalists and we'll talk about what i mean by that with the idea women's places in the home does that fit with genesis 1 26 27 28 the answer is no don't think so oh it doesn't mean that being at home with children isn't by the way a way of doing the cultural mandate but the idea that that's uh generally what traditionalist means is women are not supposed to be in the public world but you have what you have here is that uh the dominion mandate is given to both men and women so that's the first basic principle second principle though and it is sort of a though that maleness and femaleness are irreducible there is they're not interchangeable we are not made into a generic humanity and then later differentiated you can't you mustn't get that you mustn't think that that's what it's saying when it says uh in his image create in the end pardon me when he says in i've lost it where is it oh in the image of god created he him step one male and female created he them step two i tried to say the semicolon indicates by the translators that that that's not two steps it's the same thing and what that means is we're not first made human and then made male and female it means that only accepting and understanding our maleness or femaleness in the end is how we accept and understand ourselves and that goes not against the traditionalist view that says women's places in the home that actually goes against you might say the post-modernist view that says gender is a complete construct that you know there really is no two genders that basically it all depends on what we do or what culture does it says no no no the bible says it's more fundamental than that now there's a third thing and it's very important and not only does uh the third thing is it tells us that only male and female together point us to the trinity itself why because since both males and females image god now it's a shame i'm not i don't have time to go and say what is the image of god it's a big issue however you can tell almost just as a general reader what does the image mean it's a reflection it's like a mirror and if it's true that both male and female image god the being of god it means that god has all the traits associated with both human maleness and human femaleness however you define it and only therefore as male and female together can we understand the full range of god's character but it's even more than that even though i'm gonna i won't get into it this week this this month further since the trinity is multi-personal male female relationships image both relationships with god and they image relationships between the persons of the trinity and therefore only with the understanding male and female relationship not just maleness and femaleness do we really understand god now what does this lead us to these three principles actually lead us to understand how sex and gender becomes a demonic power in the world now if you were here in october we talked about this issue of power um and we said previously now you have to go back to the by the way you have to go back to your life your uh the what i gave out in um in october which was part two roman numeral two and it says the theology of christian community and when you go through the book of ephesians i make a little reference to it here uh we said that god has given many good gifts in creation that under the influence of sin become idols or they become powers there's all this reference that under the influence of sin become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or they become idols or We said that God has given many good gifts in creation that under the influence of sin become idols or they become powers. There's all this reference in Ephesians 3 and Ephesians 6 to the fact that Jesus Christ has defeated the principalities and the powers. And I spent some time that night trying to say that the traditional view both of liberals and of conservatives, when they see this term powers in the Bible, is that both liberals and conservatives think they're just talking about demons. And they think that they're demonic and therefore liberals say that's stupid, we're beyond that, and conservatives write books like The Present Darkness. And they think that what it really means is there's demons sort of running around making people do sinful things. My own father, who's by no means an intellectually, well, I shouldn't say that, he's by no means a theologically sophisticated person. He was leading a Bible study through Ephesians. He called me up and he says, I don't understand this. Because it says, if the powers are demonic, and it seems like they are, they're bad things and we're supposed to defeat them. Why does the Bible want to seem to persuade them? Why does it say that the church is supposed to show the powers the wisdom of God? Why would we trying to convert demons? And I said, you're right, dad, they're not demons. You wouldn't be trying to convert demons. What are the powers? The powers are good created things that when you make them an idol, they function with demonic energy in our individual lives and in our corporate lives. Technology is a good thing, but in our modern world, it's a power. It's a good thing that actually has demonic energy. Sex can become a power. And sex and gender, race becomes a power. You can obviously, the demonic power, it became in a place like Nazi Germany. But it's actually wreaking havoc in our own world, okay? Now, sex in general are very clearly powers, which means they're good created things that need to be redeemed. Here are some questions you ask. This is from the Gospel and Our Culture Network. Now, don't worry, I'm not going to go into this with detail. I just want you to know that this is an interesting set of questions to ask about a particular power. I know what you're saying, wait a minute, is this the same thing as an idol? Yeah, but generally at Redeemer, when we talk about idols, we're talking about psychological individual idols. Like when you, you know, you make, you make your music, no, I'm going to pick on if you're a musician, you can make music into a kind of personal idol. You can make a, your spouse, or you can make romance into a personal idol. Actually, we're getting close into that. But the point is, the powers we're talking about is when a community together, in a sense, serves one of these good creative things and makes it too ultimate. Then it becomes a power distorting the life of the society. And here's an interesting, this guy, Bill Wiley Kellerman, no relation at all, in the Gospel and Our Culture Network, has three questions to ask about a power, three sets of questions. There's the creation question. What was the original reason for this power? Why did God originally create it? Secondly, what is its creaturely purpose, its original and best intention? That is, hmm, what's the difference between that? Oh, well, I have to think. How in particular is it called to praise God and serve human life if it was functioning properly? Then there's the next set. Fall, because of sin. Do you see where that vocation has been confused? How do human beings make an idol of it? In what ways may it be said to usurp the place of God now? Do people find meaning, identity, and justification in connection with it now? How are their identities observed, confused, and distorted by it? See, that's a great set of questions. Then lastly, where do you see the power unmasked and disarmed? How are its illusions, lies, and deceptions exposed? Now, I don't have time to go any further but to say, I began asking this question, not about sex and gender in our society. I started asking these sets of questions and saying, how does it function in the world today as a power that needs to be disarmed and unmasked? And I came up with these three. I'm not asking you to sort of figure out the process. I just want to let you know that that's what's behind these three things. And from what I can tell, there's at least, I mean, there's got to be more ways, but here are three ways I see that sex and gender become an idol in our society. Three very different ways. In fact, they're almost opposed to each other. The people with these different idols hate each other, and they picket one another, and they vote for different candidates, you know, in the elections. But they're all in different ways letting sex and gender be an idolatrous power in their life and in their society, and it's distorting their society. Here's a start. Number one, I don't think these are great names, but at least I've sort of gone at it. First of all, you have what I call a traditionalist idolatry. Now, a traditionalist idolatry, and this, by the way, goes against the principle of equal indignity that I put you on the first page. One way we make sex and gender an idol is when we exaggerate gender differences and build our identity around very, very rigid gender roles. Real rigid, real macho guy, real, you know, sweet, frilly women. And what they've actually done is they've taken very, very rigid gender roles, and they say, that's who I am. And that means that's an idol. That's a power. That's making sex and gender into a power. What do I mean? Well, let me show you. Many traditional cultures over-emphasize over-emphasize over-emphasize more aggressive because of the hormones. They tend to be more independent. And hopefully nobody here disagrees. These are kind of biological facts. They tend to be physically stronger. So in such a social structure, what we do is we take some of these differences, and we exaggerate them, you know? We take something that's sort of a principle, and we turn it into an absolute. That's the very essence of idolatry. And in such a social structure, both men and women can actually take refuge in the safety of men always being in charge and women always being removed from power in public. It's safe. It doesn't... But both sides, it takes little discernment and no courage at all to live that kind of life. In many ways, extremely traditional roles take less courage to live out, as I just said. But biblically, male and female are both equal in dignity, give an equal charge to build culture, and so on. We talked about that. Christians understand, or should understand, that gender roles are penultimate identities. My maleness and my femaleness... Maleness femaleness is important, but when you turn it into the very thing that makes me who I am, it's the main thing. It's the whole only thing about me. Well, see, the point is that according to Galatians 3.28, we're Christians first, and men were women second. And as you're going to see, I mean, I don't have time tonight, but when you take a look at the fruit of the Spirit, the fruit of the Spirit are not gender-specific. It's not right to say, okay, well, women are self-controlled and gentle and humble, and men are faithful, and no, I'm sorry, every one of the traits is for every one of us. And that always sort of takes down, and in some ways, it definitely... The fruit of the Spirit always works against rigid gender roles. No doubt about it, in my mind. Rigid gender roles tend to spin one's whole identity, not on Christ, but on living to a long list of gender-stereotype traits, a hundred things that men do, and only men do, and a hundred things women do. So traditionalist idolatry, as a result, makes marriage and family into an idol. I couldn't help, even though I don't know them, and they may be different. Did anybody see the cover story of the New York Times two weeks ago? It talked about, you know, an evangelical family, somewhere in the Allentown area where I was raised. Now, I don't know enough to say this, but Kathy and I read through, and we said, we certainly can't be sure, but there's an awful lot about what we read there, and, you know, you're reading it through the filter, who knows. But there certainly seemed to me a lot of rigidity in the gender roles, and almost beginning to make the family into an idol, at least along these lines, from what we can tell. So anyway, well, I'll show you. Traditionalist idolatry always, as a result, makes marriage and family into an idol, because you essentially feel like, unless I'm married, I'm nobody. While Jesus' own life as a single man shows that marriage is a penultimate identity issue, because he was somebody. I mean, fairly, fairly significant person, never got married. Number two. The second is very different, but it's based on the second, it's a second kind of idolatry, but it's based on the second principle I gave you in Genesis. I'll call it the deconstructionist idolatry. I just still think I've got to find better names, but there we go. And this is versus the idea that maleness and femaleness are irreducibly distinct. Another way to make sex and gender an idol, or a power in your life. Ironically, it's when we rebel against the very idea of gender givens, and thus we build our whole identity around our apparent radical freedom from traditional gender roles. In other words, well, let me just read through it. This may take many forms, but those involved in it are driven very often by anger and a need to break the barriers and a need to break the traditions and need very often even to push against the limitations of their own body. Ironically, they're thus nearly as controlled by gender as the traditionalist. That's what's so interesting. Whenever I've met somebody who says, I'm totally free of this stupid idea of two gender roles, and this is just ridiculous, and yet it's very clear that that's what makes them feel significant. I'm different. I'm better. I mean, and they are just as driven to a great degree. They're not relaxed about gender at all. I mean, to a great degree, this idolatry is triggered by, and I'm going to tell you, an awful lot of people who are locked in this idolatry are locked in it because they think they're the traditionalist idolatry. It's a reaction, and in some ways, I'm a lot more sympathetic personally to people who are in this one than the other one because I don't think you come up with this unless you've really been turned off by the first, but nevertheless, that's why I put down here, it's a little bit like a person who rejects his father and spends all his life doing the opposite of what his father wanted and thus paradoxically has made an idol in reverse of his father. Or you see, I know you wouldn't think, well, idol in reverse. That's what I mean by a power. A power is something that controls you because you've made it too important even by way of negation. He is utterly controlled. They can't relax or enjoy gender differences any more than traditionalists can enjoy gender exceptions. You see? When it, when it, when it, when it, a woman who's at one end of the bell curve, you know, okay, somebody who doesn't really fit traditional rigid gender roles, traditionalists go nuts and they may kill them. On the other hand, deconstructionist idolatry tends to go nuts with people who are really pretty masculine or feminine. In many ways, they find them just very threatening. They just write them right off. They act like I'm superior to you. So they can't stand the differences any more than traditionalists can stand the exception and that shows that gender is a power in their life. There's just no peace. Thirdly is what I call, and this is the one who, if you're in New York, if you're a New York single, this is the biggest problem. And I call it the consumer idolatry, and this is opposite to the idea of the pointer to the Trinity. See, if gender, look at me for a minute, if it's really true that maleness and femaleness is supposed to reflect the relationships within the Trinity, which I believe is very obvious from Philippians 2 and a lot of other places, what that means is that sex is for service and commitment. It's not for what we usually, consumer idolatry, go back down here. The most obvious way that sex and gender is an idol power is when we try to use sex not for committed service to another person, but as a way of maximizing pleasure and or power in the sexual market. Now, I'm not talking about the meat market, all right? I'm talking something general, and that is this. In modern Western society, look, A, if you are very physically attractive, there is a lot of power and impact that you have. There's no doubt about it, whether you're male or female. If you're very physically attractive and you play that up and you use that, you can go a long way. I'm not even, and it has nothing to do with sexual intercourse. See, there's a way that consumer idolatry means that you buy into the idea that with sex I can get someplace, but it may not have anything to do with actual sexual contact. We're talking about the fact that you give yourself over to an idol of beauty and sleekness and attractiveness and all that sort of thing as really a way of, what, getting an identity. So it's a power in your life. It makes you assess people superficially. It makes you yourself, to a great degree, you know, you're locating your glory and your attractiveness. And then on the other hand, pleasure. In this case, a consumer idolatry, that sex becomes a power in the most obvious way of all. This might be the way the average conservative Christian thinks that sex becomes an idol. And that is when the actual experience of sex becomes a narcotic, a way of consoling ourselves, dealing with the harshness of life. We just have to have it. We have to have it or we just can't really live because I just need it. It's part of, it's like being addicted. It is being addicted. It doesn't mean you necessarily have to be a true sex addict. I'm not talking about that. There is that. But just somebody who absolutely has to have the pleasure regularly coming into their life. The fact is that sex and gender was from the beginning, not a way of power, but a way of service, but in this culture, it's a way for power. It's not a way to maximize yourself, but to complete somebody else. In this culture, it's a way of getting yourself pleasure. The life of the Trinity is one of love and service, complete commitment to one another. It's utterly different. And those are three ways in which sex is a power. Now, I want you to know that everybody, just about everybody in this room, to one degree or another, is wrestling with one of these kinds of powers. The brokenness that comes into our sexuality comes somehow, but to one degree or another, it is. So for example, let me just, let me give you, let me just give you, it's not down here, but just listen. The traditionalist idols mean, traditionalist idols, for example, make you overly desirous of being married and absolutely disconsolate if you're not. See, it's an idol. Why? The desire to be married is natural. The over-desire to be married is not. Or for example, if men are only looking for gorgeous thin women and women are only looking for wealthy and powerful men, that's a traditionalist idol. And yet, that's rampant in New York. Or if you're always wanting, if you want sex outside of marriage, period, that's a consumerist idol. If you are having it, it's a consumerist idol. It's a power in your life. You're not following the life of the Trinity. Or if you are completely afraid of getting married, because you're an absolute perfectionist. You're saying, I was starting to fall in love with her and then I found out that she missed, then I heard her mispronounce Goethe. You know, or then I, or as, as, you know, as Seinfeld once said, her, and then I realized her earlobes are too big. And, you know, she can cover it with those big earrings, but I hate big earrings and so on. But that's, that's a consumer, there's absolutely no, there's a consumerist idol. It's a consumerist idol because sex to you is power. I want somebody who's really perfect and is not, is going to maximize me and fulfill me or at least look incredibly good with me. I mean, so if you don't think you're having trouble with one of the, the brokenness of sex and gender in your life through one of these kinds of idolatry, I don't think you know yourself very well. Now, what that, now turn over, well, you're already there. This leads to Thank you. Thank you. the above principles there's three embankments for sex. See, now we're getting a little bit down to practicality. What do I mean by embankments? Well, a river is only beautiful and helpful if it stays within its banks. Only then is its beauty and usefulness for irrigation and navigation useful, otherwise it's not even a river really. It's certainly not very helpful. A river goes past its banks. So if sex stays within its banks, it's not destructive. These three banks are based, by the way, you see the metaphors breaking down, three banks. Yeah, I think we have, I think we have a lake or a dead end or a, what do we have here anyway? But anyway, I'm sorry, I'm sorry. We have an estuary. Is that it? We don't have a bank. But so only, only if sex stays within its banks is not destructive. These three banks are the three things I got out of Genesis 1. Here we have number one. Sex has to be with commitment. Sex with commitment. Sex was invented first for commitment. And I'm not, I'm only going to say this real briefly because I actually need to get some questions from you. I can come back to this next week as a kind of recap. And I say next week, next month. But first of all, and you've heard me say this before, but if not, here I say it. Sex is a covenant renewal ceremony. And therefore, there's no covenant to renew. It has no purpose. It doesn't work. Sex is a way to restate to somebody else, I belong completely and exclusively to you. And the proof of the pudding in that is the fact that if it's really mirroring the life of the Trinity, well, I'm not going to press you, all right? So the implication, here's the first ethical implication. It's very simple. You don't have sex outside marriage. That's the first implication of what Genesis 1 says marriage ought to be, right? Number one, or not, I mean, what sex ought to be used, pardon me. Number one. Number two, sex has to happen with compliment. And what that means is sex was invented first for commitment, for renewing a permanent relationship. Secondly, sex was invented for compliment, just as the bodies of the two genders literally fit together. So Genesis 2 and elsewhere directly says that there's a deep oneness possible between a male and a female that's not possible in sexual relations between two of the same gender. So the second basic principle is that sex must be between, in marriage, and between a male and a female. And the third, sex with joy and justice. Sex was invented thirdly for partnership, sex, servant partnership. If you just have number one and two, you still don't have it. Traditionalist cultures see the purpose of marriage as the fulfillment of social duty. Thus, you don't marry for romance, but just to get the best family, the best social standing and honor and family you came, you know, the best honor for the family you came from to bring them up and so on. In modern consumerist cultures, we see the purpose of marriage as the fulfillment of psychological needs. Thus, you see marriage as mainly for personal fulfillment and personal pleasure. And you aren't at all ready for the enormous sacrifices. You know, traditionalist marriage says the important thing is really, you don't, you don't marry for pleasure. You marry for duty and family and social standing. They're good on sacrifice, not at all on romance and pleasure and so on. Consumerists say we get together as long as it's meeting our needs, but, but they're completely in our culture, unready to deal with the changes and the sacrifices that it takes to have a long-term relationship. Biblical purpose of marriage is to become a minister to your partner committed to the development of his or her glory. That's your job. You say, I see something beautiful and great that God's making this person and I'm committed to seeing it happen and I'm committed to sacrificing as Jesus did so that I, so that I could come into fullness. And that's the purpose. And when I say joy and justice, what it really means, of course, is the traditionalist marriage that everybody knows as a traditionalist culture, took women down. It basically used women. But everybody knows, I think, that consumerist culture, you know, is, is a, is really selfish. That is, we're together as long as we're not sacrificing for each other. But here what you want in, in a Christian marriage is, is, is to really not just merge the two. I mean, there's both duty and there's joy, but it's because you have a whole different purpose. Both the traditionalist and the consumerist model are essentially selfish. In this one, you say, I am committed to the development of the glory of my partner. And therefore, you know, it's joyful justice. One person is not using the other person. That's why I put down, in traditional marriage, the husband uses the wife. In consumerist marriage, the husband and the wife use each other. Because they're ready to go if it's not mutually happy, you know, if I'm not, I'm not doing well. This is utterly different. And there's your three operational principles. Now, what I want to do, I want to tell you that what I, we have to do next month, and I'm going to ask you some very important questions. In light of this, there are four areas, don't, don't turn over just yet. There's four areas in. and very distinct and really look different. I don't think we look that different. I mean, there are many, many ways in which I'm proud of Redeemer, and actually I'm still proud of Redeemer. But we have a long way to go to create a community in which none of those three idolatries are really, really distorting us. And here's four areas of practical application, and when I've told you what they are, my watch says I have at least five minutes for you to tell me if there's any others I ought to work on for next week, next month. But here's what they are. First of all, one area where we have to be utterly different is sex outside of marriage. Can we have a community? These are important questions. Can we have a community of singles who are practicing abstinence joyfully? And keeping each other accountable without condemnation and guilt? Okay, we can't, right? Okay. Well, that's the, see now, you see that question? There are lots of churches in which everybody's practicing abstinence, but that's not what I'm asking. So you can practice abstinence through a traditionalist model. And we don't want to do that. You know, can we become a community, can we become a Christian community, largely of singles, in which we're practicing abstinence joyfully and keeping each other accountable without condemnation and guilt? Can we do that? Okay, secondly, there's a second area we'd have to be unique. And I already told you about these. Our attitude toward dating and marriage seeking. Can we have a community where neither traditionalist idols are rampant, like over-desire to be married, men looking only for gorgeous than women, women looking for wealthy and powerful men, or consumerist idols, wanting sex without marriage, under-desire for marriage out of perfectionism? Can we, in our dating relationships, comb ourselves free of these things? Okay, no. All right. Number three. Number three. Now, I think the third, this is the third area. It's very important. And here's three very important questions. We have lots and lots of gay people, some openly gay, many, many not openly gay, who come to Redeemer. Now, what are we going to do? Here's three questions. And they're very important questions. Can we admit that traditionalist idols do, sorry about the, sorry about the grammar, can we admit that traditionalist idolatry does create homophobia and gay bashing? Do we want to admit that? In other words, do we want to admit that we single out homosexuality? If you single out homosexuality over things like prejudice and anger and, you know, and, you know, joylessness, then you probably are in the grip of a traditionalist idol. Why would you single that out? Secondly, can we talk to gay people about the gospel without making them feel that becoming heterosexual is what will save them? I know that plenty of people at Redeemer give gay people that impression. Number three, can we explain how most heterosexuality is just as broken under the powers as well? Are we willing to admit that and talk like that? You know, I was buying tea downtown at my tea salon, which is a very good place to buy tea. I buy tea at, it's between 20, it's on 20th Street between Broadway and 5th. And the lady who owns the place was giving me tea. And she says, what do you do? And she's very garrulous and outgoing, really sweet lady. And she said, I'm a minister. She said, oh, you have a church in town? I said, yes. And she says, gay or straight? Which is, there's not many places that would be asking me that. And, you know, I have to tell you something. On the basis of, I avoided it not because I was nervous, but you know what? There's, I hope you understand now that you've listened to my three questions. I would like to be able to say neither. You know, I don't think that in light of traditionalist idolatries, we ought to say we're a straight church. As if there's something unbroken about straightness, you know. So anyway, that's number three. Will we be different there? And the fourth place where we have to be really unique and different is how we help people understand gender roles inside marriage. And here's my one question. Do we understand a view of headship and submission that avoids all the different idolatries? Now, I'll tell you what I would tell you next week. I'm going to have to talk about this. I think to get rid of the idea of headship and submission is a mistake. And I think to define, pre-define before you, to pre-define what that is is a mistake, too. In other words, I would say to every, well, I'll tell you next time. I'll tell you next time. But now here's what I want to know. So, I mean, we would be really, really weird and really, really unique if in those three, four areas, we could unmask and disarm sex and gender as idolatrous powers. However, are there any other areas? I mean, in those four areas, how we understand headship and submission in marriage, how we understand homosexuality, treat gay people who are in our midst, how do we... So, we're in online Thank you. lastly, just being able to handle, you know, keeping sex inside marriage with all our single people. Now, can anybody tell me some other area, or does that cover it pretty much, those four areas, some other practical area of application, yeah? Right, okay, okay, well, you know, already we're kind of unique there, but everybody hates it, anyway, but you have to remember, don't forget, that sometimes if you take an idolatry out, most people who are under the power of an idol, you don't think you are, and therefore very often a balanced approach in some areas may dissatisfy you, but generally speaking, what will happen is, I think that the beauty of a community like this will probably pull through, but I'll say that. That probably is worth a whole other subject, but I'll talk about it. Yes, a couple others, right here. Ministers to single mothers and divorced people. Okay. I'm not promising I get to all this, but I'm writing it down. Yeah, that'd be great. Okay. Give me a few more. Yeah, over here. That's a breakout issue. Yeah, you're right. In other words, it breaks out underneath something else. Okay. Well, false intimacy, define it briefly, so I'm pretty sure I know what you mean, so I don't go off. Yeah, between men and women, a male and female. Right. Right. Okay. A couple others, and I got you. That's what I thought. Yes, here. Oh, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. No, you're not talking about necessarily just when you're in full-time Christian ministry, how the marriage works. Yeah. No, you're right. Yeah. In other words, you're called together to build culture and creation. How are you doing that? Okay. A couple more. Oh, yeah. Yeah, back there. Well, you know, what's interesting is I think I'm going to touch on that because a traditionalist idol says, you know, I want somebody powerful and wealthy or beautiful. Well, a consumerist idol, see, if you are that perfectionistic, very often it's because you're just afraid. You don't, you're not really getting into this so much to minister and give. You just want to make sure that the other person is, one or two more. Wow. Yeah. Okay, Scott. Sorry. All right. Okay, so you'd like a form for an exit interview. And, right. And don't you have to give notice and sort of put them on probation and you're under review. See, actually, I'll tell you, I have to admit that's the hardest thing about, as we all know, I think, that's one of the reasons why you don't even want to date. Because you say, either I'm going to have to marry this person or else I'm going to have to break up. And, and both of them sound incredibly scary to me. And so, you know, why even start? No, I know. All right. One more. Yeah, right straight back. Yeah. You've had, what was the first, I hear a stereotype. What was it? Okay. Okay. Hmm. Now, you know, that one is not, of all the ones that were just mentioned, that's the one I really hadn't been thinking much about. Thank you. But it's time is up. I'm sorry. Put your hands down. See you next month. Let's, uh, I'm thinking of being, I'm thinking about, you know, getting a virus or something that week. We'll just, we'll just have a, we'll have a hymn. We'll just have a, we'll just have a, we'll just have a, we'll just have a, we'll just have See you next month. I'm thinking about getting a virus or something that week. We'll have a hymn sing that night. No, you can't bring visitors. Let's pray. Our Father, we're very grateful that you even give us the hope that we could build a society and build a community that is free from many of these problems that we have. Help us to see how important, though, it is for us as leaders to set the pace here. We'll just never have, in a church like Redeemer, people in process, various sorts of process, we'll never have this Jerusalem on earth. But we must set the pace. And I pray, Lord, that I certainly have been convicted by the teaching myself as I've been thinking about these things. And I pray that you would enable us to be a city on a hill that really shows the glory of God in this area and many others. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
