TITLE: Marriage, Divorce, and Singleness
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 19:1-12
TOPICS: Marriage
SERIES: Sermon on the Mount
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/marriage-divorce-singleness/

============================================================

put asunder. Why then, they asked, did Moses command that a man give his wife a certificate of divorce and send her away? Jesus replied, Moses permitted you to divorce your wives because your hearts were hard. But it was not this way from the beginning. I tell you that anyone who divorces his wife except for marital unfaithfulness and marries another woman commits adultery. The disciples said to him, if this is the situation between a husband and a wife, it's better not to marry. Jesus replied, not everyone can accept this word, but only those to whom it has been given. For some are eunuchs because they were born that way, and others were made that way by men, and others have renounced marriage because of the kingdom of heaven. The one who can accept this should accept it. Here ends the reading of God's word. Statistics on marriage are pretty common. One out of two marriages will end in divorce. Only a minority of the children currently under the age of five will live all of their childhood with two parents and so on. But the statistics aren't the important thing, but the cause and even the result of those statistics, they've touched off an endless debate about marriage itself. And nobody can seem to agree. You've got one party that says, we have got to go back to the traditional views of marriage, we've got to legislate it, we've got to press it home. Other people said, no, we've got to come to a whole new approach to marriage, a whole new form, complete with prenuptial agreements and multiple divorce options and timeshare children. And others have said, let's just get rid of the whole thing. Let's just scrap the whole thing. Why can't we come to consensus? Worse than that, why can't we just let it go? And the answer, the Bible would say, is because unlike schools and councils and art museums and civic organizations, marriage has got an indelibility about it, a deep, deep grasp on the psyche, because unlike all other institutions of society, marriage, most other institutions of society, marriage was invented by God. Marriage was started by God. It has a divine origin to it. And that's why there's an indelibility about it. There's an inherent grasp it has on our hearts. There's never been a society found, there's never been a culture found, no matter how remote, that didn't have marriage. Because, the Bible says, God invented it on the day he invented us. That's how deep it goes. It's not just a social, it's not just a social convention that was dreamed up by late Iron Age cavemen. It's a great idea. The Bible says it was invented on the day that we were born. And because of that, it means on the one hand, we can't get rid of it. We can't. There's a lot of people that have tried their darndest to get rid of it. A lot of people have tried everything they can, but trying to get rid of marriage is a little bit like trying to take your own appendix out. It's part of us. And it's like saying to yourself, hold still when you're trying to do it. But on the other hand, are you working on that illustration? On the other hand, we can't understand marriage unless we deal with the design of the inventor. You see, if marriage, like schools and museums, if marriage was our invention, you can tinker with it. If it's not our invention, you can't. See, if you pick up a gun, you have to deal with the design of the maker. The maker of the gun designed it to aim that away. And if you don't submit to it, you'll probably shoot a hole in yourself. Marriage is the same way. That's the reason we can't get a grip on it. Because since we didn't invent, we can't get rid of it because we didn't invent it, and we can't then just do anything we want in it. You have to submit to the design of the creator. And when you enter into marriage, you actually enter under the regulations of the creator. That's why the old prayer books and the old marriage vows usually go like this. Marriage is instituted of God, regulated by his commandments. That's what it says. Because what God institutes, he regulates. I don't know how many times I've sat down with people, I've sat down especially with men, and I've said, you've got to forgive your wives. The Bible says you have to forgive your wife. And he looks at me and he says, don't tell me how to run my marriage. And the response is, if you feel like that, you have no idea what marriage is. Because your marriage isn't yours. It's an invention by somebody else, and you have to enter in under the design and the regulations of the designer if you're going to use it, if you're going to... about marriage? And what does He say about divorce? And about singleness? These things. Ready? First. First thing, we're told here, and I'm going to go rather quickly, because unfortunately, this should be two sermons, but it's really wrong to separate what Jesus teaches about marriage and what He teaches about divorce and singleness, because they really hang together. So instead of going into every one of these points in depth, I'm going to have to go through it in a more cursory way, but unless we do it, we can't see how they hang together at all. First, Jesus teaches the essence of marriage. What is the essence of something? The essence of something is what makes it itself. If I say, what is a physician, and you say a physician is someone who wears a white coat, I would say, well, physicians often wear white coats, but that's not what makes them a physician, because barbers wear white coats, and other people wear white coats, so you can't say that. What makes marriage marriage? Some people will say it's affection, that feeling of love and affection. But your dogs have that, you know, and they're not married to you. They'll die for you. Some people say it's procreation, it's making babies, see, it's making, it's creating a family and having children. That's the essence of marriage, but rabbits and rats do that very well, too. My wife and I were watching one in the subway system the other day. Rats and rabbits are very good at procreation, but they're not married. Some people say, what is the essence of marriage? Here's the essence. Jesus says a man shall leave his father and mother and cleave. To his wife. And that word cleave in verse 5 is the essence of marriage. That word cleave literally means to make a covenant. It means to make a public vow of absolute faithfulness and commitment. And you're not married until that's happened. You see, God says it in Ezekiel 16. He says to Israel, I married you when you were of age, I covered you with my robe, I made my vows to you, and I pledged my faithfulness to you. And what he's saying there is the essence of marriage is a covenant. Absolutely. He says in Ezekiel 16, when you were of age, I made my vows to you, I entered into a covenant with you, and you became my wife. And so it's the vow, it's that commitment that's the essence of marriage. Now, practical application before we move on. Practical application is this. It's amazing how often when I ask people who I'm performing a wedding for, if I say, well, I don't ask them to do this. Sometimes they come to me and they say, could we write our own vows? Now, I don't ask them to do it for this reason. Whenever people write their own vows, they come back exhibiting that they don't understand what marriage is. Usually the vows come back saying something like, I love you and I care for you and I want you and that sort of thing. Listen, friends, a marriage covenant says nothing about the present. Because to cleave to somebody means to make a promise and promises have to do with the future. In a wedding, you are not so much declaring your present love, though of course that's the reason for it. In a wedding, you're promising future love. You're not just saying, I feel tender to you now. In a wedding, in a covenant, you're saying nothing about your feelings at the present. In a covenant, you are saying, I promise to be tender, to be affectionate, to be faithful, to be serving from now on, regardless of your condition or mine. That's what a covenant is. You're not really talking about your feelings at all. To say, I love you, is not a covenant. To say, I love you in front of the world isn't a covenant. And you see, if the essence then of marriage would be having babies, or if even the essence of marriage was a feeling, then marriage would be a moment-to-moment thing. But if the essence of a marriage is a covenant, then it's a permanent thing, and what it does is it controls your future. And we've said this before, the only possible way for you to not be controlled by your past, but to control your past, is through forgiveness. And the only way you can control your future and not be controlled by your future and your hormones and your genes and your circumstances is a promise. The essence of marriage is a covenant. Secondly, the purpose of marriage is friendship. You notice, when I say the purpose of marriage, I'm not asking what makes marriage marriage. This time I'm asking you, what is marriage for? And the answer is here in verse 5. And for this reason, a man will leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. There it is. For this reason, we have marriage. Well, what, for this reason, that's a critical passage or a critical little pivot. So what happens before that phrase will tell you why we have marriage. And the answer is, he made the male and female. And what Jesus is referring to is that strange and wonderful passage in Genesis 2. malediction. You know, a malediction literally means a bad word, and a benediction means a good word, benediction. And you notice all through the early parts of Genesis 1 and 2, everything God does is benedicted. God made it, and it was good. God made it, and it was good. God made it, and it was good. And suddenly, Adam is there, and God says, it is not good that man should be alone. He creates Eve to deal with loneliness. He therefore creates Eve to complete Adam and to become his companion, to become his friend, and he, her, and she, him. The bottom line is, Jesus is teaching that the essence of marriage is a covenant, but the purpose of marriage is deep friendship. Several places in the Old Testament, your marriage partner is called a halupe. Kathy, my favorite name. Every so often, we'll look at each other and say, halupe, how are you doing? It means a covenant partner. It means a deep friend. Listen, when Adam first saw Eve, he broke into poetry. You know where the first poetry in history is? The first poetic couplet is right there in Genesis 2. When Adam saw Eve, he said, at last, this is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. And what he's saying is, love you, I am you. He's talking about something that goes a lot deeper than the one flesh idea of physical oneness. And we've talked about this under another heading, of course. To be in love, and to be in marriage, means not just that you're physically naked, but that you're personally naked. That you have made yourself absolutely vulnerable. You have shared the bottom of yourself. You've shared everything. You've opened up all the way, and you're loved. And you're delighted in. You're scared to do it. It's a horribly difficult thing. You do it, and you find someone there loving, and rejoicing, and accepting you. Now listen, friends. That is the essence of marriage, and that's the best it gets. It's not like what those beer commercials said. It doesn't get any better than this. It doesn't get any better than that. And even in the best marriage, it's only episodic. But when it happens, you can feel the heavenly connection. You realize the life of heaven is here. Deep friendship. The purpose of marriage is friendship. Now, can I do a practical application again? To singles, and then to marriage, and then to singles again. Practical application. To singles, do you see, I hope you see, why the church has never really been just an old stick in the mud when it says, please marry people that have a similar faith commitment. Because instead of looking at it as a rule, you ought to look at it as a living principle. If you ever even get close to being married as a marriage ought to be, you have to open up. You have to share secrets. You have to go all the way down. You have to share the deepest, most intimate parts of yourself. And if, for some reason, Jesus Christ is one of the most important things in your life, or the most important thing in your life, and you open up to somebody who can't figure it out at all, you feel raped. You feel, not just naked, but raped. You feel awful. And it's because, here's somebody else that looks at your core, your center, and either yawns, or worse than that, laughs. It's a living principle that you can't have a marriage, and you can't actually have a deep, deep friendship, if you wittingly go after somebody who doesn't share the same center. So, you see, it's not just a stupid, narrow-minded bigotry that says, marry someone with the same faith commitment. It's a living principle. Okay? A practical application to married people. If the essence of marriage is friendship, look carefully at yourself. What happens, I know, over the years, is continually opening yourself again, and again, and again, and again, is very hard work. And what very, very often happens is you, partly, partly by neglect and partly by design, you just find parts of your life that you just don't share with your spouse anymore. There's secrets you keep. There's things you just are afraid to bring up. Because the last two or three times you did, that your spouse didn't understand or laughed at you. Now, I don't mean that you need to come on back necessarily, especially with a spouse who in many ways may be extremely, extremely hard and callous, and who could really hurt you in a lot of ways, and just simply go in there and make a clean breath of everything. But I want you to realize your marriage is dysfunctional if it's not a friendship. And you should make every effort you can. Go as far as you possibly can to put it back on a friendship basis. As far as you can, go toward the place where you're able to confess to one another, talk to one another, confront one another, and just share with one another what makes you the happiest and what makes you the saddest. Do everything you can. application of this principle, the friendship principle to singles. And I want you to know, New York singles, I have a bone to pick with you. You can't wait, can you? I can't either. If friendship and a covenant is the basis for marriage, and romance and sexuality grows out of that, if that's the biblical order, at the essence and purpose of marriage is friendship, and out of that, out of a great friendship, out of deep sharing, grows romance and sexuality. If that's the biblical order, how do you justify the way you, and the way we all did, decide who to date? I'll show you how you do it. I know how you do it. You walk into a room, and there's six people of the other gender. You immediately eliminate four of them, having no idea whether that they'd be good friends, but on the basis of the romance and sexual attraction. Four of them are too tall or too short, too fat or too thin, or they don't look like your class. So you eliminate them because the way you do it is you start with romance and sexuality, and if that looks good, if that goes well, let's build a friendship. So you do romance and sex and friendship next. And you may have, over the years, eliminated a tremendous number of your very best prospects because you've been enslaved by the idolatry of image that New York in particular puts on you, but our culture in general plays on you. You have no idea how many people you've passed over because you've reversed the biblical order. Friendship is what marriage is about. Believe me, that's what's sexy. Not the other way around. Sex grows out of friendship. Friendship doesn't grow out of sex. It never has. That's what the Bible says. And you know, whether you believe in the Bible at all, whether you think, all I'm doing is fundamentalist raving, you know what I just said is true. And what I said is true not because I said it, because it grows out of the wisdom of the word. The purpose of marriage is friendship. The essence of marriage is the covenant. And lastly, Jesus also shows us the priority of marriage. He says, a man leaves his father and mother and cleaves to his wife. More than any other relationship, marriage must have the priority. It must be the most important relationship in your life because it's the most powerful one. In the garden, God did not put a parent and a child. That's not the most fundamental relationship. In the garden, did not put two people of the same gender. That is not the most fundamental relationship. In the garden, the archetypal relationship, therefore the most powerful and primal relationship you can have, is marriage. The reason it has to have priority is because of the power it's got. Let me just say a couple of things that are just scary to me and should be scary to you, but we need to hold marriage in the kind of awe that it deserves. Marriage has the power to set the course of your life as a whole. If your marriage is weak, and yet everything else about you is, you know, in every other way you're surrounded with strength. If your marriage is weak, and yet in every other way you're surrounded by strength, it doesn't matter. You move out into your world in weakness. And if your marriage is strong, and everything around you is weak, it doesn't matter. You move out into the world in strength. Marriage is the vortex of your life. First of all, it's because marriage can recreate your self-image. Where does your self-image come from? I'll tell you where it comes from. It comes from your own successes and failures, but mainly from your failures, and it comes also from the uneven way in which people have treated you over the years. Now you get married, and you will be amazed to find that your spouse has got the power in his or her hand to challenge the accumulated authority of all the verdicts that have ever been passed upon you. And what I mean by that is pretty simple. If your spouse says, you're ugly, and everyone else says, you're beautiful, you feel ugly. And if your spouse says, you're beautiful, and everybody else says, you're ugly, it doesn't matter. You feel beautiful. Why? Because marriage has got that power. How could it have that power? Because it's not invented by you. It's invented by God with that power. It's the primal relationship. It's why it's got to have that priority. Do you see that? There's other reasons, but I can't go into them now. Marriage, Jesus says, the essence of it is covenant. The purpose of it is friendship. And the priority of it is something that we cannot escape. The power of it is there because of the priority. My last application before I talk about the divorce and singleness thing. One more practical bit of application. Some of you, some of you singles are sitting there saying, I'm scared to death of this thing. I don't want anything to do with it. It sounds like a bomb that if I even... of you married people are saying, what did I get myself into? And here's what you're thinking, and this is what you should be thinking. Look, I see, you say, that marriage takes an unconditional commitment. And I see that marriage takes unselfish loving and an openness and a vulnerability. And I also see that marriage is a powerful thing. So that if I love my spouse as Christ loved the church, if I love the way Christ loved, I could know unequal bliss. But on the other hand, if I don't, and I misuse it, it could create tremendous deep hurt in me. Oh my, I can't do it, some of you are saying. Because I see that if I love like Christ loved, I could know a tremendous joy, but I can't love like Christ loved, I'm too dysfunctional. Wrong. You're looking at Christ the wrong way. In other words, you're half right. And that's how most of our wrongs are. When you look at Jesus Christ, and you look at him loving other people, committing himself to other people, serving other people, you say, I can never attain to that. But if you look at Christ loving and dying for you, if you look at him on the cross, saying, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And you know he did it for you. If you look at him, here he is, the great one, the creator of the universe. Heaven and highest heaven can't contain him. He becomes a little baby for you, and he's tormented on the cross for you. If you know that personally, and if you fill your heart with it, it melts you. And it becomes a seed that if you plant it, if you take it off the shelf, and if you plant it every single day, it begins to sprout, and it will enable you to love without residual anger, and to open yourself without residual fear. It works. God would not call you to it, something like this, and not equip you for it. You have to look at Jesus, and then marriage can take its course. Now, it's only in light of that, that what Jesus says about divorce and singleness is possible to understand. And Jesus tells you three things about divorce and singleness that I will move through quickly, but I'm going to say them to you in the most epigrammatic way I can. Number one, divorce is an amputation, he says. Number two, divorce is therefore sometimes necessary for life. And number three, singleness under any conditions has got to be seen as a calling, or you cannot endure it. Do you see how he says that in there? I sure wish I had more time, but I'm just going to have to go through and quickly give it to us. Number one, divorce is an amputation. Number two, divorce is sometimes necessary for life. And number three, singleness cannot be endured unless you accept it as a calling. That's what he says. First, divorce is an amputation. He says here, what God has joined together, let no man put asunder. That word asunder tells you something. We live in a time in which divorce is considered a normal and natural thing in which we believe it should be as easy as possible. Jesus Christ says, if you understand marriage as this deep unity, this deep oneness, then you will discover that divorce cannot be like taking off your clothes. Divorce is more like taking off your arm. Divorce can happen, it does happen, and it can be survived, but it's as radical as to remove a leg or an arm. He says what God hath joined together, all that emphasis on joining, let no man put asunder, which means when it is put asunder, it is that amputation. The teaching is it can be done. The teaching is here that it does happen. The teaching is even here that it can even be survived, but that it is not something that it's entered into lightly at all. Any doctor would be run out of the practice if he was constantly and quickly saying, well, we'll probably have to amputate. You know, it's the last thing you do. It's the most drastic thing you do. It's an absolutely life-threatening thing that you do. It's not something you enter into very lightly at all. And any society who recommends it lightly should be run out of town just like a doctor would be. And that's what Jesus says. But then number two, take the analogy a little further. If it's true that divorce is amputation, the fact is sometimes the doctor does prescribe it. And you see, the disciples come back or the Pharisees come back and say, well, why did Moses give you to grant a divorce? And Jesus immediately says in verse 8, what? For the hardness of heart. You see, even though God meant marriage to be permanent, in fact, the permanence of marriage is what actually helps you grow. It's what enables you to feel free to open up and be vulnerable. It's what helps you finally come to grips with who you are. And we can't go into all that. Marriage needs to be permanent. And yet, Jesus says, because of sin, because sin has entered into the world, there are conditions in which divorce and divorce And. And. the voice. lists one of the grounds right here, and that is the ground porneia, in which case he's talking about adultery. And he says, on the basis of adultery, when your spouse has committed adultery against you, you can be divorced and free to remarry. There's another place in 1 Corinthians 7 that Paul gives the other biblical grounds to divorce, and that is what he calls desertion. And if your spouse deserts you and will not return, and so on, then you are free to remarry, Paul says. There's a sense in which, in the Old Testament, if you would break your covenant, your marriage covenant, through adultery or through willful desertion, you were stoned. You were killed. In the New Testament, that is not the way it is. And yet, the New Testament recognizes there's a sense in which the partner has died. You know how it says, till death do you part? Well, the New Testament recognizes that under those two conditions, there is a death, and that you then are able to marry and remarry. Divorce is sometimes necessary, and some people are awfully self-righteous about divorce and look down their nose at any divorced person. But Jeremiah 3, verse 8, in that place, God says, I divorced Israel. And God has the audacity to call himself a divorced person, and if you don't want to have anything to do with divorced persons, you are in the unenviable position of not having anything to do with God. Because God is not afraid to call himself a divorced person. Now, one quick question before we leave, and just say one last thing about the single calling. People ask me constantly, what about a divorce that doesn't live up to specs? What about a divorce, what if I, the person says, was the, quote, guilty party in that divorce? What if I just walked away and never had biblical grounds for a divorce? What happens to me? And I'll tell you the quick answer, but it's not an easy answer. The quick answer is, an unbiblical divorce cannot be the unforgivable sin. It's, you know, to ask the question, can a sinfully divorced person be remarried, is to ask the same question, well, can murderers and swindlers and perjurers who have repented, can they be remarried? And the answer is yes, so why should this be different? Of course I believe repentance is something that cleanses the slate. And now, one of the most interesting things about the Old Testament is that David, the King David, started his marriage with Bathsheba in the most awful conditions. It was knee-deep. You talk about an unbiblical divorce. David fell in love with Bathsheba, committed adultery with her, then had her husband killed so he could marry her. You talk about starting a marriage knee-deep in sin, but when he confessed and repented, God cleansed that marriage and blessed that marriage to the point that out of that marriage came Solomon, and out of Solomon's loins came Jesus the Messiah. It's unbelievable that God would take a marriage like that and put it in the line of the seed of David, out of which would come Jesus Christ, through whom all the nations of the earth would be blessed. What does that mean, other than God is trying to say to all of us, I love redeeming the worst situations. I love to bless the hardest cases. Try me. Come to me. No one ever perished at Jesus' feet. No one who ever came to him was in any wise cast out. The last thing that Jesus says is probably very puzzling, and some of you singles are out there saying, what in the world does he mean about this eunuch stuff? In fact, a lot of you are sitting there saying, I never knew he said this. What? Not everyone can accept this word. I'll tell you what he's saying. Paraphrase. He says, some people are constitutionally unable to marry. That's the physical eunuchs. But he says, some people are spiritually called not to marry. And the power of the kingdom of God in their life enables them to go unmarried. That's what he's saying. He says it in response to this amazing question. He's been talking about marriage and divorce just like I have been, and he's been expounding this. And finally, in verse 10, the disciples can't take it, and they say, for gosh sakes, if this is the way it is between a man and a woman, it's better not to get married. Typical New York commitment phobics. Right? In other words, they're saying, if marriage is like this, too many problems, too messy, too sticky, let's just not get involved with it at all. And Jesus says, no, no, no, you don't understand. He says, the only people who can be unmarried are those who accept it. He means marriage is a calling. And in brief, it goes like this. If you're single, some of you can be permanently called to be single. Paul talks about it in 1 Corinthians 7. And the permanent calling means that the power of the kingdom works in your life so you don't want to be married. So that you find you're not depressed by loneliness. like that. And it can be a permanent calling. But a lot of you say, I know that by my own desire for marriage I don't have that permanent calling. And then in that case, Jesus says it's still a temporary calling. Well, how can it be a temporary calling? He says this can only be accepted by those who accept it. Right now, your singleness, if you are single, is a temporary calling. The only way you can endure it is if you look at it as a calling from God. E.B. White some years ago wrote this terrific book on New York, an essay, and in it he says this, on any person who desires such queer prizes, New York will bestow the gift of loneliness and the gift of privacy. It can destroy you or it can fulfill you depending a good deal on luck. Now, I agree with everything but that last part because he's saying exactly what Jesus Christ says. You see, if there wasn't any sin in the world, marriage would be the normal situation and the right one for everybody. But because of sin being in the world, he's saying here, some people are called to singleness, some people are not. Some people are called for part of their lives to be single and some people are called for part of their lives to be married. And he says singleness is not inferior or superior. Look at Jesus as a single person. Jesus. He's the paragon of true humanity so it can't mean to be single is somehow to be subhuman in any way or somehow disfigured in any way. No way. Jesus says because of the condition of the world, it can be inferior, it can be a superior calling if you receive it as a calling and here's how to do it. E.B. White says, it can make you or break you. Jesus says, if you see it as a calling, if you say, oh Lord, I am not going to fear marriage nor am I going to rage against my singleness. Instead, I'm going to use the freedom I've got as a single person to serve people. I'm going to refuse to rage against you. That's what it means to offer up your singleness. To offer up your singleness is to say, I refuse to rage against God but to say, Lord, if you want me single today, I'm going to use my singleness. I'm going to use the independence I've got. I'm going to use the freedom to serve people and to serve you. I'm going to die to my yearning to be married. It doesn't mean I'm going to deny it. I'm not going to rage against you on it. I'm going to serve you in it. I'm going to give it to you. And I know that if I give it to you, it'll be resurrected and turned into something beautiful. But if I use my singleness and the freedom I've got to indulge my desires, especially freedom and especially the singleness of New York, it will kill me. That's what Jesus is saying. Some people are eunuchs because other men made them that way. Some of you are raging. You're saying, I'm unmarried because people have made it that way. Jesus says, no. If you're going to be single, be single for the kingdom. Say, right now, today, I'm going to give God my singleness and use it for the kingdom. I'm going to trust he knows what he's doing with me. I'm not going to rage against him. And if I give that, if I die in that way, it'll be resurrected and turned into something beautiful. Don't be single because someone made you that way. Be single for the kingdom of God. Amen. You know what the rule is? Seek ye first his kingdom and its righteousness and everything you really need will be added to you. Put first things first and second and third things will come second and third, but put second things first and you'll get nothing. Seek him first and you'll blossom. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for all this stuff. We thank you for all this information, but we would not be like the apostles. We wouldn't cry out and say, this is too much for me. This is too great for me. It's better than just to walk away from it. Instead, help us as married people to give you our marriages. Help us as single people to give you our singleness, to be in the condition we are in for the kingdom, to seek your kingdom first. And then we know what we are and who we are will blossom. Enable us all to do that. For we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
