TITLE: Marriage – The Biblical Guidelines (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Sex, Singleness, and Marriage
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/marriage-the-biblical-guidelines-cont/

============================================================

counselors, and therefore you could find yourself falling in love with somebody who has just got a talent, a good intuition, a good ability to understand. But I guess it comes down to this. If you are a Christian and somebody else is not a Christian, what you're really, what you're really, you're looking at reality, let me put it this way, let me put it this way. If you went to a party and you saw 100 people there and your friend that you had with you saw only 25, the other 75 were invisible, and you said look there's there's really a hundred people here and he says I only see 25. So you say well I see a hundred and you go around talking to the 70, you know all the people that he doesn't see all night. Now if he really doesn't believe those people are there, he really doesn't, he thinks that you're imagining them, he could be very understanding to you, he could be extremely warm to you, he could be incredibly empathetic and sympathetic and know that you sincerely feel that way and not laugh at you or scorn you and really make you feel pretty good. But ultimately he wouldn't understand you, he would just be understanding to you. He couldn't understand you because he doesn't believe those 75 people are there. He believes that you're deluded. Now if you're a Christian, and if another person is not a Christian, that means you have fundamentally different understandings of reality. In other words, the person is looking at reality and you're seeing a lot of reality that person doesn't see at all. And I really do think that the person can be very understanding, but whether or not he could truly understand you, I doubt it. Now it depends at this point, and I don't think we need to get into it here, it would be, it depends a little bit on your definition of Christianity. If you think Christianity, for example, is a lot of ethical principles basically, that a Christian is someone who turns the other cheek and who works for love and justice and so on. Another person has somewhat different ethical opinions. You can respect each other and understand their point of view. But if you're talking about one person says there is a God and he's personal and yet infinite and his son came to earth and did miracles and lived a life in this way and now can break in. And if you believe in him, you'll know him personally. It'll change the way you look at reality and you'll live from heaven forever with him and his kingdom. And if you don't, you'll be cast out forever into the outer darkness. I mean, those are fundamentally different positions from a person that says, I don't believe that. So I do believe a person can be very, very understanding, very sympathetic, very empathetic. And unfortunately, I'll tell you something, there's plenty of non-Christians who, because they have those gifts of intuition and love and counsel, could be considerably better spouses than plenty of Christians. There's plenty of Christians that are just so immature still, because they haven't grown, that though they believe what you believe, they'd still be lousy spouses. So I would certainly agree with you that non-Christians can go a long way. But I'm just defending, my answer is basically defending my position. And you might, you just might not agree with it. But that's how, that's how, that's the, that's my thinking behind that statement, which is what I think you're asking me to explain. Do you want to add to that? Well, I'd just say that we probably, all of us have seen marriages that start out where it looks like you've got everything in the world in common with the person. And as time goes by and children are born and you get older and whatnot, the differences that have been there all along become more pronounced. And I know Tim and I have seen plenty of marriages where people have talked themselves over the line, well, she's not exactly a Christian the same way I'm a Christian, but sort of according to her own definition, you know, and you talk yourself into sort of broadening and waffling out the definitions of what you expect in a person's spiritual life. And the shoe doesn't drop. The effects of that decision don't really become evident until a number of years down the line where your own growth has really been held in check because you don't want to offend your spouse who's really, really not that keen on all this religious stuff. And the effects of it become more pronounced later on. It's a lot easier to talk yourself into it when you think, I don't want to pass up another possibility. You know, when will I ever get another chance? It's, it's a hard thing. Okay. Yeah, we're here. Yeah. That's right. And, you know, when you, when you cross the line, when you cross the line from a kind of a kind of a state of semi-belief into firm belief, and you've got a lot of going to immediately say, oh, this person doesn't understand me. I absolutely agree that there's a process, but what's actually happened is a seed has come into your life that's going to carry you away. It's like an acorn. The difference between an acorn and a giant sequoia is pretty huge, and yet the entire giant sequoia is in that acorn. Not only that, pardon me. You get oak trees. Yes, you get oak trees. Did I say sequoia? Entire giant oak tree. I don't know where sequoia is going to be. Anyway, the entire oak tree comes out of the acorn. It's all in there. And therefore, when you see that acorn, you say, now I'm planting this thing. And at first, you might only get a little shoot out of it, but eventually the changes are vast. So what happens is when a person, when you just take a one little step and leave that person not too far behind, and yet the difference between, let's just say, between him and you is an acorn on the shelf, and you've taken your acorn and actually put it in your heart, or you've actually put it into the soil. At least for a good while, there's not much difference between those two acorns. It doesn't happen immediately. Even four months, there won't be a huge difference. But in four years, there'll be a monstrous difference. So what ends up happening is that the person's not at least moving in the same direction as you are. You're going to find that a year from now, or two years from now, or three years from now, your friendship is going to be a lot harder for you to maintain that same intimacy. That's the big problem. So you're not going to feel that right away. Not at all. Your question probably is, though, well, what do I do about it? Yeah. I knew you were thinking that. Did you all hear the question? Oh, okay, I see. Her question is, here she's a new believer, and the person that she is in love with and best friends with is not a believer. And that relationship was already prior to her commitment to Christ. Now what do you do? You know, sayonara, Sam, or what? You know, I think the first thing you do is you start praying like crazy, and you get everybody you know to pray like crazy. And you put your heart on the altar, too, and say, Lord, your will be done. This is what I want. And you spell it out in detail. You give him blow by blow what you want. And then you say, and thy will be done. You know better than me. I mean, I begged God to let me marry two different guys before I met Tim. And I was sure my life was in ruins when I didn't get either one of them. Yeah, that's right. The question was, does God choose a marriage partner for you? I mean, is there someone with your name on him or her? A bullet with your name on it. What are you looking at me for? Do we agree on this? There's one way to find out. You first. The secret counsels of God stay secret in spite of our efforts to peer around the curtain. And I just have a problem with that, the type of guidance that a lot of people seem to think consists in somehow surprising God and prying away from him a secret that he was really not willing to divulge. I mean, the kind of thing where you just have to know what God wants you. Should I buy this house or shouldn't I buy this house? Should I marry this person or shouldn't marry this person? And you end up with a view of God that is sort of a malicious prankster. He knows the answer. And if you're quick enough, you might find out the answer too. But he's not going to make it easy for you. I don't think God is really malicious at all in the way he guides us. He gives us the Bible and tells us very clearly that we're meant to be guided by wisdom, not by little magic incantations or signs or, you know, seances or words of prophecy or anything like that. The direct way, the way that Christians are normally to be guided is through the Holy Spirit and wisdom. And the number of people that could be suitable marriage partners are any number of people. If God may have one person picked out for each individual who's intended to get married. But if that's true, you're not going to figure out who that is until after the wedding. You see what I mean? You use the principles of guidance that he has. the spouse or, you know, some invisible way of discerning for yourself, is this the one? And you, people have made terrible mistakes, not just with their spouses, but with their houses and their careers and everything else, looking for some, quote, sign that this is right. And unfortunately, it flies in the face of all the wisdom that might ordinarily be exercised in that decision. Oh, I know that he doesn't have a job and he's, you know, been a drug addict for 25 years. But I just know that I have, this is the one, you know. How can you know that if it's not in accordance with the principles of wisdom? So the answer is, of course, there's one person that you're meant for and is meant for you if you're supposed to get married. But see, that doesn't help in the decision-making. You still have to go through the same decision-making process. And here's an example. Doesn't the Bible say that your days are numbered? Isn't it true that the day that you are to die is already laid out? God knows what day it is. It's already there. Okay? Does that mean that every single day you say, well, I don't know if I ought to eat or take my medicine because I don't know whether today's the day God wants me to die? Of course not. You go on doing what you're supposed to do. You're responsible. You make every precaution to live. And on the day that you die will be the day that you die. You don't sit around trying to guess it any more than, in fact, Charles Spurgeon has this great story. Have you heard this one? He went, he's a Baptist minister, and he went by to see a man who was very sick. And he says, well, how are you doing? And the man said, well, the doctor says I need to take this medicine or I might not pull through. Well, are you doing it? Well, he says, pastor, I don't know if I should take it because I don't know whether I should be dying now. I mean, I don't know if I'm predestined to live or predestined to die. And so Spurgeon says, I can tell you right now, if you take your medicine, you're predestined to live. But if you don't take your medicine, you're predestined to die. And so what he was saying is, you don't try to guess the day you're going to die. You go out and you try to live and the day you die, you die. And the same way, of course, there's a person out there for you, but that doesn't necessarily help you. You've got to go through the same process of decision making. Will this person be a great friend? Do our callings match up? Is there someone that I'm finding myself falling in love with and for the right reasons? You have to go through the same decision making process. Isn't that what you said? Yeah. I thought so. Good. Okay. Yeah. Over here, Lee. And then back there. Lee. You talked a little bit about, in the first test of the purpose, can you change the purpose to a better? What happens if the other person is not willing or they're not used to be stuck with criticism? Is that setting what you did and working together to improve things? And some people might take that wrong and they don't want the person to change them. So, what if when you first start to relate to somebody... Lee's question is, what if when you start... Did you hear it? No, I better repeat it. What if when you start to relate to someone and you're being constructive in your criticism, you're trying to change one another, the way people want it to change, and the other person is willing to change, and the other person might take advantage of that and be that, okay, well, this person is easy to change with this one, but how many other areas can I change this person? But that's part of the whole process. For example, you may be... Nobody heard the follow-up to the question. Maybe you'll get taken advantage of if you allow yourself to be changed by another person. Maybe they will take advantage of your openness and your willingness and just jump down your throat and say, well, wow, you're at it. You know, there's six other things. I think behind that question, Lee, you're asking, how do you maintain your integrity as a person and not allow your vulnerability to be misused? When you're open to another person, they're changing you, you're changing them. Are you going to answer this? Well, yeah, I'll start this time, and you can follow up, but I... It could be that you're a lousy criticizer, for example. If you're the person who says, I try to criticize or try to show a person where they wanted to change and they just wouldn't do it, so obviously this isn't the right person for me, you might be jumping to conclusions. It could be that one of the ways in which you've got to change is that you don't know how, in a winsome way, to speak the truth in love. It also could be that if a person comes to you and says, here are things I want you to change, they might be... It might be in a very, very selfish and a very rigid and a very inflexible... you might show you that this is somebody who is really poor at changing people, really poor at criticizing. And you say, many of these things you point out are right. These things I really love to start working on and I want to work with you on them. But can I say something about how you come across? You really get this long list and you're making me feel like you don't really accept me as I am. That's the whole process. I mean, that's frankly that kind of thing. Being able to change not only yourself but the way in which you change people. All those sorts of things are things that are part of the process by which you find out whether this is somebody who can end up being your best friend or counselor. It's really not that a hearted decision to make in the end. Because if one of you is doing all the changing and the other one's not, that's a real bad sign. If one of you is constantly demanding change and the other person is constantly getting defensive because the way in which the criticism is brought is very off-putting, that's a very bad sign too. You have to talk it out, you have to work it out, and if it doesn't work out, then that person is not the one. I'd just say that rather than talking about changing one another, I mean, that conjures up the idea of you have this agenda. You know, you're pretty good raw material, but you know, there's 10 or 11 things here that you'd be better if you were like my agenda. I think it's better to talk about problem solving. You know, confronting a difference that exists between the two of you. And there are so many areas that don't have a right and wrong value attached to them. They just have different ways of doing things. You grew up in a family like this, and she grew up in a family like that, and you know, you always put little hospital corners on your sheets, and you know, he always just threw the sheets on the bed, and if they fell off by morning, so what? There are a lot of things that don't have a right and wrong value about it, but you're going to have a disagreement about it anyway. And those are areas in which you have to solve the problem. It's like a dance. Somebody has to go forward, somebody has to go backward, and you've got to make that sort of a smooth process rather than stopping to debate every single point at every single issue. And I'd say that has a lot more to do with whether you're changing and being changed. It's confronting the things that are going to be issues for you, working them out in a smooth way, and in a way where one person isn't always feeling railroaded. By the way, the wisest... Jesus actually says when he talks about the speck and the beam thing, he says the best way to change somebody is to change yourself. Far in a way that... If you're in a relationship with somebody who comes to you like this, who says, I would... or she... I would really like you to tell me where you think I could make improvements. That's the humblest... That's the humblest way to get... to create a climate in which you're both honing each other, is to... for you not to start off by saying, well, Lee, you know, you're a pretty good guy, but I got six or seven problems with what... how you behave, and I'd really like you to change them. That's... that's a bad sign. If on the other hand, somebody comes and says to you, somebody in the relationship says, I would like to see where I can change. That creates a climate in which the other person turns around and says, well, well, tell me what you think about me. And that... that's the way to go. So there's... when we talk about changing and making a little... you know, when we talk about changing one another, I think Kathy's right in saying it's... it could be a little bit dangerous to talk about that, as if you come to each other with lists and say, well, if you're a person that I should marry, you'd be willing to make these changes. That's not the way the Bible says people change each other. There's a humble speaking of truth and in love. There... there was a... okay... there and then up here. We have... we got time for these. Go ahead. Back there. See? Okay. All right. you share your fondness for what i heard that you want to restate it for everybody he was saying in addition to all these other tests of should this person be the person that i should marry on all of these high elevated spiritual planes can we and should we be more specific when we pray to god exactly what we would like to have if it's all right with you god is that sort of what your question is okay god encourages us to be tremendously specific with him i mean i was specific whenever i was at the point of not knowing what tim was going to do with or turn into a marriage, of being very specific. I want this person, God. I mean, you don't always have an actual person in front of you, but God encourages us to pour our hearts out to him. And if there's something that makes a difference, you should tell him that. The other side of it, though, is you never finish pouring your heart out and then just put a full stop. Now, God, I've told you everything I want. Get busy. You always roll into, but God, you know me better than I know myself. You're wiser than I am. Give me what I would ask for if I really was wise enough to ask for what would be best for me. And never be afraid to pray that prayer. Like you're sort of asking for what you want and then turning around and giving God an out. Like, I know I won't really get what I want, God, but I'll take whatever it is you have left over. Spurgeon, again, says if God doesn't pay in silver, he'll pay in gold. And if he doesn't pay in gold, he'll pay in diamonds. And that's a good thing to remember. It was somebody else. That was somebody else. In other words, praying for a spouse, praying for a spouse is no different than praying for anything else. The Bible says you should be very, very specific. But on the other hand, you should always say, however, I know that you, oh Lord God, will give me what's best for me. So there's always a, you know, Jesus was very specific in the garden. He said, this is what I want. This is what I don't want. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. You don't pray for a spouse any differently than anyone else. And not only that, on the issue of short brunettes, you said he wanted a tall blonde, so. Yeah, that's true. Doesn't worry me. I got him. But you know what? That's true. You know what? I'd forgotten. So, okay, you don't. Wait, wait a minute. We'll take these. I saw Sally up here. Go ahead. What's a reasonable amount of time, the question is, to draw this conclusion? Well, it's not a matter of how far the calendar, how many days on the calendar. It's really, it's a function of how many hours you're spending. There's no doubt about it that if you're, if you shipped off to Saudi Arabia and you're in the same troop together and you're working together 14 hours a day, you might be able to come to the conclusion a lot faster than you can just by seeing somebody, you know, driving, if you're five hours away from each other and you're seeing each other once a month. That's the problem. It's a function of hours. And therefore, I don't know, I think the best answer is you go back to those tests and say, as long as it takes to find out whether or not this person is blowing past all of my other friends and it's turning into just a dynamic friendship. Once that happens, then you move to the other questions, I think. Then you move secondly to the question of, well, let's check out calling. Let's check out things like children. Let's check out things like career. Let's check out things like that. So, first of all, the friendship. Then the other stuff you can usually work on for a while. If the friendship is just going awfully well, like I said, blowing by everything else, then you really can spend quite a bit of time working out all the other details and as long as it takes. But it's, I'm afraid it's a function of the hours, not the calendar. I don't think I have a good answer. Do you want to get more specific on that? I'd say it's also a function of progress is you get to a point in a relationship where it has stalled at a certain point and it, give it a couple of chances to, to move beyond where it has stopped. And if the other party is not willing to move any further, then there's a point at which it becomes real harmful for both of you to get stalled at a spot and you're holding yourself out and waiting for the next step to progress and there's no next step and there's no next step and there's no next step and that begins to feel a lot like rejection. I mean, to me, whenever it stalls for a real long time at a spot, you think the person is absolutely wonderful, but they haven't moved themselves on to the next step and telling you how wonderful you are. Should I do that? Go ahead. I know, yeah. Why not? Well, there's a, a little talk that Tim and I had once when our relationship was stuck at that point, which has gone down in our personal history as the pearls before swine talk. Not that I called him a swine, but the point is a swine can't appreciate a pearl. Give him something that he can appreciate. And if I was in this tremendous, the, the, just to the talk went like this. If I'm in this great relationship with you and yet you're unable to see my value, then maybe you're not the person I thought you were. You're not the right one for me. And here you are in a relationship, I mean, with a person who, you are, and yet they keep not making any move to go further. That begins to get like rejection, and you have to, sooner or later, explain to the person that you're not going to reject them, but at the same time, you can't just keep holding yourself open in case he or she gets around to being willing to go forward. You have to get on with your life and do the next step. That's a very good supplement. See, Sally, the point is that virtually never do you progress at the same rate. And so, therefore, one of you tends to get to the precipice faster than the other one, and that's what Kathy's talking about. The pearls before swine speech basically went like this. It basically says, the pearls before swine speech is that if a pig cannot tell the difference between a pearl, and a real pearl, and a plastic pearl, and a stone, you can't tell. In other words, you can't make the distinctions. And very often, you may have this great relationship going, and it's doing very well, and the friendship is there, but one of you is ready to move it up a notch, and the other person is not. At that point, if you're the one moving it up a notch, there is a time limit there. I've usually said to people who come to see me, and they say, I've got this relationship. I want to get here, and the other person doesn't want to come with me. So I suggest the pearls before swine speech, actually, which is a way of saying, and I say never actually used the term pearls before swine, because no matter how you listen to it, I was the swine in that. I was the swine, and you were the pearl. I know that. So, and once I got past that illustration, I understood what she was saying. And she was saying, you want to be friends, and I want it to be more. And therefore, I'm in this position where I can only stay here for so long. We either have to go ahead and become lovers, or else I've got to roll the whole thing back, and we've got to become only mild acquaintances. I cannot stay where it is. And therefore, don't expect me to stay here forever. And so, right now, I want you to realize that this is a temporary condition. We're going to have to go ahead or come back, but we're an unstable compound. I suggest to people that that should be a matter of some months, maybe, or even weeks, but not much longer than that, because what ends up happening is you become abused in a relationship that you feel used. And so, there, there is a time frame. I usually suggest a couple of months on something like that. Just as a footnote, that little speech or the content of it can never be used as a form of blackmail. Get going, or else it's over. It has to be over in your own heart. You have to have been willing to say to God, okay, this is not the one, and I am not going to manipulate. I am not going to be aggressive. I'm not going to try and blackmail to get this to go where I want to go. I really do believe that I can trust you, God. And if this is not the right person, in spite of my feelings, I can trust you to say, it's time for me to move on. You can never use that little speech as a form of blackmail, because it will just smell like blackmail, and it will have the absolute reverse effect. And you have to be ready to, and point of actual fact, I was when I talked to Tim, telling him that we were not going to be able to be friends anymore, because it was too painful to keep this friendship, this real heavy-duty friendship going, that wasn't turning into anything else. And I just couldn't keep up my end of it anymore. Did you hear that? That's an important safety tip on using that thing. In other words, you have to be willing to say, this probably will be the end of the relationship, and I'm ready to give it up. And if you don't do that, it's going to feel like blackmail the other person anyway. But the fact is that if it's not blackmail, eventually, if the person really has given it up, it'll come clear. And then that frees the other person to make a real choice. Because when I began to realize, hey, Kathy, Kathy of course will be hurt if I back away, of course she'll be happier if I say, let's go. But I can see that she's really given it up in her heart. And she's not really saying, well, whatever you say, but actually underneath saying, it better be yes. She was saying, whatever you say, because I've given the thing up. I could tell that after a while in talking to her. And that, it was still a tough decision to make, but it wasn't impossible then. Let's read a couple of these. Do you want to try a couple? I got one that's easy. If sex is an indication of a couple's communication in marriage, if in other words, bad communication creates bad sex, how do you explain the couple that has a great sexual relation, but doesn't communicate, doesn't have a friendship, people just get... In other words, those people are using sex simply as a thrill. It's basically a form of mutual masturbation. You're not really trying to have a relationship, so sex isn't part of a relationship. It's much harder to live with somebody and have every part of your life touching. Then when one part, there's a lack of communication, it affects every other part. If these two people have said, look, all we want out of this is a thrill, you don't need a relationship. And so the people have just, they've taken sex and they've abstracted it out of what it was supposed to be originally. Also, that can only happen generally after you've done this for a long time. The first person you have sex with, you can't do this. The first person, it's still operating the way God intended sex to operate and that is to commitment apparatus. You feel committed, you want to be part of the person's life. But after a while, if you abuse sex and just have sex with people you're not married with, you can separate the two, so sex is nothing more than just a charge. Then you can have a nice sexual relationship, but you don't expect anything from each other than that. So it can be done. I'm telling you, in marriage, in marriage, communication is the basis for great sex. And go ahead, why don't you do one? Okay, what percentage of the time should you be thinking about the person if they're the right one for you? I don't know that there's any biblical guideline about that, although I think it's safe to say that if a person or a relationship has become an idol in your mind and there's idolatry going on, you can't think about anything else. And is this going to work out and I'm going to die if it doesn't and on and on and on? That's a pretty fair symptom that it has gotten out of perspective and it's not going to be what God meant it to be, even if it does go forward into a relationship. The right person for you is going to make you want to be more godly. It's going to be the kind of person who is making you wish that you were closer to Christ and making you wish you were a whole lot more of a person than what you already are so that you have more to give to him or to her. You're not going to be so absorbed and claustrophobically thinking about the relationship, the relationship, the relationship. It's tough because you are very preoccupied. Love is extremely powerful. But Kathy is saying, and I know this is a hard thing to draw the line, there's a difference between being preoccupied and being obsessed. And in this thing that we're going to make available here at the church by Dave Pallison, he says this, be careful. Are you looking to marriage to satisfy your deepest needs and desires? If you are, then you'll get obsessed. You'll get obsessed with being married and you'll also get obsessed with whoever you're interested in right now. And that's the best way to kill a marriage. Idolatry is one of the main problems in marriage. For you to say, this person is going to meet all my deepest needs. And that person, you'll find nothing but fault with that person because nobody can meet your deepest needs. And he goes on and says, when this happens, Christ is no longer your Lord in a practical way. He's no longer your functional master, David likes to say. Do you think getting married will provide meaning in your life, direction, security, self-respect? Do you hope marriage will remove a sense of despair, inadequacy, failure, bitterness, or isolation? Do you say to yourself, if only I find a husband or if only I find a wife, I finally will have love, acceptance, and security? Then I'll be happy. My life's a failure unless I'm married. Unfortunately, a lot of you have had parents that have verbally or non-verbally said this to you and are still saying it to you. But often people come to marriage with these or other unrealistic expectations. They expect marriage to do what only God can do. Unrealistic and distorted views of marriage can lead to disappointment, frustration, anger, and despair when your partner finally lets you down. Because he certainly, or she certainly will. Just to piggyback on that for a second, last week I talked about the sensation in my life of feeling like God kept bringing me around to the same jump in the steeplechase that I couldn't get past it. I kept finding myself in the same position in a relationship and not being able to understand why I could never get past that. And retrospectively, it was just that issue that there was this gaping hole in my life that Christ should have been filling that I was looking to love to fill. And God was just not going to let me inflict that on someone, let me suffocate someone, until I had that under control, until he was the one that was filling my life and giving my life the meaning and direction that it needed to have. And I wasn't safe to be with anybody else. I mean, I would have just sucked a guy dry. Okay. Okay. Here's a straw. Okay. You're next. I'll do this one. This is a good one. Here. That's yours, dear. How specific? be? That's really good. I wish I had gone into more detail. I couldn't. Maybe I can say something right here. For example, two people are both called to work in ministry in music or with youth, etc. But one feels called to do it in Africa. One feels called to do it in China. When does it become compromising of your vision? Let's see. One of you wants to do it in Africa. One of you wants to do it in China. I think you should compromise with Mexico. Isn't that about right? Isn't that the right place? Because it's too complicated to just say, well, if you want to do this and I want to do this, we're not... how do I say it? You're being too simplistic to say we want to go to different kinds of countries here. It could be that the relationship, the love that you have for each other, you are going to become a new person. The Bible says the two, a man shall leave his father and mother, cleave to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh, which means a new person. You really do become a new compound, a new chemical, because of the intimacy of the relationship. And your calling will not be intact. Becoming a... two Christians marrying do not simply mean, here's your calling and here's your calling. And all that happens is it's attached like Siamese twins, so now they're together. What will actually happen is this. Can you see that? It's not like this. It goes like this. And they start to affect each other. And what will happen is the passion of one person will wear off on another one. So, for example, the passion of one person to live in the city and take the Christianity into the marketplace, and the other person never had that particular vision, you may find that the one person's vision ends up coloring the other one, not because the one person is stronger, but because it was God's will for the second person to get the calling through the first person. So there's got to be some jockeying around, not merely compromising. It's really a little bit more complicated than that. I think it'd be better to say that your callings are not attached by a bar, but more by a chain. They don't, in a rigid way, have to relate to each other. Instead, you may find that you are, in talking, that you start to hone each other, knock your vestures off of each other. You color each other so that you're really too... Instead of one of you is blue and one of you is red, and now you come together. I'm sorry, this is an interracial marriage, I guess. One of you is blue and one of you is red. And you find that you're together, you're kind of violet. And you start to actually affect... And in many different areas, in one area, one of you end up dominating the other one. And the one person finds, I don't mean in a bad way, the other person says, in this particular area of life, I'm following your lead. I like your vision. I've gotten a passion through you. And in another area, it's the other person that seems to set the pace. So in the work area, or in the ministry area, or in the church area, that sort of thing can happen. So it's really quite complicated. And that's definitely the sort of thing that you have to spend a lot of time talking about once the friendship is established. Did you want to try that one that I gave you? Yes, I'm glad someone asked this. It's something I wanted to say. In light of the general scriptural principle that men are leaders, do you believe it is proper for women to ask men out on dates? You were about to say... Well, what's a date is partly... It would help to know what that is. But I think just using the general term, talk about want to go to the opera next week, want to go out and bet on horses at the aqueduct. I mean, I don't know, whatever you're interested in. I would recommend against it. Not that there's a scriptural principle. The scriptural principle was your parents picked out who you married. So if we want to be... And that wasn't the principle. That was the practice. And therefore, looking for guidelines about dating in scripture, you just have to look at the guidelines that inform us on our Christian behavior to one another, period, and how we relate in fellowship terms. But I would recommend against women being the initiators in relationships. And you can all come after me with knives if you want to afterwards, and we'll talk about it. But the question is, you have to ask yourself, if you initiate and pursue a man, women, then you'll only catch a man who wants to abdicate from his leadership. If you want to be the one that's the leader in the relationship all along, then you start out that way. That's how it'll go on. Now, there's plenty of men that are looking for a mommy, and so you may find one and you'll fit together fine if that's what you want. But it's my experience. is to have the biblical leadership the way God intended, not with sin distorting that into a kind of tyranny, but the way it's described in Ephesians 5 and throughout the scripture. A man that you're always having to goad and nag and criticize and push and pull is not someone you're going to be able to respect as a leader and as the person that you want to trust with your vulnerability. I mean, that's my opinion, and you can come hate me for it. Well, but not right now because we're about done. On the other hand, I'll tell you, listen, there's another, I'll tell you another reason why, there's another, a totally another different reason actually, why it would be good for women not to be too forward in the relationships. Women, you've spent all of your life with other women learning how to do relationships. The men haven't been doing that. So you're already better at initiating relationships. The reason you shouldn't do it is because you want to help the guy grow. Now, I'll put it this way. You spent all of your life with your other women friends talking about relationships. Guys never talk with each other about relationships. Never. For example, you're not going to find two guys looking at each other and say, you know what, you're my best friend. We don't do that. If this guy is my best friend, I'm not going to talk to him about it. So the point is, when it comes to initiating relationships and initiating new relationships, you have years of experience and we have virtually none. So by asking the other person, by asking the guy to initiate in the relationships and take some leadership, it's just simply a necessary, it's a necessary test of whether this guy has finally grown up. It's scary, you see, for us to do that. We're not used to it. We've moved into a whole realm that you have been moving in for years and you know all about it. Talking about relationships, initiating relationships, we don't like to do it. And therefore, you're just simply demanding that the guy get up to speed with you. If, on the other hand, you start right out in doing the initiation, you'll never get him to do what he has to do to have any kind of relationship with a woman, and that is grow up and start to make some, and start to be intentional in the development of a relationship.
