TITLE: Mary!
SCRIPTURE: John 20:1-3, 10-18
TOPICS: God the Father Easter Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: St. John’s Passion
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/mary-2/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture is found on page 9 of your bulletin, and it comes from the book of John, chapter 20, verses 1 through 3, and then verses 10 through 18. Early on the first day of the week, while it was still dark, Mary Magdalene went to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the entrance. So she came running to Simon Peter and the other disciple, the one Jesus loved, and said, They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have put him. So Peter and the other disciple started for the tomb. Then the disciples went back to their homes, but Mary stood outside the tomb crying. As she wept, she bent over to look into the tomb and saw two angels in white seated where Jesus' body had been, one at the head and the other at the foot. They asked her, Woman, why are you crying? They have taken my Lord away, she said, and I don't know where they have put him. At this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing there, but she did not realize that it was Jesus. Woman, he said, why are you crying? Who is it you are looking for? Thinking he was a gardener, she said, Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have put him, and I will get him. Jesus said to her, Mary. She turned toward him and cried out in Aramaic, Rabboni, which means teacher. Jesus said, Do not hold on to me, for I have not yet returned to the Father. Go instead to my brothers and tell them, I am returning to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. Mary Magdalene went to the disciples with the news, I have seen the Lord. And she told them that he had said these things to her. This is the word of the Lord. How does somebody connect to God? How does somebody connect to the power and the grace of God? The answer of the Christian church, of course, through all the ages has been the key to that connection is faith. Faith, but what is faith? A lot of ways to describe, define faith. There's no better way to understand the faith that connects to God himself than looking at this case study of Mary Magdalene meeting Jesus on Easter morning. It's here, John the gospel writer gives it to us, not just because it happened, but because it's instructive, because it tells us what faith is, what Easter faith is, what connecting to God faith is. And there's three things we'll see here, three, very simple, look at it briefly. We learn here that faith rests in truth, comes by grace, works through love. It rests in truth, comes by grace, and works through love. First, rests in truth. If you actually read any one of the gospels through, there is something that is incredibly striking about the third day after Jesus died. Because all through the Bible, all through the gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, Jesus keeps saying, I'm going to rise on the third day. So, in Luke 9, he says, the Son of Man will suffer many things, be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and teachers of the law, will be killed, and on the third day, raised to life. And Luke 18, he says, the Son of Man will be handed over to the Gentiles. They'll mock him, they'll insult him, spit on him, flog him, kill him. On the third day, he will rise again. Over and over again, he says, I'm going to rise on the third day. I'm going to rise on the third day. On the third day, I'm going to rise again from the dead. Now, it's the third day after Jesus' death. Okay? The morning of the third day. Peter and John aren't even there. Nobody's even there. Except Mary. And she's gone to pay last respects. And she gets there, and the tomb is empty. Okay, now, remember this. Mary has been there when Jesus over and over said, I'm going to rise on the third day, I'm going to rise on the third day, and I'm going to rise on the third day. Wouldn't you think, if you'd heard that over and over again, that when you got to the tomb and it was empty, wouldn't you think she'd at least go, huh? Third day. Wait a minute. It's crazy, but no. It doesn't even occur to her. I mean, she couldn't. They could not have believed what Jesus said, even 1%. Or they would at least be there out of curiosity. Or even she was there, and she would have at least said, I wonder. But no, what did she say? They stole the body. Now, you know, now, if you think, I mean, you know the reason why it hits us, it's the most funny? It's because we're not. ourselves in the, you know, we live in a modern time and we have trouble putting ourselves in the shoes of people when we're reading ancient texts. Let me help a little bit. Why is it the average New Yorker on Easter Sunday? They may say, oh, they may say happy Easter, but the average New Yorker says, well, I take that metaphorically. You know, the resurrection of Jesus, I take that metaphorically. I don't really believe he actually literally rose from the dead. Why? Well, I'm a modern scientific person and science, our scientific worldview says that miracles don't happen. And that's the reason why we take that metaphorically and we really don't take it seriously. So we say today we live in a modern time in which the resurrection isn't allowed by our worldview. I mean, it just isn't conceivable. And so because of our worldview, we just can't accept that. Now, you have to keep in mind that the Greeks, the Romans, and the Jews did not have a scientific worldview. Absolutely not. But they had a worldview. And their worldviews were very, very, very different than what you might think. The Greeks, for example, had a view that said salvation is releasing the soul from the body. The body's bad. The soul is good. And so salvation is the liberation of the soul from the body. And for them, the idea of a physical resurrection as being a good thing or a saving thing or something like that was absolutely nuts. The Jews were utterly different. And yet, first century Jews, some of them believed, not all of them, but some of them believed that at the end of time, God was going to renew the world. He was going to get rid of death and suffering. And therefore, there would be a renewal of the world, and there would be a general resurrection, and they would get new bodies at the end of time, everybody together. Some believe that. But here's one thing that the Jewish worldview of the first century could not conceive of. They couldn't conceive of a human being being the Son of God. They couldn't imagine God becoming a human being. That's ridiculous. I mean, that's beyond the pale of anything. And they couldn't imagine an individual physical resurrection right in the middle of history by one person. That made absolutely no sense. That was inconceivable. I want you to see that even though their worldview was different than our worldview, to them, the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the Son of God resurrected, bodily resurrection of Jesus Christ, was absolutely as inconceivable to them as it is to us for different reasons. And therefore, when he had said over and over again, third day, third day, third day, third day, they must have taken it just as metaphorically as we do. See, what we do is we, our worldview makes it impossible to really accept that. So we just take it metaphorically or something like that. Well, so did theirs. Their worldview made it absolutely inconceivable. It was so inconceivable that on the third day, they weren't even there. And when Mary saw the tomb empty, she couldn't even, it didn't even occur to her. Ah, now you know what that means? Here's what it means. If there's anybody here who really says, I just can't believe in the bodily resurrection of Jesus, you know, I just can't believe in it. I mean, there's a lot of people in New York that feel that way, and I'm sure that some of you are here, okay? But here's what, let me do a thought experiment with you. What would it take? Well, what kind of objective, overwhelming evidence would it take to smash your worldview and bring you to be absolutely certain that Jesus Christ was bodily raised from the dead? Hmm? You'd say, it must be over, it would have to be overwhelming evidence. It would have to be incredible evidence to smash my worldview to smithereens and prove to me that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead. Well, I want you to see that whatever it would have taken, it would take to hit you like that, it must have hit them. Something as strong, something as overwhelming, must have happened to them. It must have. Because for different reasons, they were every bit as, it was every bit as inconceivable and impossible for them as it was for you. So something must have been overwhelming, and what was it? We know what it is that the gospel writers tell us. At least 11 times, there might have been more because only 11 are talked about here, at least 11 times Jesus Christ actually appeared. And hundreds of people believed in the risen Christ because they actually saw him, heard him, touched him. And then thousands more believed because they believed the eyewitness testimony of their friends and neighbors. And that overwhelmed them. That smashed their worldview. Now, by the way, friends, you've got the eyewitness testimony too. And you might say, what do you mean, eyewitness? The Bible? That's the eyewitness testimony? Well, how do you know that isn't just legends? Well, there's a lot of reasons, but let me give you one. You're looking at her, Mary Magdalene. In that day, pennIES, these stories were not eyewitness accounts but invented, somebody invented them to try to get people to believe that Jesus Christ was risen from the dead. In those deeply patriarchal societies, the Jewish, the Roman, the Greek, they were all deeply patriarchal. Never in a million years would you have made the first eyewitness a woman. That was nuts. It would have done everything to undermine the credibility of the account. And therefore, the only possible reason why Mary Magdalene in these accounts is the very first eyewitness, and she is in all four Gospels, the only possible reason why she would be an eyewitness is if she was. The only reason she'd be in the account as the first eyewitness is if she was. There's no other possible motivation or reason why she would be there. You have the same stuff that they did, the eyewitness accounts. Oh, no, no, you don't have the eyewitness experience. But the thousands of people who believe the eyewitness accounts, that's how Christianity started. It smashed their worldview. You've got it too. Now, why am I telling you all this? Because the first point about faith is it rests in the truth. If people say today, oh, if Christianity changes you, if Christianity changes you, and if it works for you, and if it helps you, then it's true for you. But you see, the Christianity actually says, no, it's the other way around. Don't say, if it changes you, and it helps you, and it works for you, then it's true for you. Oh, no, only if it's true, really, really, really true, will it change you and help you and work for you. Listen, what do we need? How can you be totally sure that when you look at all the horrible stuff that's going to happen this year, that's been happening in your life or out there in the world, how can you not just hope, but be absolutely sure that someday God's going to make it all right? How can you be absolutely sure? I don't mean just hope so. How can you be absolutely sure that in spite of your own failures, your own lapses, that God loves you and will never let you go, ever? How can you not just hope, but be sure? How can you not just hope that the world will be set to right someday, but sure? Or how can you be sure that when you face death, it's not the end? You know, this thing we just sang tonight, Jesus lives and death is now, but my entrance into glory. Courage then, my soul, for thou hast a crown of life before thee. He shall raise me from the dust. Have you ever seen a real dead body? I don't mean a prettified one. Have you actually seen a human body going to dust? How can you be absolutely sure that you're going to be raised up from that? How can you look at that and not even flinch? Only if you know Jesus lives and so shall I. See, the only way you can be sure of these things, the only way that you can be sure of these things, therefore face life, is if you know that Mary really saw him. It's not a, don't say, well, if it works for you, then it's true for you. No, no, only if it's true. Only if it really happened. Only if you really saw him. Only if you really called to her. If that happened, then I can face death and I can face my failures. I can face the future. I can face anything. But see, don't ask, is Christianity exciting? Is it relevant? Will it meet my needs? No, ask if it's true. Because if it is true, only then will it meet your needs. And if it's not true, who cares about it? Christian faith rests in the truth, the object of truth, that the resurrection of Jesus Christ happened, number one. Number two, Christian faith also comes through grace. Grace. When you take a look at Mary, oh, my goodness, why is Mary such a great case study for us? Look at her. I mean, in some ways, she's a spiritual seeker, isn't she? She's looking for Jesus. She's looking high and low for Jesus. She won't go home. She's weeping. She's crying. She's going to take on the gardener. I don't care if you still took the body or not. Give him to me. I mean, she's so you could say, oh, she's really seeking. But guess what? Unless he breaks in, she's never going to find him. You know why? She's searching and searching and searching for Jesus. And I've seen a lot of people like this. But in yourself, you're always searching for the wrong Jesus. She's searching for a Jesus that doesn't exist. She doesn't really know what he's really like. Like, you know, I love the way he comes. In other words, if he just sits back and waits for her to figure it out, he'll wait forever. And she'll never find him. Because she's got her blinders on. She is completely obtuse about spiritual reality. As loving as she is, as passionate as she is, as much as she loves Jesus. Please. Bye. cautionary tale. For example, right now she believes that she's in the middle of a disaster. Now there's angels in front of her, there's the Lord breathing down her neck, and she feels alone. She's about to be made one of the most famous people in the history of the world, and she feels abandoned. When she actually meets the Lord, she figures he's one of the enemy. Have you taken the body? She's passionate, she's loving, she loves Jesus, and she's absolutely spiritually blind to the situation. She has no idea that God's working. She feels like God has really abandoned her. Everybody's abandoned her. It's the end of the world. But it wasn't. And not only is she spiritually blind to the situation, she really doesn't know the real Jesus. In fact, I love the way he comes after her. He has to break in. If he just sat back and said, well, you know, if you're a spiritual searcher, well, you know, seek and you will find, and as long as you work hard enough and figure it out, I'll just wait here in the corner until she figures out who I am. No, that's not how it works. It's not salvation by works. It's not salvation by our finding him. It's salvation by him finding us. He comes after her so gently and yet kind of poignantly. I love it when he says, woman, why are you crying? It reminds me of Wendy saying it to Peter Pan. Boy, why are you crying? Now, it's a very tender moment. But then he says, who are you looking for? And I'm sure that for all the rest of her life, you know, this has all the marks of an eyewitness account, oral history. And for the rest of her life, she must have thought about the double meaning in that question, who are you looking for? Because he wasn't just saying, who are you looking for? He's trying to say, Mary, you love me, but you really, your understanding of me is way too small. You're not really looking for the real me. You're looking for a me, a Jesus that you think exists and he doesn't. So finally, he breaks in. Notice, it's not, it doesn't happen like this. Teacher, hi, Mary. No, it's Mary. Teacher, he calls to her. He breaks in on her. He opens her eyes. Salvation is always by grace. You know, as the hymn goes, my heart owns none before thee, for thy rich grace I thirst. This knowing, if I love thee, thou must have loved me first. And what better way for Jesus Christ to teach that his salvation is only by grace. It's not by our works. It's by his works. It's not by what we do. It's by what he did on the cross. It's not us pulling ourselves together and then looking down on all the people who haven't started living the way they should. It's resting in his absolute sheer unmerited grace and then loving everybody around us whether they believe like we do or not. What better way to get across the fact that salvation is by grace than to choose Mary as his first missionary? And you know that? He does. Think about this. You can see it even from the text. We pulled out part of it. But you can see Peter was there, John was there, and Mary was there all together. And Jesus was there, but he didn't come out until it was just Mary. He was deliberate. Now, why would he do that? Here's what I think. He chooses a woman, not a man, and he chooses a former mental patient, not a pillar of the community. Well, what do you mean by former mental patient? You know, in Luke chapter 8, we're told that Jesus cast seven demons out of Mary. Now, the word seven in the Semitic language, the word seven was an idiomatic expression. In a way, it's not for us. And what that means is the number seven functioned the way our word mega functions. She was mega-possessed. She was possessed by a legion. The only other place in the Bible that depicts somebody who was demon-possessed by a whole legion of demons, you might remember, is in Mark chapter 6. And there, the man who was so possessed by a legion of demons, he was pushed outside the city. He wandered amongst the tombs. He was naked. He cried out. He screamed. He cut himself. They tried to restrain him. They couldn't restrain him. That was Mary. And Jesus deliberately chooses a woman, not a man, in a patriarchal society. Jesus is a former mental patient, had been possessed by unclean spirits, not a pillar of the community. How much clearer could he say, could he be saying, my salvation is by grace. It's for everyone. It doesn't matter your pedigree. It doesn't matter your record. It doesn't matter your, it doesn't matter your gender. It doesn't matter your class. It doesn't matter. My salvation is by absolute sheer grace. ambassador. And by the way, he doesn't just love Marys, because Marys are marginal people. Marys are outside all of the insider. You know, she's not an insider by any standard, by any worldly standard. You know, she's a woman, not a man. She's had to form mental patients, all this stuff. But then he says to her, go and tell my who? Go and tell the gospel. Why doesn't he say, to those miserable deserters, to those miserable deniers. Brothers, you tell them that they, I want to see them day after tomorrow. They have one chance. No. Go tell my brothers. Because of what I've done, we're in the same family. Because of what I've done, my father is their father, and my God is their God. What a, well, you know, you've got to remember, the disciples were haughty. Mary was humble. And that's important. And yet Jesus isn't, he's not, how do I say it, he's not bigoted against bigots. He's not self-righteous to the self-righteous. You know, so many of us, there's always somebody that we think is, you know, if we feel like we're open-minded people, then we hate the bigots and the traditional people. And if we feel like we're virtuous and we're kind of traditional and we're kind of moral, then we don't like, you know, the licentious and the immoral people. But Jesus Christ is promiscuous in his love and his calls to repentance and his offer of grace. And so that's what, secondly, you believe in the truth of the resurrection. That's the first thing. But Christian faith, secondly, rests in grace, says, Father, accept me because of what Jesus Christ has done. I'm a sinner saved by grace. Until you recognize that, until you admit that, you don't have faith. Lastly, and briefly, works through love. One of the things that's so neat about Mary is that she's a lover. And when, you notice at the very end, Jesus actually has to say to her, don't hold me so tightly. Now, you know, in some translations, it looks like he's saying, don't touch me. And some translations seem to indicate that Jesus is saying, I'm holy like the burning bush or Mount Sinai, don't touch me. But that's not true. It can't be what he means because just a little bit later in the chapter, he actually tells Thomas, touch me. You know, put your finger in my hand. So that's not it. Actually, the verb he uses there means stop clinging so tightly. It's almost like, you know, it's almost funny. What actually Jesus is saying is, ouch. What he's actually saying, Mary, as soon as Mary realized he's back, she must have grabbed hold of him like a kind of like a vice. And he says, basically, he's saying, stop holding on to me so tightly. But what does he say in response? He says, I'm ascending. Now, what would that mean? That seems like a non sequitur. No, not if you understand. If you've read chapter 16, 17, 18, all the things that Jesus says, he says, when I ascend to the, when I ascend, he says, to the right hand of the Father, I will send the Holy Spirit and the Holy Spirit will make me real to you. He says, I will send the Comforter and the Comforter will manifest me to you. He will show me your glory. You know what this means? Friends, you might think, wouldn't it be so neat to have been there, one of the disciples, Peter, John, Mary, to have actually hugged Jesus, to have actually kissed Jesus, and Jesus says, no, I got something better. I got something better for all of you. If the Holy Spirit comes into your life, the sense of my love, which will come upon you, is greater than the sense of my love that would come upon you if I actually held you in my arms and kissed you. One pastor once wrote this in his prayer diary. He says, sometimes in prayer we know what it is to be too happy to live. Sometimes I've had to ask Jesus to stay his hand for love, glory, and joy were coming into my heart from him in waves too great to bear. Have you ever experienced that? I'm not trying to make you feel bad. I'm just trying to make you realize this. That's what's available. And the mark of a person who is not just a nominal Christian who believes the doctrines, but who grasps the gospel, the mark of saving faith, is that you realize that at infinite cost to Jesus you've been saved by grace, and that creates an explosion of love in your life. You feel loved, and you want to love. And that's what makes Mary great. In fact, before she even figured it out, Mary basically, in this chapter, wipes the floor with the male disciples. Spiritually speaking, that is. Why? She's the only one that goes there on the third day. She's the only one that stays there on the third day. away. She's looking for a body, and she's not going to go away until she finds the body. And she's willing to take on one of the grave robbers. She thinks the gardener is, give them to me. That's love. Where does that love come from? I'll tell you why. Because she understands grace. You see, during the rest of the gospel, whenever anybody...whenever Jesus said anything to Peter and John about, you know, and the male disciples about, you could be children of God, they always...their attitude was always, yeah, I know. We know. We think we can make that. Yes, we can make the cut. We think we could be children of God. But, you know, when you say to Mary, when he said to Mary, you can be a child of God, she must have thought in her heart, or maybe said with her lips, me, do you realize I used to walk this street crying out, half-naked, out of my mind? I can be a child of God? Yes, says Jesus, you can be a child of God. That's incredible. See, to the degree you understand your need for grace, to that degree, faith explodes in your life in the form of love. Galatians 5, 6. Neither circumcision or uncircumcision means anything, says Galatians 5, 6. But all that matters is faith working through love. You know, what I love about the fact that Jesus Christ calls Mary by name, it's a very interesting way. When he calls her to himself, he uses her name. He calls her by naming her Mary. And I think that's his way of saying, if you want to know who you are, know me. I know who you are. I made you. You're unique. But the way you're going to find yourself and the way you're going to find your mission in life is not by trying to find yourself or trying to find your mission in life, but finding me. Because if you find me, you'll find yourself. When you grab me, when you get me, I'll tell you your name. Annie Dillard, the great writer Annie Dillard said at one place, I'd been my whole life a bell, and I never knew until I was picked up, lifted up, and rung. And you see, she thought, she said, I thought I was a paperweight. I thought I was a doorstop. You know, I had no idea that if somebody picked me up and rung me, I was a bell. I had no idea what I was. Jesus Christ, let Jesus Christ lift you up and ring you. Like Mary, seek him, even if it seems hopeless. Like Mary, seek him, even if you're not really sure who he is. And he'll call you by name. And you'll get everything along with him. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for Mary, and we thank you for her love, her simplicity, her doggedness. We thank you for her humility. We thank you for all the ways in which she is a model for all of us, both women and men. And yet the model is not, oh, be like Mary. The model is rest in the grace of Jesus. And he can give us our names, and he can give us a mission, and he can send us outward into the world serving people with love in our hearts. And we therefore ask that you would do that. We want it. And it's also that which will glorify you. So on this Easter, we pray that you would make these things true in our lives through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
