TITLE: Materialism
SCRIPTURE: James 5:1-6
TOPICS: Stewardship, Generosity and Money
SERIES: James: A Faith that Comes Down to Earth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/materialism/

============================================================

This is James chapter 5, verses 1 to 6, a troubling passage, and a difficult one, actually, to interpret and to hear. James 5, 1 to 6. Now listen, you rich people. Weep and wail because of the misery that is coming upon you. Your wealth has rotted and moths have eaten your clothes. Your gold and silver are corroded. Their corrosion will testify against you and eat your flesh like fire. You have hoarded wealth in the last days. Look, the wages you failed to pay the workmen who mowed your fields are crying out against you. The cries of the harvesters have reached the ears of the Lord Almighty. You have lived on earth in luxury and self-indulgence. You have fattened yourselves in the day of slaughter. You have condemned and murdered innocent men who were not opposing you. And that's that. That's the passage for tonight. This is God's word. Now, it's a troubling passage in a couple of ways. It's not just what it's talking about, but the fact. It's not just what it's saying, but that it's saying it. It raises two issues, a very specific issue and a very general issue. And let's mention the general one first. And all of these are issues that really people differ on who have interpreted this passage over the years. The first one is, who is he talking to? Oh, of course, he's talking to people with money, landowners, management, people that pay wages. But are these Christians or not? And you see a lot of people say, no, no, no, couldn't be. Couldn't be. First of all, it's a condemning passage. It says, you've fattened your souls for the day of slaughter. It says, on the last day, the corrosion of your gold and silver will testify against you. Now, that's covenant curse language. That means on the final day, you see, on judgment day, you're going to lose, is what he seems to be saying. You're going to lose. They'll get up and this will be evidence against you. The amount of gold and silver that you've hoarded will be evidence against you on judgment day. Well, you know, so many people say, this couldn't be Christians because you couldn't talk to Christians with such severity. Doesn't the Bible say, doesn't Paul say, the good work that God began in you, he will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ? Now, how could Paul say that? In Philippians chapter 1, verse 6, he writes a group of Christians and he says, I know that the good work that began in you, that when you became a Christian and God put his Holy Spirit in you, I know that God will never fail to finish what he started. I know that if he started good work in you, you cannot lose your place in the family of God. You can't fall out of your position. Now, Paul couldn't say that. He couldn't write that to a whole group of Christians, many of whom he probably hasn't written, unless it was true principally, unless it really was impossible for a person who's been adopted into the family of God to be unadopted. Now, if that's true, how in the world could James be talking like this? How could he be actually warning Christians about the possibility of not standing on judgment day? And so we say, well, many people say, of course, he can't be talking to Christians here. But I'm sorry, you can't take that wonderfully comforting position. It just doesn't stand up. Why in the world would he be talking to people who aren't there? I mean, you know, James is writing a letter to the church. And in chapter 4, verse 13, we looked at this last week, he starts off and says, listen, now listen, you who make plans. And we looked at that last week. We're not going to go back to that. And now, just a few verses later, he says, and now listen, you who are rich. Now, you see, what warrant have we got to say that, you know, when you just take it grammatically, you just take it naturally, James has been going through and he's been saying, now listen, you who this, now listen, you who that. He's writing a group of Christians. He's writing a church. Now listen, you who this. Why in the world would we suddenly say, well, but he couldn't be talking to anybody who's there? I'm sorry. If he's saying, now you who are this and now you who are that, and of course, after this passage is over, he'll continue to go on. How in the world can we conclude? Where do we get the warrant to say, well, he must be talking to people who aren't there, people who aren't even Christians? It just doesn't make any sense. No, no. And therefore, here's the implication. He is talking to Christians with this kind of severity. What does that mean? It means, look at the danger of fruitlessness. What is he doing? He is taking away their comfort. Now, what do I mean by that? He's taking away their comfort because they aren't growing in Christlikeness they have no right to comfort themselves that they are sure they're Christians. Now, look, here's this wonderful and interesting balance. You know how the gospel goes. We have a little way, and we talk about the gospel around Redeemer. We've used it for years, and we're going to keep on going. by the fact that on the cross, the holiness of God and the love of God came together. You see, to see the law by love fulfilled. That's what happened on the cross. That in God's love, he came and fulfilled the law on the cross. So God's holiness and his hatred of sin and God's love and his mercy for us sinners came together on the cross, and therefore we say, because God is holy, we are very wicked and we are more lost than we ever dared hope, but because he's loving through Jesus Christ, we're more accepted than we ever dared believe at the same time. We're more wicked than we ever dared hope. We're more accepted than we ever dared believe. Now, here's the problem. If you're a Christian, you know that you can't fall out of God's family, but how do you know you're a Christian? And by God's grace, if you go through an extended period of time in which you fail to show that God's good work is in you, in which you fail to grow in Christlikeness, if you go through an extended period of time, by God's grace, you lose that comfort. When I say God's grace, I mean it was for me. When I've gone through an extended period of time in which I wasn't growing in Christlikeness, I wasn't living the way Christ wanted me to live, I lost my comfort. You start to wonder. You start to doubt. You start to say, will I stand on the day of judgment? Did I ever really believe? It's good for you to lose your comfort. You see, some of you, and I know this because I'm a pastor. I talk to people all the time. Some of you lose your comfort too quickly. The minute you sin, wham, maybe I'm not a Christian, which goes to show you forget one half the gospel, and that is you're saved by grace. If you think you're not a Christian, the minute you sin, that shows you really believe you're saved by being a good person. And the minute you stop being a good person, you say, oh, maybe I'm not a Christian. That shows you don't understand the grace part of the gospel. You don't understand that God is a God of grace. You really don't understand or believe in grace. There's a legalism in you because if you lose your comfort the minute you sin, but there's other people who never lose their comfort. It doesn't matter what they do. I prayed a prayer with a preacher. I know I'm a Christian. I know I've given my life. They never lose their comfort. They forget any other side of the gospel, and that is that God is a God of holiness. That what do you think? Why did Jesus die? Why did Jesus die? Just to pardon you from sin? No, to save you from sin, and not just the consequences and the condemnation of sin, but to turn you into a righteous and godly and holy and beautiful person. And you see, if you forget that, and that's what James is doing, he's coming and saying if you lead consistently fruitless lives, lives in which consistently and regularly you fail to show forth the generosity and the courage and the wisdom and the goodness of Jesus Christ. I take away your comfort, says James as a pastor. You shouldn't have it. Oh, I'm not saying you're not a Christian. You certainly can't be sure you're not a Christian. Look at what Christians are capable of. Look at David and Bathsheba. Look at Peter. Look at him. Oh, look. Look at the denial. Look at all this. But, he says, you see, Peter's saying, I'm not saying, James says, and a good pastor says, I'm not saying that you're not a Christian. I'm saying that you have no right to comfort yourself today. That's what he's doing. He's taking away the comfort. He says, by God's grace, your comfort ought to be gone. How do you know you can even stand on the day of judgment? If you keep on living like this, how dare you comfort yourself? That's bad. It's the reason why perhaps you're not wailing and repenting. See, when he calls them to wail, he's calling them to repent. That's how he calls people to repent. Weep and wail, he said. Submit yourselves to God, back in chapter 4. He's calling them to repent. He's not saying you're hopeless, but he's saying, get rid of your comfort. You don't have a right to it. So, those of you who lose your comfort too quickly, beware a spirit of legalism. Those who never lose their comfort, no matter how you live, beware a spirit of licentiousness. Those of you who lose your comfort too quickly, beware that you don't see the God as a God of grace. Those of you who never lose your comfort, no matter how you live, beware, because God is a God of holiness. Do you see? All right. That's the general thing. But then, more specifically, that's the first issue. The first issue is, how can he talk to Christians as severely? And the answer is, because fruitlessness is a severe and dangerous situation. A lack of growth in your life. No difference. Three, four, five years, you're no different. You say you've been a Christian all this time, you're not changing. Look out. Not saying that you're not a Christian, but you mustn't, mustn't, completely comfort yourself and assure yourself that you are either. Get on the stick. Wail, you know. Repent. Get your assurance back. So, that's the idea. Now, the other thing, though, is he talks about a particular danger, not the danger of fruitlessness, but specifically the danger of materialism and a love of money. And he says some things here that are extremely, extremely hard, and we don't have lots of time to go into all of them, but let me show you what he's saying. He's, first of all, telling us about a particular danger. us a number of things that that love of money leads to. And then he tells us, actually, how we can avoid it, how we can heal it if it's in us. Number one, here are some of the sins. He says, you've hoarded wealth. Now, you know, the word hoard is a negative word. Have you noticed that? He didn't say you've saved. Proverbs chapter 6, verse 8 says, oh, sluggard, go to the ant. The ant stores up, saves, saves, saves for wintertime. The Bible's not against saving. It's against hoarding, and here is the problem. This says, you've hoarded your wealth, and then back down in verse 5, it says, you've lived in luxury and self-indulgence, and people get pretty upset at this point, and here's why. James is saying it is extremely important for Christians to see there's a difference between, there's a line to be drawn between saving and prudence and self-indulgence and hoarding and storing up money instead of putting it to good use. There's a difference between living a basic life of necessities and conveniences and moving over into the area of unnecessary luxuries and self-indulgence. And everybody says, where is that line? And, you know, the reason the Bible does not give us a real, real, real, clear, easy-to-look-at place. You know, people say, okay, how many cars can you have as a Christian? How many, you see? How big an apartment? How much, well, how big should your clothing budget be? And the trouble is, the Bible is written for all people at all times and all places and all cultures. But just because you can throw your hands up and say, well, who knows then, doesn't mean that James isn't saying, you better find a way to draw that line. You better look at everything in your life and say, is this really a necessity or is it a luxury? Do I really have to spend my money on this or could I, instead of spending this on myself, could I be giving this money away? Somebody says, boy, I'd hate to have to live a life like that. This is the life that you're called to. There's a balance. It means, but basically it's this. You know, have you heard of the famous story about John Wesley? John Wesley, of course, founded the Methodist Church and he started out as a simple preacher and he didn't make much money, but after a while because of his, and he founded one of the great movements in history, one of the great church movements. By the end of his life, he was making just tons of money from his publications and so on. And it's a pretty well-known fact and pretty famous that when he made 30 pounds and he gave away three, the next year he made 40 pounds. That was his income and he gave away 10. The next year he made 70 pounds and he gave away 40. And at one point he made 1,400 pounds one year and he gave it all away and he stayed living on 30. And one of the questions a Christian has got to ask is, is my standard of living going up as fast as my income? It must not. The more money you make, the greater a distance there must be between where you live and what you're capable, you know, the lifestyle you do live and the lifestyle you're capable of living. No Christian must live as well as they are capable of. Nobody. I mean, at least the tithe is there. The Bible says you should give at least 10% of your money away and that's enough to make a lifestyle change for almost anybody. But you see, the richer you get, the greater a distance there has to be between where, the lifestyle level at which you live and the lifestyle level at which you can live. You say, well, where is that? How do you know? All I can show you is the Bible, this passage is the most severe passage in all the book of James. It is incredibly severe because the love of money will rot your soul if your money is rotting. Now, see, you know, you say, how does money rot nowadays when your money basically is on some microchip someplace? It doesn't make much sense, but you have to understand the context. Things rot and things corrode when they're not being used. The picture is, if you are not taking your money and making it do good, awakening people's hearts, straightening people out, if you're not putting your money into people, making a difference in their lives, if you're just sort of sitting on your money, you see, if your money is rotting, if you're not putting it to tremendous use, your soul will rot. James says this is so incredibly important. It's this love of money. It's this holding on to your money, which is so serious. It leads you to think things that are really luxuries or necessities. And he says, watch out for that. Look at yourself. Examine yourself. Compare yourself to other people. Look at the needs in the world. Look, look, look. That's all I can tell you is what he's telling you. This is serious. You can't say, well, because you're not telling me exactly, I just throw my hands up in the air. You can't do it. All Christians have to be living. That's what it's saying. But there's something else it says, and I've got to say this because, boy, this is important in a place like Manhattan. It's not just that he condemns hoarding. Love of money doesn't just make us self-indulgent in our lifestyle. It also, look, it says, the wages you fail to pay the workmen who moved your fields, mowed your fields, excuse me, are crying out against you. When you love money, you have a tendency to take people for all they're worth. In other words, you have a tendency to step on people for your own financial gain. You have a tendency to underpay people, or you have a tendency to sort of get a lot more out than you really, you know, that you ever really originally said. When I first came to New York, I thought that I better preach a lot and talk a lot about sex, because one of the things I found out when I came to Manhattan is more than most places, maybe there's something about Manhattan, the fact that, well, who knows why, but more than most places, people were misusing sex. So I said, boy, this is really bad. I got to do something about this. But I found something else out. Maybe it's the nature of New York and the nature of the way in which we work. Do you realize how many of us are hiring each other? We're constantly hiring each other. We all, we all, so many of us provide services. So we go and we ask for advice and we ask for, we get, we get each other to consult. We ask people for services. And I found, and it's continuing to be the case, that in New York, there is a tremendous tendency for us to use each other, not pay promptly, not pay generously. We ask for something and then, oh, you know what? We asked for it and we thought we could pay, but then we find out, gee, I guess we really can't, and then we don't pay or we don't pay well. I cannot tell you how many times inside the church, around the church, outside the church in New York, it's incredible. You don't have to be a wealthy landowner to have unpaid wages, your unpaid bills, crying out to God, it says, crying out to God. Is there somebody you owe right now? Is there somebody you've gotten something from them and, you know, you feel a little bad that you haven't been able to get back, but what can I do? It says the wages you fail to pay. It's a love of money that causes you even in little ways to step on people for your own financial gain. You must not. Now, how can this be healed? How can it be healed? This love of money gets us to a place where we're doing self-indulgent lifestyle. It gets us to a place where we use people. We very often abuse people. It can be done in very major ways. I mean, if you have enough money, and most of you don't, you know, there can be millions of dollars of unpaid wages, which are crying out to God, it says, to God. But in most of our cases, just somebody we asked a friend to do something, we said, I'll pay, and we haven't gotten to it. But that's crying out to God, too. And it comes really from an unwillingness to sacrifice. In both cases, an unwillingness to sacrifice. You could pay. You could pay. But we don't. You don't want to cut into you. You don't want to cut into the things you want to do. Now, how can this be healed? There's two things he says, and one of them is a little obscure, and only, where's Jeff? Only Jeff knows about this. He has to study this text with me every week because he has to write the Bible study stuff. It says, if you are living like this, if you're stepping on other people, if you're worried about money, you know, the love of money can rot. If you have this love of money, it's going to rot your soul whether you get it or not. You see, if you have this great love of money, this desire, this lust for money, if you get it, it'll rot your soul. But if you have a lust of money and you don't get it, it will rot your soul. You'll be envious and you'll be bitter. And some of you are. So envious and so bitter. You went to the same graduate school. It's people making three times as much as you at your age. What's going on? Why the bitterness? You see, don't you see your spirits are corroding. Your spirits are rusting. Because when you put your heart on things which rust, your heart will rust with them. Now, how can we deal with it? The answer is, he says, if you have this problem, you've forgotten that Jesus is coming back and you've forgotten that he was betrayed for you. I can only be brief about it, but it's important. First of all, notice in verse 3, it says, it doesn't just say you've hoarded wealth, it says you've hoarded wealth in the last days. And this is interesting because it's extremely intriguing. But what he's really saying is people who have too much concern for money, too important, your lifestyle important, is your eschatology isn't straight. You know what eschatology is? Your eschatology is remembering that Jesus is coming back. And here's what's pretty interesting. C.S. Lewis put this beautifully years ago. He says, if you have a proper understanding of the second coming of Christ, you'll have a proper attitude toward the world. Now, before I give you his illustration, I'll say, the conservative churches tend to be overly focused and when this happens and when the temple's rebuilt in Jerusalem and they've got all these little timetables, and they're sure they know. Mainline churches say, well, who knows? I don't think Jesus is coming back at all. But the biblical doctrine cuts against both of those things, because against the mainline churches, the Bible says, Jesus is coming back. This world is not ultimate, it's penultimate. The order of this world, who's on top, who's got this much money, it's all going to blow away. But against the conservatives, it says, there's no way possible for you to know when this is going to happen. No way. It could be a thousand years from now, it could be a thousand seconds from now. Well, what does that do? C.S. Lewis put it this way, what if you're a man who's 80 years old? He says, now, you have to have a balanced view about your death. He says, on the one hand, you shouldn't get up and say, I'm 80 years old. Why plan anything? I could die today. Why go to see a movie? I could die today. Somebody calls up and say, hey, would you like to meet me for lunch? No, I could die today. You see, that is a view that says, so obsessed with death. I mean, that's obviously wrong. On the other hand, an 80-year-old man should certainly have your will made out. It's criminal if you don't have your will made out. It's also criminal to sort of embark on something that, don't embark on any 10-year projects. I mean, in other words, you should always take it out. The individual's death is to an individual what the second coming is to the human race. If your eschatology is on straight, what you mean, on the one hand, it means that unlike the mainline churches will usually tell you, Jesus is coming back, and therefore, there ought to be a riskiness about our lives. We ought to say, you know, in the end, money doesn't matter. The savings doesn't matter. Where we get doesn't matter. This is all going to blow away. There should be an adventurousness, a radicality, you know, about Christians. But on the other hand, unlike the people that are just obsessed with the second coming of Christ, we have to say this world is a place we're living in. We have to care about this world. You know, very often people who are just apocalyptically taken up in, you know, it's interesting, the people who are just apocalyptically obsessed, they say, let's not feed the hungry. Let's not rebuild their homes. Let's not do anything to improve social conditions. Why? Let's just save their souls because Jesus could come back, and he probably will come back tomorrow. I know, I got the timetable. And it was so pretty, it's interesting, is the people who don't believe in the second coming of Christ completely invest their lives in the world, and they get all of their satisfaction from where they make it in the world. And the people who, on the other hand, are overly, you know, like the 80-year-old man is saying, well, why do anything? I'm going to die today. They're under-concerned about the world. But James is basically saying, if you hoard wealth, you're just forgetting about the fact that Jesus Christ would come anytime, and the curtain could come down, you've forgotten, that all of your, see, all of your gold and all of your silver will rust. All of your microchips will do whatever they do. It'll be gone. Don't put all of your hope in that. But then, last of all, look, at this last verse, I got to show you this, but this last verse is very, very difficult. And you know what makes it really difficult is the translators, you have to decide what you think the verse means before you translate it. And once that happens, then you who are reading the translation, your own understanding gets hijacked in the direction the translators had to choose. And there's almost no way around it. Literally in the Greek, this is what James says, you have condemned and murdered the righteous man who did not, who does not oppose you. You have condemned and murdered the righteous one. The righteous one is what it says, who was, does not oppose you. And you see, the translators have said, well, he must, they must be talking about, James must be talking about, you rich people have somehow killed the poor. It doesn't say that. It says the righteous. It doesn't say the righteous ones. It doesn't say the good poor. It says the righteous one. You have murdered and killed the righteous one. And if it's talking about a poor man, it would say who could not oppose you. But it says who does not. It's a voluntary word. What in the world is he saying? James says, ultimately, the reason that you're so concerned about money and the reason you're grasping about it and you're actually not paying your bills to people and you're stepping on people and you're all concerned and you're worried about money, you have forgotten the one who was betrayed for 30 pieces of silver, but he didn't resist. He voluntarily died for you. You have forgotten what he's done for you. One of the most interesting things is that in Matthew and in Mark, we're told that a woman came to Jesus in the last week of his life and she brought out a vase of ointment, a container of ointment that was extremely expensive in those days and was worth a whole year's wages and probably was the family heirloom, probably was her life savings. And she poured it out on Jesus. all of my worldly goods, all of my worldly security, I pour out on you because we're the whole realm of nature mine. Mine were a present far, that be a present far too small. Love so amazing, so divine, demands my soul, my life, my all. And we're told by Matthew and Mark, it was at that point, then, he says Matthew, then Judas went out and sold Jesus for 30 pieces of silver. We have no idea why Mary, that's who it was, the woman putting Jesus infinitely above all worldly goods, saying, I don't care if I lose everything for you. You're more important than money. You're more important than my worldly security. You're more important than everything. We don't really know why that triggered Judas. Other than, Judas couldn't stand it. He couldn't stand to see it. What a contrast. See, James is saying, in a sense, are you going to be like Mary, or are you going to be like Judas? Are you going to be willing to say, I see what you've done, and therefore, it's worth my money. My money's worth really very little. I put it at your feet. Or are you going to be like Judas, who sold Jesus for money? Do you remember, you know what the theme of this whole passage is? Don't forget. Remember that? The greatest sin is just forgetting what Jesus has done, just going about life without thinking about it, spending your money, deciding your budget, without thinking about the one who is worth more than all the gold and silver, who died and does not oppose it, did not resist it. Some of you are going to say, Kathy said, don't tell them this story, because they're going to think all you ever do is watch movies. Well, there's a wonderful movie, a 1945 movie, by Olivia de Havilland, won the Oscar for it. It's called To Each His Own. It's a real tearjerker, but an awfully well-done one. And it's about a woman who has a child and gives the child up. But then she's sort of, the little boy is really stolen by her rival. And it's hard to explain, and I won't go into all of it. But basically, she's really, when she wants the child back, she finds that her rival has decided that she's going to keep her. And so Olivia de Havilland is in this terrible situation of doing nice things for her little boy. Growing up near her little, you know, her little boy grows up near her. She does wonderful things. She helps out in all kinds of ways, but she decides to honor the wicked, nasty lady who the little boy thinks is his mother. Never comes in and says, you know, I'm really your mother. Loves him from afar. Does all these wonderful things. Sacrifices for him, and he never knows. It's the very end of the movie. He's grown up. He's a soldier. He's getting married. She arranges for him to be able to get married, and it's pretty interesting. But at the very, very end, a friend of Olivia de Havilland, an older gentleman, comes and sort of says, can't you put this all together? Don't you know who this woman is? Don't you remember her when you were, you thought she was your aunt this and that, when you were four? Do you remember this? Do you remember that? That was her. That was her. That was her. And suddenly, the light goes on. And the very last scene, he walks over to her. Everybody's dancing. He walks over, and he looks at her, and all she hopes for is that he'll be happy and never really know. And he looks at her, and he says, this is the last line. Mother, may I have this dance? Yeah, you know, the little line in the TV guide says, you know, incredible tearjerker, but so well done. You know, you feel like you knew it was coming. You knew they were going to do it to you. Kathy and I are sitting there, you know, weeping our eyes out, saying, why did we watch this movie? But don't you see? Don't you see? He remembered. He remembered. He realized suddenly what she had done for him, and suddenly he remembered everything, and he gave her credit. And he says, now I see who you are. Now I know what you've done for me. Now I know who you are. He remembered. She'd been forgotten, and she was remembered. Listen, the nicest thing you can do for somebody is just to remember them. The worst thing you can do is to ignore them. James is saying, remember the one, if you do, if you remember the one who died for you but didn't oppose it, the one who did all this for you, then you will have a whole different attitude toward everything in the world, everything, including your money. Are you going to be like Mary, or are you going to be like Judas? Let's pray. Our Father, we ask now that you'd help us to come to you and, like Mary, lay all of our worldly security and all of our worldly possessions down and say, Lord, you were rich, you became poor, that through your poverty we might become rich. Give us a whole new attitude toward our money and toward our worldly security. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
