TITLE: Meditation, Affection, Contemplation, Kingdom
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Spirituality (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/meditation-affection-contemplation-kingdom/

============================================================

Take your hand out. And because we're... Well, first let me tell you what we're doing. Not all of you have been here every month. That's fine. What we're doing is we're looking at prayer this year. Are you wondering? We're looking at prayer, but in particular we're looking at grades of prayer, levels of prayer. To use a phrase from the Chronicles of Narnia, we're looking at how to get farther up and higher in to the reality and the presence of God. And everybody gives lip service to this. For example, when I was a college student, when I was a pretty new Christian, I got a hold of a book that I still think is a book everybody should read. It's called Knowing God. And it was an exciting book because in the beginning it said you need to move from knowing about God to knowing God. And yet, if you actually read the book, as great as it is, it's basically a theology book. It tells you about God. It really doesn't tell you how to move from just praying to really experiencing His presence. It doesn't really tell you. There's another book that's very famous that I still think everybody should read. It's a much newer book. It's by Blackaby. It's called Experiencing God. And again, you read that book and you think, oh, this is going to tell me about it. It doesn't. It's on guidance. It's not telling you at all about how to experience God. But it's really after. It's really how to trust God and find His guidance for your life. But it's really not on this. You see, the Puritans, the Catholic mystics, everybody said it's one thing to pray. It's one thing to say your prayers. It's another thing to move into communion with God, into fellowship with God, into experience of God's reality and presence. Everybody talks about that, but how do you do it? And that's what we're talking about in these monthly meetings. And if you want to get the overview, we have to get this overview. Look at the bottom of your first page, I think. Actually, I have to, yeah. And this is really what we're looking at. And each month, I'm looking at a, well, every month or two, we're looking at one of these grades or stages in prayer. So, for example, over on the left, we have simple prayer. And what we've been saying is the best way to move higher up and further in is to move, ordinarily to move into meditative prayer. And then into affective prayer. And then into contemplative prayer. And then into kingdom prayer. So, if you go back up into the, look up, further up the page where it says flow. Now, the reason we have to talk about this every month is not just simply because we always have people that, you know, missed or, you know, are starting to come for the first time. But because we're in somewhat uncharted waters ourselves. Because to our liturgical left and to our liturgical right, Christians know more about mystical experience than we do. Well, who's we? I mean, some of you think, what you mean we, Kimisabi? Well, I'm talking about Protestants in particular, but Presbyterians, Methodists, Baptists, you know, a lot of you from those backgrounds, not everybody, of course, Episcopalians. But basically, when I say to our liturgical right and to our liturgical left, now it depends on how you want to do this, but to your liturgical right are much more formal churches. The Orthodox, the Eastern Orthodox, the Catholic churches. Much more formal. If you go to our left, you go to the Quakers and you go to the Pentecostals, and there's far less form, far less liturgy, far more moving with, you know, the spiritual experience. What's so intriguing to me is because Protestants, and especially, you might say, you know, mainstream Protestants, the older Protestant churches, have been rightly but overly afraid of emotional excess. Rightly but overly, you hear that? I am a Protestant. Rightly but overly concerned with emotional excess. As a result of that, there's been much more emphasis in our tradition, in our circles, on knowing your doctrine, getting all that straight, doing things. And there's far less literature, far less help, far less guidance for actually communion with God, fellowship with God. So if you move either into the Pentecostal or the Quaker circles, or if you move into the Orthodox or the Catholic circles, and you take a look at their writings, you'll see just tons more material. And actually, we have to look there if we're going to get some ideas for ourselves. And that's what I've been trying to do. I've been trying to distill, as a Protestant and as a Presbyterian, trying to distill this for us. And I say that there's a tremendous amount of consensus, actually, all across the spectrum on what the grades and stages are. Now, let me remind you what they are. Take a look. at contemplative prayer, which is the hardest thing to talk about, at least in terms of how-tos, at least for Presbyterians. It's hard because there are almost no how-tos at all. It's going to frustrate some of you. Meditative prayer, let's remind ourselves what these things are. Meditation, affection, contemplation, kingdom. Meditative prayer, we said, is, and we're looking, remember Psalm 1 was a good place to look at what meditation is. Meditation is engaging your intellect, and what we mean is you go to the Word, go to Scripture. Word-centered meditation means that through deep communion ordinarily happens through biblical meditation. And meditation is formative rather than informative reading. In informative reading, which you always have to start with, in informative reading, you're asking the text questions and you're trying to figure out what the text says, so you're asking it questions. But informative reading, you're listening to God, letting the text question you, letting the biblical text address you, rather than you questioning and addressing it. So it's essentially to bring the truth of the mind into contact with the heart until you get some spiritual warmth. Let the Scripture, let the Lord speak to you through it. Listen to it meditatively. It's basically, the Catholics call it discursive prayer because they say it's still basically an intellectual thing. It's still something that you decide to do and you move on through. We've talked about this. We're not going to talk much about it tonight. We've talked about this quite a bit in the past. But then, once the warmth begins, then you can move into the next stage, you might say. And the next stage, to my mind, it's amazing. There's, again, a remarkable amount, when I say there's an amount of consensus I'm talking about on the one hand, you might say the mystics to the left, the Anabaptists, the Quakers, the mystics to the right, the Catholics, and the Puritans, who were more or less in our tradition, but who also had pretty, they spent a lot more time talking about Christian experience than we do nowadays. And they all agree in something they call effective prayer. We talked about this last week. Jonathan Edwards, one of the last of the Puritans, wrote maybe his greatest work, maybe, called The Religious Affections. And what is that? Well, the best text for that is Colossians 3, 1-4, where it says, set your affections on things which are above, where Christ, who is your life, appears, and so on. And what we mean here is you don't grow in Christ simply by trying harder to be good. Remaining sin in your life is always a result of your affections. That means your heart's most enjoyed beauties and most committed loves being set on saviors other than Christ. And so what you do once you've gotten some spiritual warmth, again, I'm not going to keep going back over this much, but what you do when you get some warmth is you take a look and see, you know, what the things are that you tend to serve instead of Jesus, and you pull the fingernails of your heart off of the things that you tend to serve and tend to drive you and put them on to Christ. You say, well, how do you do that? You really can only do that when meditation is starting to pay off with some spiritual warmth. By spiritual warmth, I mean reality. When some of the things that you've always known begin to affect you, when they begin to become beautiful to you, they begin to thrill you, they begin to disturb you, they begin to move you, they begin to melt you, when that begins to happen, you can turn to Jesus who's beginning to look beautiful. Not just, I know this thing, I know he did this, I know he did this, I believe all these things. He's beginning to look beautiful. When that begins to happen, that and only then, really, can you really do work on your affections. You know, what do I really want? What are the things I really crave? Those are the things that drive you. How are you going to change that? At the end of sermons, by and large, you can't do much. You just know, I shouldn't be this way, and you walk out. Well, it's in prayer where, because of the meditation, you begin to rejoice more in Christ, and we say what affective prayer is, is offering your heart in a new way to God. Repenting. Saying, I don't want to be this way, I don't want to serve these things, I want to serve you. Now, we talked about that last time. Now, almost all of the folks that I've been reading say that after meditative prayer to affective prayer comes something called contemplative prayer, and that's what we want to talk about tonight. However, I'm going to skip that for a second, because I'm going to get back, and then, in contemplative prayer, what basically goes on is you get into real adoration. You get into a gaze of Jesus Christ, where he becomes very real to you, and you adore him. You don't do much work. You don't do much thinking. You simply, you drink it in. It's a, it's a, it's a, well, we'll get to this in a second. It's a high form of praise. And when you've done with that, you go to kingdom prayer. What's kingdom prayer? Well, think about this. Think of the Lord's Prayer. You don't get into, give us this day our daily bread, and you don't even get into thy kingdom come, until you've already, between. before you get to give us this day our daily bread, you have to go through contemplative prayer, which is, our Father who art in heaven, hallowed by thy name, and you have to go through affective prayer, thy will be done. So petition comes last, and you'll find that when you, if you go from meditation into offering your heart to God, into gazing on his beauty and spending quite a bit of time in adoration of him, and then you turn to the petitions, then you turn to intercession, then you turn to the things that your friends need and the church needs and the city needs and all that, you'll pray with a tremendous, you know, far, far more power. So the summary here at the bottom, meditation is bringing the intellect to complete focus on listening to God. This ordinarily leads to a kind of prayer called effective prayer, which is a combination of deep repentance and offering up your life and new degrees of surrender. That in turn leads to praise and thanks in which the soul simply rests content in contemplating God's beauty and greatness, and finally, the soul looks outward toward its challenges in the world, and now with clarity of perspective begins to wrestle to have God's will done on earth as it is in heaven. And that is the ordinary trajectory. Now, if you turn over your page, let's start talking about contemplation. Contemplation, of all the things we've talked about, this, I already warned you, this is the one, this is the one basically that can't be done. Well, what I mean is, as you're going to see, everybody who talks about this, and I mean everybody, says this is the place where you can receive this, but you really can't go get it. Not really. If you do meditation and affection, very often the reception comes. And of course, this can come out of the blue, but we're talking about how do you ordinarily work. All along we've said, we've said great experience of the presence of God can come any possible way. You know, God is not a tame lion. You know, this is not a bunch of, this is not a technique. This is no guarantee, but this is the ordinary way, biblically, you see this happening. Now, let's talk about contemplation for a little bit. One of the things that is important to keep in mind is the word meditation, whether you're listening, whether you're talking to a Catholic mystic from the 16th century or a Puritan from the 17th century or a Quaker, virtually everybody that talks about meditation uses the term in the same way. Basically, meditation has an early section in which you're doing more informative reading, and then is a formative section in which you're basically listening. And you're basically saying, how can I praise God on the basis of this text? We've talked about this before. How can I confess my sins on the basis of this text? Why is God showing me this text now? And you're really seeing it like a letter, and you're listening to it. So there's a lot of consensus on that. And what's interesting, even though that you don't run into the term affection, you don't run into the term meditative prayer a lot. You don't run into the word effective prayer much. But when you do, Catholic, Protestant, no matter what, they all agree. Effective prayer is not used as often, but they all agree. The word contemplation, though, is confusing. And it's been confusing to me, because I'm coming to realize that different people have used it in different ways. Now, the term isn't so important. It's the category that we've got to talk about. And let me give you some examples of this. For example, Augustine, when he talked, he wrote about what he called the soul's ascent into God, you know, going higher up and deeper in. And whenever he talked about it, he talked about three stages that his own soul essentially took. And because he spoke Latin, he gave us, it was in Latin, and he spoke of retentio, contemplatio, and dialectio. Now, retentio, when you read what he says, is basically study, which is, in a sense, the informative part of reading, basically reading the Bible and trying to study it. That's what retentio means, to get a clear picture of the teaching of the text in your mind. Contemplatio, I put down here, is really a combination of meditative and effective prayer. Because when he does, what he means by contemplation is a kind of, it's basically meditation. And contemplation is to move from knowing about, you know, this fact in the scripture, to beginning to adore God for it, to begin to rest in it, to begin to marvel, or to be troubled by it. He means to let it affect you. Begin to feel it. And begin to pray it. But basically, what he means by contemplatio is, is what we've been talking about, is meditation. But then, he talks about dialectio. And what he means by dialectio is, sometimes, he says, sometimes you get visited with an unusual clarity, and an unusual joy, and an unusual reality that comes. Now, what's interesting to me, is that if you go to who was one of the Puritans, he was Oliver Cromwell's chaplain. He was part of the Puritan uprising in Britain in the middle of the 17th century. And John Owen also speaks in this text, I think this is from his book called Communion with God, in which he's talking about the ascent of the soul into God. And he says there's three stages to it. And he doesn't, well, look at it. Number one, first comes the actual exercise of the mind, fixing thoughts and meditations on spiritual truths. That's simple enough. And listen, secondly, next comes the inclination of all the affections toward the things whereby they cleave to the spiritual truths and make an engagement unto them. Even in this old English, even in all this Puritan jargon, it's pretty clear right away. See what he's saying? He says, after I've understood the text, now I start to move my affections toward it. I move my love, my zeal, you know, my passions toward it. Number three, finally comes a relish and a savor in which lies the sweetness and the satisfaction of the spiritual life. That's a pretty strong statement. We taste then by experience that God is gracious and that the love of Christ is better than wine. When under the conduct of spiritual light our affections do cleave unto him with full purpose of heart, our minds fill up with thoughts and delight in him. Then virtue, which is change in character, will proceed from him to purify us, increase our holiness, and sometimes fill us with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Wow. Now, what he's saying here is this third stage is something that you're kind of out of control. He even uses the word sometimes. And so what he's saying is meditation, you're completely under control. A meditative prayer, you're really in control. A effective prayer, you're a little less in control. But this, you're out of control. Sometimes it just doesn't happen. See, I mean, this is hard for those of us who went to graduate school. You know, because graduate school is to get, you know, here's how to make things happen. You know, but you see the upper reaches of, you know, the most advanced Christian lessons are how to become passive and receptive. Now, he's not using the term contemplation for that middle thing. He calls it meditative prayer, effective prayer, and then he doesn't use any term for the third one. Let me go a little further. Now, when we get to Teresa of Avila, now we're into something. She was really something. Very interesting person. And, you know, even though, if I had time or the inclination, I'd tell you all the things that are wrong with her. But I would rather tell you that I think she's ahead of me on a few things. I think she's ahead of me. She describes contemplation. And, you know, I'm going to follow her on this because she uses the term for this next stage that John Owen talks about, that St. Augustine talks about. She calls it contemplation. And following her, either, I don't know who started it, but all the Catholic mystics of the 1500s, Teresa of Avila and St. John of the Cross, I shouldn't say all of them, but most of them use the term contemplation for that. So what Augustine is talking about and what John Owen is talking about and what Teresa is talking about, she calls it contemplation. And I've decided, what the heck, let's follow her. Because it's just as well to use the term that way. Though if you're reading other literature, sometimes people use the term contemplation and meditation interchangeably. We're not going to use it that way. Not because it's so important to have the word, but because we need to have the category in our mind. And when Teresa of Avila talks about it, she gives me some very provocative stuff that really rings true with the lower reaches of this country that she knows very, very well and I only know the outskirts of. She says, in this stage of ascent into the soul, into God, she says, a sense of the reality of God's presence. That's one mark of it. A real sense of the reality of God's presence. That should be obvious, but no, that's good. She put it down. B, a great assurance of belonging to God. And she really puts a big finger on this. This thing, this feels really good. And over the years, I think, I know Pentecostals and people in John Wesley's tradition have misunderstood this as being some kind of zap of power from heaven. But she was smarter than that. And she says, it's not sort of a zap of new favor and power, but it's the enjoyment of the standing we've got. It's assurance of what we already have. It's a certainty. C, now this is pretty important. She says, in this stage, the soul becomes much more passive than active. D, this is indescribable. E, so what am I trying to do? She wrote a whole book on it. This is indescribable. But she spends four chapters on it. So, you know, what are you trying to do? I mean, it's indescribable, yet you can't stop talking about it. words, usually, at least, I'd have to tell you that this stuff is a matter of degrees. There is not a nice, simple, you know, boundary marker by which you know you've passed from this stage into this stage. Oh, my goodness, no. But what she's saying is that, essentially, when this begins to happen, when God becomes real to you, it physically affects you. You know, you feel it. It's like any, frankly, it's like any strong feeling. I mean, how do you feel when the person, you know, not every, this hasn't happened to everybody, and, you know, but one good thing is the person you want to marry says, okay, that's a pretty good feeling, you know, or things like that. I mean, if it affects you at the time, if it didn't affect you, come talk to me, okay? Okay, that's what, okay, F. It's character changing thereafter. In other words, if this is really, if this is the real McCoy, it changes the way you live. It has a permanent effect. It doesn't just give you a high and leave you the same grumpy person you were before. It doesn't give you a sort of an emotional high and leave you just as insecure as you were for it. It doesn't. The general method, how do you do contemplation? Here's what she would say. It may begin with words of adoration. It is essentially a move to wordless gazing and admiration. It's essentially moving beyond analysis and essentially into intuition. You stop analytical meditation when it happens. And here's what she does. She has a pretty interesting, now, the reason I'm going to give this to you as long as you're willing to take it with a grain of salt, as long as you're willing to realize that people's personalities are awfully different. And certainly we mustn't take this and say this is the way it's got to be. But she describes levels of contemplation. And the only reason I'm putting it down here is not so much because I really think there are so much levels of contemplation, but it shows you aspects of the experience. First of all, she says, these are the levels. Infused contemplation is the basic category. And by infused contemplation, she means the ability to gaze rather than think. Instead of thinking and working it out, it just becomes real to you. You're not thinking, you know, in other words, the chatter of your heart stops. B, the ability to rest. It becomes satisfying. You say, what more do I need? And C, the ability to delight, which means there's something very delicious about it as well. And then she talks about four levels of this, which basically are just, look, I can see why she calls it this. The prayer of quiet means that your mental distractions are gone. So you really moved into contemplation when you don't notice what else is going on. You're having no trouble concentrating. That's pretty interesting. In other words, you know, suddenly, wow, you're having no trouble. You're completely undistracted, completely undistracted. All contemplation has this degree. Teresa's talking about an unusual amount. The prayer of union means conscious desire for sin and other objects begin to recede. In other words, this is major effect of prayer. This is a place beyond what you can do on your own. Then she talks about the prayer of conforming union and the prayer of transforming union. And I wanted to confess to you, I think that this rings true to me, but I don't know anything about it. And what she says is, the prayer of conforming union is a spiritual ecstasy, but a wound. And she says, one of the things that goes wrong when you get this close, now look, I'm just telling you this to kind of whet your appetite a little bit. She says, one of the problems with really getting close to Jesus is you get a wound. And the wound means you really, it's not just that you don't worry about needing other things as much, but you actually begin to, how would she put it? She says, you find the main difficulty now in your life is the lack of the beatific vision. You walk around kind of wounded, she said. Now, I don't know if that should be or not. I don't know if that was a flaw in her personality or not. But how could I tell? I don't think I've been that close. She said, you get that close, she said. She calls it the wound of love, where you essentially walk around kind of wounded, always happy and crying. I don't know. Maybe. Let's move on. In the Welsh revivals, one of the things that's interesting is every single leader of the great Welsh revivals, there was a great one in 1740s, there was a huge one in 1857, 1858, and there was another huge one in 1904, 1905, when like a third to a half of Wales got converted each time. And what's intriguing is if you go and you read the accounts of the leaders of those revivals, they very often were sort of ordinary Christians, but they broke into another level of experience. And let me just read you some of the accounts. And this is definitely contemplation. In fact, maybe it's the kind of stuff Teresa of Avila was talking about as sort of the advanced stuff. Here's Evan Roberts. bedside, I seemed to be taken up to a great expanse. It was communion with God. Before this, I had a far-off God. After this experience, I was awakened. A little after one o'clock, I was taken up into divine fellowship for about four hours. What it was, I cannot tell you, except that it was divine. That really sounds an awful lot like what she was talking about. Here's an older one, and I've always liked this guy, Howell Harris. He became a field preacher. June 18, 1735. Being in secret prayer, I felt suddenly my heart melting within me like wax before the fire. With love to God, my Savior, I felt not only love and peace, but also a longing to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And there was a cry in my inmost soul with which I was totally unacquainted before. It was this, Abba Father. I could not help calling God my Father. I knew now that I was his child and that he loved me. My soul being filled with and satiated crying, it's enough. Very close to what Teresa talks about. I'm not going to read you the Pascal and the Edwards quotes. If you've been around Redeemer, you've seen these before. If you haven't seen them before, read them. But turn over to the biblical stuff, and I also want to hasten here to a couple of practical things. Biblical sources, look at this one. Psalm 20, where does the Bible talk about this? Psalm 27, 4. Oh, pardon me. I need to read it to you. I thought I'd printed it out. But in Psalm 27, 4, well, I almost know it by heart, but I want to make sure I get it right. The psalmist says, one thing, where am I here? One thing I ask of the Lord, one thing I seek, that I might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life and to gaze on the beauty of the Lord and seek Him in His temple. Now, almost for sure, this guy is not, this is David, he's not asking for a vision. And he's also not asking to go back into the Holy of Holies behind the veil and to see the Shekinah glory of the covenant over the mercy seat between the archangels. What is he asking for, then? Well, he's asking for what we're talking about here. Or another verse, which I want you to think about, is in Romans 8, 15 and 16, a very, very, very key verse that talks about this is Romans 8, where it says, the Spirit bears witness with, oh, in fact, let me read you the verse before. You did not receive a spirit that makes you a slave again to fear, but you received the Spirit of the Sonship, and by Him we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit Himself testifies with our spirit that we are God's children. Very important verse. Why? It doesn't say the Spirit testifies. It says the Spirit testifies with our spirit. What does that mean? It means your spirit, normal, inferentially, your spirit says, I'm a child of God. How do I know? I've seen Christ as Savior. I've done this. I've seen this. I've seen growth in my life. In other words, your spirit knows that you're a child of God. But then the Spirit comes alongside of your spirit and gives you this remarkable reality. See that? That's pretty interesting. Why would God do that? That's one of the things He offers to us. Even without contemplation, even without this unusual reality, even without this assurance, you're a Christian. You know you're a Christian. See? It's not like you have no assurance at all. But this is something additional. Now, so what is it? Let's take a look at a couple of the quotes. Peter Toon, an Anglican author, says, Contemplation is the attention of the whole soul upon God. The whole inner self is quiet and still, looking only unto God in a state of utter reverence, total admiration, and wholehearted worship and adoration. Jordan Allman, a Catholic writer, says, Contemplation is knowledge accompanied by the light that arouses admiration and captivates. That's a great word. Captivates. Richard Foster, a Quaker, says, Contemplation is a matter of receiving rather than trying. It may begin with words of praise and adoration, but moves beyond words and analysis to big picture grasps. So you tend to sort of sit quietly and gaze. And you know what's intriguing is C.S. Lewis, in his book, Letters to Malcolm, Chiefly on Prayer, has this little passage in it. I still think the prayer without words is the best. If one can really achieve it. Now, look at this. But I now see that in trying to make it my daily bread, I was counting on a greater mental and spiritual strength than I really have. To pray successfully without words, one needs to be at the top of one's form. And you can't just jump to contemplation. In other words, there has to be a reality there. You can't just sort of stop and gaze. I mean, I used to hear about this sort of thing, you know, reading kind of super spiritual books, hearing people talking about it when I was a younger Christian. And I used to try it and I didn't, you know, what am I doing? You know, what am I doing? I'm not thinking anything. And actually, some people also mistake this for Eastern meditation because Eastern meditation... That's why it'll give you a mantra, you know, to actually destroy rational thought. This is not that. That's why Lewis is saying this is not at all easy. Jacques Pousset puts it this way. The soul should not stay in meditation, for by its fidelity in mortification and recollection, it ordinarily receives a pure and more intimate prayer. See what I mean? This is universal. Across the board, everybody who's worked at prayer says the same thing. It says, if you do meditation and mortification, you know what mortification is? What is it? Yeah, it's effective prayer, okay? It says, if you move through from meditation into repentance, it ordinarily receives a pure and more intimate prayer consisting in a simple-looking or loving attention to God himself. The soul-quitting reasoning is a sweet contemplation which keeps it peaceful, attentive, receptive of any divine impression the Holy Spirit may communicate. Well, I'll just give it to you. This is what Martin Luther says. Martin Luther, in his very funny letter to his barber on how to pray, which I follow very, very closely in the stuff I've already given you, and when I come back with a kind of master, you know, guide, it's going to follow Luther very closely. Luther said, do your meditation. That means you study your text, you know what the text says, and then you do adoration, confession, thanksgiving, and supplication on every part of the text. We talked about that before. But he says, you work yourself through it. Adore. Confess. You work yourself through it. But he says, if suddenly the Holy Spirit begins preaching to you, write everything. He says, stop what you're doing and write it down. What is it? Martin Luther. Martin Luther says, you're going through your meditation. That means you're going through your paces. You're going through the list. You're doing the stuff you're supposed to do. But he says, if all of a sudden the Holy Spirit begins to preach to you, write it down. Now, what he means is, suddenly you get rid of, you know, your method, and you begin to get receptive. But only after you've done all this other stuff. If you tell new Christians, or if you tell people who don't know anything about biblical meditation to do this, they're going to get, they're going to start getting, you know, they're going to start getting revelations from Mars. And they will. And they'll tell you about it. You know, usually it will start when they come up to you and say, Jesus told me you're supposed to marry me. And it does happen that way. They just open up and they say, we'll see what comes to you. You see how dangerous that will be? Who knows what's going to come to you? And, you know, the mind is, you know, the mind is like a lake, you know, in a storm. All kinds of stuff can come up from the bottom. All right. Now, if you turn over to the last page. You like that metaphor? Ah! I have my mind. Gunk. This is the beginning. I don't have time to do this. This is the beginning of a real brief way of seeing how you would move through the stages. You see, in the beginning, preparation means you center, you concentrate. We talked about this, but we won't talk about that. But spiritual reading means you're reading your text. Meditative prayer means I start to meditate. I start to adore and confess and thank and petition God. I write those meditations out. Effective prayer. See, the goal of preparation is inner collectiveness. The goal of spiritual reading is to understand the text. The goal of meditative prayer is illumination, where things begin to start to get real to you. The goal of effective prayer is love, to take the affections of the heart off false objects and offer up the heart to the Lord. But, now here's the best part. Contemplative prayer, the goal of contemplative prayer is beauty. To sense with the heart the absolute sufficiency and excellence of the Lord. To taste it. One of the things I didn't read to you, but it's in your handout, is where Jonathan Edwards says, Meditation and contemplation is the difference between knowing that honey is sweet and tasting it. You can know honey is sweet without tasting it, but you can't taste honey is sweet without knowing it. So, he says that's the difference. Moving to a sense of the reality. You've moved to knowing about honey, to tasting honey. So, you move knowing that Jesus is X to sensing it. Knowing that he's loving to sensing his love. Knowing that he's wise to sensing his wisdom. Knowing that he's merciful to sensing his mercy. See? And, how does that happen? This is the best way I can do it. I tried, after spending all this time saying, there's no way to do it, you have to receive it. Nevertheless, this is basically how I think it works. The best way is, when you're done with effective prayer, to simply continue to rejoice in the aspect of Christ's suitability and excellence that has become the most real and vivid and relevant to you during all this time. Now, what's the one thing about Jesus that's most beautiful and great to you at the end of your time? Then, take it back to his presence. as much as possible the inner chatting and analysis. Don't be legalistic about this because, you know, don't try to, you know, again, this is not an Eastern meditation thing where you've got to stop all internal rational thought. It just means, you know, stand back. I said, you may find yourself moved to songs. You know, don't say, oh, I can't sing. I'm not supposed to think. You know, don't be ridiculous. What we're trying to say is, you know, move away from the rules, move away from this process, move away from the steps, move away from discursive thought, and as much as possible, take the one thing back into his presence and say, this is tremendous, Jesus. This is wonderful. You may find yourself moved to song. If contemplation happens, it will. If you don't, don't try for it. Okay? But then the next best would be to return, and here's what I do. If this isn't happening, this is how I move. What I do is I go back to my meditations in which I have written down my adorations, the things about, from the text, I want to praise God to, and what I do is I just work my adoration out a little bit. And I always use three things. I always say, what does this show me of the majesty of God? What does this show me of the grace, loveliness, and sweetness of God? What does this show me about the wisdom, symmetry, and depth of God? This is what I do. I forget where I got this. I got this from Thomas Goodwin or somebody. I can't find the text anymore. He says there's three things about God that are great. His majesty, his sweetness, and his wisdom and his symmetry and his depth. And, you know, that's always helped me. So what I'll do is I'll go back to the text, and I'll work on the adoration. And I use, ask yourself questions a little bit. How can I neglect and miss such wonder, love, grace, and greatness? So I begin to praise him. I begin to adore him. But if it doesn't catch fire, fine. Move on to your intercession petitions and your kingdom prayer. And that's it. This is, I'm telling you about this so you know what's available. I'm telling you about this because most of the, because at least as Protestant, if you're talking about Protestant, especially Protestant evangelical type books, really are so technique driven and so rationalistic that they're afraid of this. Okay? So we need, in some ways, I need to emphasize this to say, this is real, that really is the place where I change. I do not change in worship services so much. I do not change, you know, in classes. I do not change. I change in community and I change in meditative, effective, and contemplative prayer. I change my interactions with other Christians at a deep level and I change in interaction with God at a deep level. Not just Bible study, not just classes, you know, not just saying my prayers, not just going to church. It's important for us to know. Okay, let me close this in prayer. Our Father, Father, this is a very, this is a very, well, I think I come at this with approach avoidance. I'm a little afraid of this. On the other hand, I want this very, very much. I know, Lord, that to want an experience is the best way not to get one or to get a counterfeit version of it. I know that if any of us, especially living in a world today that's starved for experience, if any of us get a hold of this and begin to say, oh, I want to have these wonderful feelings, it's going to take a lot longer time to find them. But if we really do want you, you've promised, him who cometh to me, I will in no wise cast out, you said, and we tend to think of that as salvation, but it's more. If we come to you, if we seek your face, it's because you have already asked us to, you've already begun to instigate it in us. And so we know that any desire we have as we think about these things tonight to really know you and seek you is from you and therefore our desire will be successful. Help us to want you, not feelings. Help us to want you, not experiences. Help us to want you. And you'll give us more than we dare ask or think. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. The best text for that is Colossians 3, 1-4, where it says, set your affections on things which are above, where Christ, who is your life, appears, and so on. And what we mean here is you don't grow in Christ simply by trying harder to be good. By remaining sin in your life is always a result of your affections. That means your heart's most enjoyed beauties and most committed loves being set on saviors other than Christ. And so what you do once you've gotten some spiritual warmth, again, I'm not going to keep going back over it as much, but what you do when you get some warmth is you take a look and see, you know, what the things are that you tend to serve instead of Jesus and you pull the fingernails of your heart off of the things that you tend to serve and tend to drive you and put them on to Christ. You say, only do that when meditation is starting to pay off with some spiritual warmth. By spiritual warmth, I mean reality. When some of the things that you've always known begin to affect you, when they begin to become beautiful to you, they begin to thrill you, they begin to disturb you, they begin to move you, they begin to melt you. When that begins to happen, you can turn to Jesus, who's beginning to look beautiful. Not just, I know this thing, I know he did this, I know he did this, I believe all these things. He's beginning to look beautiful. When that begins to happen, that and only then, really, can you really do work on your affections. You know, what do I really want? What are the things I really crave? Those are the things that drive you. How are you going to change that? At the end of sermons, by and large, you can't do much. You just know, I shouldn't be this way, and you walk out. Well, it's in prayer where, because of the meditation, you begin to rejoice more in Christ, and we say what affective prayer is, is offering your heart in a new way to God. Repenting. Saying, I don't want to be this way, I don't want to serve these things, I want to serve you. Now, we talked about that last time. Now, almost all of the folks that I've been reading say that after meditative prayer to affective prayer comes something called contemplative prayer, and that's what we want to talk about tonight. However, I'm going to skip that for a second, because I'm going to get back, and then, in contemplative prayer, what basically goes on is you get into real adoration. You get into a gaze of Jesus Christ, where he becomes very real to you, and you adore him. You don't do much work. You don't do much thinking. You simply, you drink it in. It's a, it's a, it's a, it's a, well, we'll get to this in a second. It's a high form of praise. And when you've done with that, you go to kingdom prayer. What's kingdom prayer? Well, think about this. Think of the Lord's Prayer. You don't get into, give us this day our daily bread, you know, and you don't even get into, thy kingdom come, until you've already been between, you know, you also have to get, before you get to give us this day our daily bread, you have to go through contemplative prayer, which is our Father who art in heaven, hallowed by thy name, and you have to go through affective prayer, thy will be done. So, petition comes last, and you'll find that when you, if you go from meditation into offering your heart to God, into gazing on his beauty, and spending quite a bit of time in adoration of him, and then you turn to the petitions, then you turn to intercession, then you turn to the things that your friends need, and the church needs, and the city needs, and all that, you'll pray with a tremendous, you know, far, far more power. So, the summary here at the bottom, meditation is bringing the intellect to complete focus on listening to God. This ordinarily leads to a kind of prayer called effective prayer, which is a combination of deep repentance and offering up your life and new degrees of surrender. That, in turn, leads to praise and thanks, in which the soul simply rests content in contemplating God's beauty and greatness, and finally, the soul looks outward toward its challenges in the world, and now with clarity of perspective begins to wrestle to have God's will done on earth as it is in heaven. And that is the ordinary trajectory. Now, if you turn over your page, let's start talking about contemplation. Contemplation, of all the things we've talked about, this, I already warned you, this is the one, basically, that can't be done. Well, what I mean is, as you're going to see, everybody who talks about this, and I mean everybody, says, this is the place where you can receive this, but you really can't go get it. Not really. If you work on, if you do meditation and affection, very often the reception comes. And, of course, this can come out of the blue, but we're talking about how do you ordinarily work? Of all along, we've said, we've said, great experience of the presence of God can come any possible way. You know, God is not a tame lion. You know, this is not a bunch of, this is not a technique. This is, this is no guarantee, but this is the ordinary way, biblically, you see this happening. Now, let's talk about contemplation for a little bit. One of the things that is important to keep in mind is the word meditation, whether you're listening, whether you're talking to a Catholic mystic from the 16th century or a Puritan from the 17th century or a Quaker, virtually everybody that talks about meditation uses the term in the same way. Basically, meditation has an early section in which you're doing more informative reading, and then is a formative section in which you're basically listening. And you're basically saying, how can I praise God on the basis of this text? We've talked about this before. How can I confess my sins on the basis of this text? Why is God showing me this text now? And you're really seeing it like a letter, and you're listening to it. So there's a lot of consensus on that. And what's interesting, even though that you don't run into the term affection, you don't run into, you run into the term meditative prayer a lot. You don't run into the word effective prayer much. But when you do, Catholic, Protestant, no matter what, they all agree. Effective prayer is not used as often. And it's been confusing to me, because I'm coming to realize that different people have used it in different ways. Now, the term isn't so important. It's the category that we've got to talk about. And let me give you some examples of this. For example, Augustine, when he talked, he wrote about what he called the soul's ascent into God, going higher up and deeper in. And whenever he talked about it, he talked about three stages that his own soul essentially took. And because he spoke Latin, he gave us, it's in Latin, and he spoke of retentio, contemplatio, and dialectio. Now, retentio, when you read what he says, is basically study, which is, in a sense, the informative part of reading. Basically, reading the Bible and trying to study it. That's what retentio means, to get a clear picture of the teaching of the text in your mind. Contemplatio, I put down here, is really a combination of meditative and effective prayer. Because what he means by contemplation is basically meditation. And contemplation is to move from knowing about this fact in the scripture to beginning to adore God for it, to begin to rest in it, to begin to marvel or to be troubled by it. He means to let it affect you, begin to feel it, and begin to pray it. But basically, what he means by contemplatio is what we've been talking about is meditation. But then, he talks about dialectio. And what he means by dialectio is sometimes, he says, sometimes you get visited with an unusual clarity and an unusual joy and unusual reality that comes. Now, what's interesting to me is that if you go to somebody as different as you could be, John Owen, who was one of the Puritans, he was Oliver Cromwell's chaplain. He was part of the Puritan uprising in Britain in the middle of the 17th century. And John Owen also speaks in this text, I think this is from his book called Communion with God, in which he's talking about the ascent of the soul into God. And he says there's three stages to it. And he doesn't, well, look at it. Number one, first comes the actual exercise of the mind, fixing thoughts and meditations on spiritual truths. That's simple enough. And listen, secondly, next comes the inclination of all the affections toward the things whereby they cleave to the spiritual truths and make an engagement unto them. Even in this old English, even in all this Puritan jargon, it's pretty clear right away. See what he's saying? He says, after I've understood the text, now I start to move my affections toward it. I move my love, my zeal, you know, my passions toward it. Number three, finally comes a relish and a savor. In which lies the sweetness and the satisfaction of the spiritual life. That's a pretty strong statement. We taste then by experience that God is gracious and that the love of Christ is better than wine. When under the conduct of spiritual light, our affections do cleave unto him with full purpose of heart. Our minds fill up with thoughts and delight in him. Then virtue, which is change in character, will proceed from him to purify us, increase our holiness, and sometimes fill us with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Wow. Now what he's saying here is this third stage is something that you're kind of out of control. He even uses the word sometimes. And so you, what he's saying is meditation, you're completely under control. A meditative prayer, you're really in control. A affective prayer, you're a little less in control. But this, you're out of control. Sometimes it just doesn't happen. See, I mean, this is hard for those of us who went to graduate school. You know, because graduate school is to get, you know, here's how to make things happen. You know, but you see the upper reaches of, you know, the most advanced Christian lessons are how to become passive and receptive. Now, he's not using the term contemplation for that middle thing. He calls it meditative prayer, effective prayer, and then he doesn't use any term for the third one. Let me go a little, let me go a little further. Now, when we get to Teresa of Avila, now we're into something. She was really something. Very interesting person. And, you know, even though, if I, if I had time or the inclination, I'd tell you all the things that are wrong with her. But I would rather tell you that I think, I think she's ahead of me on a few things. I think, I think she's ahead of me. She describes contemplation. And, you know, I'm going to follow her on this because she uses the term for this next stage that John Owen talks about, that St. Augustine talks about. She calls it contemplation. And following her, either, I don't know who started it, but all the Catholic mystics of the, of the 15th century, all of them, but most of them use the term contemplation for that. So what Augustine is talking about and what John Owen is talking about, what Teresa is talking about, she calls it contemplation and I've decided, what the heck, let's follow her. Because it's just as well to use the term that way. Though if you're reading other literature, sometimes people use the term contemplation and meditation interchangeably. We're not going to use it that way. Not because it's so important to have the word, but because we need to have the category in our mind. And when Teresa of Avila talks about it, she gets rid of some very provocative stuff that really rings true with the lower reaches of this country that she knows very, very well and I only know the outskirts of. She says in this stage of ascent into the soul, into God, she says a sense of the reality of God's presence. That's one mark of it. A real sense of the reality of God's presence. That should be obvious, but no, that's good. She put it down. B, a great assurance of belonging to God. And she really puts a big finger on this. This thing, this feels really good. And over the years, I think, I know Pentecostals and people in John Wesley's tradition have misunderstood this as being some kind of zap of power from heaven. But she was smarter than that. And she says it's not sort of a zap of new favor and power, but it's the enjoyment of the standing we've got. It's assurance of what we already have. It's a certainty. C, now this is pretty important. She says in this stage, the soul becomes much more passive than active. D, this is indescribable. E, so what am I trying to do? She wrote a whole book on it. This is indescribable. But she spends four chapters on it. So, you know, what are you trying to do? I mean, it's indescribable, yet you can't stop talking about it. E, it's physically affecting. And I think that's an interesting point. In other words, usually, at least, I'd have to tell you that this stuff is a matter of degrees. There is not a nice, simple, you know, boundary marker by which you know you've passed from this stage into this stage. Oh, my goodness, no. But what she's saying is that essentially when this begins to happen, when God becomes real to you, it physically affects you. You know, you feel it. It's like any, frankly, it's not like any strong feeling. I mean, how did you feel when the person, you know, not every, this hasn't happened to everybody, and, you know, but one good thing is the person you want to marry says, okay, that's a pretty good feeling, you know. Or things like that. I mean, if it affects you at the time, if it didn't affect you, come talk to me. Okay? That's what, okay, F, it's character changing thereafter. In other words, if this is really, if this is the real McCoy, it changes the way you live. It has a permanent effect. It doesn't just give you a high and leave you the same grumpy person you were before. It doesn't give you a sort of an emotional high and leave you just as insecure as you were before. It doesn't. The general method, how do you do contemplation? Here's what she would say. It may begin with words of adoration. It is essentially a move to wordless gazing and admiration. It's essentially moving beyond analysis and essentially into intuition. You stop analytical meditation when it happens. And here's what she does. She has a pretty interesting, now, the reason I'm going to give this to you, as long as you're willing to take it with a grain of salt, as long as you're willing to realize that people's personalities are awfully different, and certainly we mustn't take this and say this is, this is the way it's got to be. But she describes levels of contemplation. And the only reason I'm putting it down here is not so much because I really think there are so much levels of contemplation, but it shows you aspects of the experience. First of all, she says, these are the levels. She calls them, infuse contemplation is the basic category. And by infuse contemplation, she means the ability to gaze rather than think. Instead of thinking and working it out, it just becomes real to you. You're not thinking, you know, in other words, the chatter of your heart stops. B, the ability to rest. It becomes satisfying. You say, what more do I need? And C, the ability to delight, which means there's something very delicious about it as well. And then she talks about four levels of this, which basically are just, look, I can see why she calls it this. The prayer of quiet means that your mental distractions are gone. So you've really moved into contemplation when you don't notice what else is going on. You're having no trouble concentrating. That's pretty interesting. In other words, you know, suddenly, wow, you're having no trouble. You're completely undistracted, completely undistracted. All contemplation has this degree. Teresa's talking about an unusual amount. The prayer of union means conscious desire for sin. Teresa's talking about an unusual amount. The prayer of union means conscious desire for sin. Teresa's talking about an unusual amount. The prayer of union means conscious desire for sin. completely undistracted. All contemplation has this degree. Teresa is talking about an unusual amount. The prayer of union means conscious desire for sin and other objects begin to recede. In other words, this is major effective prayer. This is a place beyond what you can do on your own. Then she talks about the prayer of conforming union and the prayer of transforming union, and I wanted to confess to you, I think that this rings true to me, but I don't know anything about it. And what she says is, the prayer of conforming union is a spiritual ecstasy but a wound. And she says one of the things that goes wrong when you get this close, now look, I'm just telling you this to kind of whet your appetite a little bit. She says one of the problems with really getting close to Jesus is you get a wound, and the wound means you really, it's not just that you don't worry about needing other things as much, but you actually begin to, how would she put it? She says you find the main difficulty now in your life is the lack of the beatific vision. You walk around kind of wounded, she said. Now I don't know if that should be or not. I don't know if that was a flaw in her personality or not, but how could I tell? I don't think I've been that close. She said you get that close, she calls it the wound of love, where you essentially walk around kind of wounded, always happy and crying. I don't know, maybe. Let's move on. In the Welsh revivals, one of the things that's interesting is every single leader of the great Welsh revivals, there was a great one in 1740s, there was a huge one in 1857, 1858, and there was another huge one in 1904, 1905, when like a third to a half of Wales got converted each time. And what's intriguing is if you go and you read the accounts of the leaders of those revivals, they very often were sort of ordinary Christians, but they broke into another level of experience. And let me just read you some of the accounts. And this is definitely contemplation. In fact, maybe it's the kind of stuff Teresa of Avila is talking about as sort of the advanced stuff. Here's Evan Roberts. One Friday night last spring, when praying by my bedside, I seemed to be taken up to a great expanse. It was communion with God. Before this, I had a far-off God. After this experience, I was awakened. A little after one o'clock, I was taken up into divine fellowship for about four hours. What it was, I cannot tell you, except that it was divine. That really sounds an awful lot like what she was talking about. Here's an older one, and I've always liked this guy, Howell Harris. He became a field preacher. June 18, 1735, being in secret prayer, I felt suddenly my heart melting within me like wax before the fire. With love to God, my Savior, I felt not only love and peace, but also a longing to be dissolved and to be with Christ. And there was a cry in my utmost soul with which I was totally unacquainted before. It was this, Abba Father. I could not help calling God my Father. I knew now that I was his child and that he loved me. My soul being filled with and satiated crying, it's enough. Very close to what Teresa talks about. I'm not going to read you the Pascal and the Edwards quotes. If you've been around Redeemer, you've seen these before. If you haven't seen it before, read them. But turn over to the biblical stuff, and I also want to hasten here to a couple of practical things. Biblical sources, look at this one. Where does the Bible talk about this? Psalm 27.4. Oh, pardon me. I need to read it to you. I thought I'd printed it out. In Psalm 27.4, well, I almost know it by heart, but I want to make sure I get it right. The psalmist says, one thing, where am I here? One thing I ask of the Lord, one thing I seek, that I might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life and to gaze on the beauty of the Lord and seek him in his temple. Now, almost for sure, this guy is not, this is David, he's not asking for a vision. And he's also not asking to go back into the Holy of Holies behind the veil and to see the Shekinah glory of the covenant over the mercy seat between the archangels. What is he asking for, then? Well, he's asking for what we're talking about here. Or another verse, which I want you to think about is, in Romans 8, 15 and 16, a very, very, very key verse that talks about this is Romans 8, where it says, the Spirit bears witness with, in fact, let me read you the verse before. You did not receive a spirit that makes you a slave again to fear, but you received the Spirit of the Sonship, and by him we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are God's children. Very important verse. Why? It doesn't say the Spirit testifies. It says, the Spirit testifies with our spirit. What does that mean? It means your spirit, normal, inferentially. Your spirit says, I'm a child of God. How do I know? I've received Christ as Savior. I've done this. I see this. I see growth in my life. In other words, your spirit knows that you're a child of God. But then the Spirit comes alongside of your spirit and gives you this remarkable reality. do that? That's one of the things He offers to us. Even without contemplation, even without this unusual reality, even without this assurance, you're a Christian, you know you're a Christian, see? It's not like you have no assurance at all, but this is something additional. Now, so what is it? Let's take a look at a couple of the quotes. Peter Toon, an Anglican author, says, Contemplation is the attention of the whole soul upon God. The whole inner self is quiet and still, looking only unto God in a state of utter reverence, total admiration, and wholehearted worship and adoration. Jordan Allman, a Catholic writer, says, Contemplation is knowledge accompanied by the light that arouses admiration and captivates. That's a great word, captivates. Richard Foster, a Quaker, says, Contemplation is a matter of receiving rather than trying. It may begin with words of praise and adoration, but moves beyond words and analysis to big picture grasp. So you tend to sort of sit quietly and gaze. And you know what's intriguing is C.S. Lewis, in his book, Letters to Malcolm, Chiefly on Prayer, has this little passage in it. But I still think the prayer without words is the best. If one can really achieve it. Now look at this. But I now see that in trying to make it my daily bread, I was counting on a greater mental and spiritual strength than I really have. To pray successfully without words, one needs to be at the top of one's form. You can't just jump to contemplation. In other words, there has to be a reality there. You can't just sort of stop and gaze. I mean, I used to hear about this sort of thing, you know, reading kind of super spiritual books, hearing people talking about it when I was a younger Christian. And I used to try it and I didn't, you know, what am I doing? You know, what am I doing? I'm not thinking anything. And actually, some people also mistake this for Eastern meditation because Eastern meditation always talks about get rid of your categories. You know, stop thinking of words. That's why it will give you a mantra, you know, to actually destroy rational thought. This is not that. That's why it's, that's why, that's why Lewis is saying this is not at all easy. Jacques Bousset puts it this way. The soul should not stay in meditation, for by its fidelity and mortification and recollection, it ordinarily receives a pure and more intimate prayer. See what I mean? This is universal. Across the board, everybody's, everybody who's worked at prayer tells, says the same thing. It says, if you, if you do meditation and mortification, you know what mortification is? What is it? Yeah, it's effective prayer, okay? It says, if you move through, from meditation into repentance, it ordinarily receives a pure and more intimate prayer consisting in a simple looking or loving attention to God himself. The soul quitting reasoning uses sweet contemplation, which keeps it peaceful, attentive, receptive of any divine impression the Holy Spirit may communicate. Well, I'll just give it to you. This is what Martin Luther says. Martin Luther, in his very funny letter to his barber on how to pray, which I follow very, very closely in the stuff I've already given you, and when I come back with a kind of master, you know, guide, it's going to follow Luther very closely. Luther said, do your meditation. That means you study your text, you know what the text says, and then you do adoration, confession, thanksgiving, and supplication on every part of the text. We talked about that before. But he says, you work yourself through it. Adore, confess, you work yourself through it. But he says, if suddenly the Holy Spirit begins preaching to you, he says, stop what you're doing and write it down. What is it? Martin Luther. Martin Luther says, you're going through your meditation. That means you're going through your paces. You're going through the list. You're doing the stuff you're supposed to do. But he says, if all of a sudden the Holy Spirit begins to preach to you, write it down. Now, what he means is, suddenly, you get rid of, you know, your method, and you begin to get receptive. But only after you've done all this other stuff. If you tell new Christians, or if you tell people who don't know anything about biblical meditation to do this, they're going to get, they're going to start getting, you know, they're going to start getting revelations from Mars. And they will. And they'll tell you about it. You know, usually it'll start when they come up to you and say, Jesus told me you're supposed to marry me. And it does happen that way. They just open up and they say, we'll see what comes to you. You see how dangerous that will be? Who knows what's going to come to you? You know, the mind is, you know, the mind is like a lake, you know, in a storm. All kinds of stuff can come up from the bottom. All right. Now, if you turn over to the last page. You like that metaphor? Ah! Ah, my mind. Gunk. This is the beginning. I don't have time to do this. This is the beginning of a real brief way of seeing how you would move through the stages. You see, in the beginning, preparation means you center, you. talk about it. Spiritual reading means you're reading your text. Meditative prayer means I start to meditate. I start to adore and confess and thank and petition God. I write those meditations out. Effective prayer, see, the goal of preparation is inner collectiveness. The goal of spiritual reading is to understand the text. The goal of meditative prayer is illumination, where things begin to start to get real to you. The goal of effective prayer is love, to take the affections of the heart off false objects and offer up the heart to the Lord. But, now here's the best part. Contemplative prayer, the goal of contemplative prayer is beauty. To sense with the heart the absolute sufficiency and excellence of the Lord. To taste it. One of the things I didn't read to you, but it's in your handout, is where Jonathan Edwards says, Meditation and contemplation is the difference between knowing that honey is sweet and tasting it. You can know honey is sweet without tasting it, but you can't taste honey as sweet without knowing it. So, he says, that's the difference. Moving to a sense of the reality. You've moved to knowing about honey to tasting honey. So, you move, knowing that Jesus, that, you know, Jesus is X to sensing it. Knowing that he's loving to sensing his love. Knowing that he's wise to sensing his wisdom. Knowing that he's merciful to sensing his mercy, see. And, uh, how does that happen? This is the best way I can do it. I tried, after spending all this time saying, there's no way to do it, you have to receive it. Nevertheless, this is basically how I think it works. The best way is, when you're done with effective prayer, to simply continue to rejoice in the aspect of Christ's suitability and excellence that has become the most real and vivid and relevant to you during all this time. You know, what's the one thing about Jesus that's most beautiful and great to you at the end of your time? Then, take it back to his presence and admire him and wonder at him. Stop as much as possible the inner chatting and analysis. Don't be legalistic about this because, you know, don't try to, you know, again, this is not an Eastern meditation thing where you've got to stop all internal rational thought. It just means, you know, stand back. I said, you may find yourself moved to songs. You know, don't say, oh, I can't sing, I'm not supposed to think. You know, don't be ridiculous. What we're trying to say is, you know, move away from the rules, move away from this process, move away from the steps, move away from discursive thought, and as much as possible, take the one thing back into his presence and say, this is tremendous, Jesus. This is wonderful. You may find yourself moved to song. If contemplation happens, it will, if you don't try for it. Okay? But then, the next best would be to return. Here's what I do. If this isn't happening, this is how I move. What I do is I go back to my meditations in which I have written down my adorations, the things about, from the text that I want to praise God to, and what I do is I just work my adoration out a little bit. And I always use three things. I always say, what does this show me of the majesty of God? What does this show me of the grace, loveliness, and sweetness of God? What does this show me about the wisdom, symmetry, and depth of God? This is the way I do. I forget where I got this. I got this from Thomas Goodwin or somebody. I can't find the text anymore. He says there's three things about God that are great. His majesty, his sweetness, and his wisdom and his symmetry and his depth. And, you know, that's always helped me. So what I'll do is I'll go back to the text, and I'll work on the adoration. And I use, ask yourself questions a little bit. How can I neglect and miss such wonder, love, grace, and greatness? So I begin to praise him. I begin to adore him. But if it doesn't catch fire, fine. Move on to your intercession petitions and your kingdom prayer. And that's it. I'm telling you about this so you know what's available. I'm telling you about this because most of the, because at least as Protestant, if you're talking about Protestant, especially Protestant evangelical type books, really are so technique driven and so rationalistic that they're afraid of this. Okay? So we need, in some ways, I need to emphasize this to say, this is real, that really is the place where I change. I do not change in worship services so much. I do not change, you know, in classes. I do not change, I change, I change in community, and I change in meditative, effective, and contemplative prayer. I change my interactions with other Christians at a deep level, and I change in interaction with God at a deep level. Not just Bible study, not just classes, you know, not just saying my prayers, not just going to church. And it's important for us to know. Okay, let me close this in prayer. Our Father, this is a very, this is a very, well, I think I come at this with approach avoidance. I'm a little afraid of this. On the other hand, I want this very, very much. best way not to get one. Or to get a counterfeit version of it. I know that if any of us, especially living in a world today that's starved for experience, if any of us get a hold of this and begin to say, oh, I want to have these wonderful feelings, it's going to take a lot longer time to find them. But if we really do want you, you've promised, him who cometh to me I will in no wise cast out, you said. And we tend to think of that as salvation, but it's more. If we come to you, if we seek your face, it's because you have already asked us to, you've already begun to instigate it in us. So we know that any desire we have as we think about these things tonight, to really know you and seek you is from you, and therefore our desire will be successful. Help us to want you, not feelings. Help us to want you, not experiences. Help us to want you. And you'll give us more than we dare ask or think. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
