TITLE: Meditation and Affective Prayer
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Spirituality (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/meditation-and-affective-prayer/

============================================================

We are, what we're doing in these monthly meetings is we're looking at how the gospel leads us into deeper levels of spiritual experience. And what you have at the top is the flow that not only the consensus of people who have written both in the Catholic and Protestant traditions on the subject of spirituality agree, is the normal flow of levels of prayer. Now you could say levels going higher and higher into God or maybe deeper and deeper down into God. I find myself mixing the metaphors when I talk about it. But the flow of the levels of prayer, getting closer and closer into the presence of God, tend to go like this. We said that even though people can have major spiritual experiences of God's presence, all sorts of ways. But the ordinary way is through meditation. And everybody seems to agree that meditation is the way. Meditation, which we're not going to, we don't certainly have time to backtrack at all. What we've looked at for the last two months, meditation is moving from informative reading to formative reading of the scripture. Informative reading means I'm asking the text questions. I'm addressing it. What does this mean? What does this mean? I'm asking the text questions. But in formative reading, the Bible starts to ask us questions. And we put ourselves in the place of listening to and being addressed by the word of God. We listen to God through the word rather than just study and pick it apart. And we've talked about that, how important that is. And even though I thought maybe this week, this month, I'd give you my own kind of practical guide steps on how I do meditation, I realized that frankly I needed to go through the whole flow before I did that. Because most of the Catholic and Protestant, and I have to even say in my own experience, most people say that after you meditate, and you begin to develop some spiritual warmth, and you sense that your mind descending into your heart, and you sense God speaking to you, what happens? How do you begin to pray? How do you begin to pray? Now, these forms of prayer can happen in different orders, but this is very typical. And that is, out of listening and meditation comes affective prayer, which leads to contemplation, which leads to supplication. Now, affective prayer, we're going to talk about tonight. And affective prayer is really just a version of repentance. Contemplation is really just a version of praise. And supplication is asking God for his kingdom to come. But they don't have to necessarily happen in this order, but we have to take very seriously the fact that so many of the masters, and not just the masters, but you don't use the word mistress, so many of both the men and the women who are great at prayer found that out of, the first thing that happened out of meditation, A affective prayer means, I find in my heart a desire to surrender. I find a love coming up, and making me want to offer myself to God in a new way. That tends to lead to gazing on the beauty of God, seeing his attractiveness, looking at him, and just being content with him. That usually leads to a desire to begin to wrestle for the kingdom of God, for God's will to be done on earth as it is in heaven. Richard Foster, he's got a book on prayer, not just his famous book on celebration of discipline, but he moves like this. He says he believes that prayer tends to move in, then move up, then move out. And this is, interestingly enough, I find myself that when I move in this direction, it feels very, very natural. Also, the reason I stuck these little arrows going up, sometimes, St. Teresa of Avila, who wrote her great book, The Interior Castle, sometimes, affective prayer, which is mortification, repentance, surrender, making resolutions, and covenants. Sometimes, the Holy Spirit descends, and it moves into what she calls the prayer of simplicity. The prayer of simplicity is a form of repentance and offering where you actually find your heart not fighting anymore. You find a complete compliance, a complete congruence between what you know to be true. You just find yourself desiring to do God's will. You wonder, why do I sin? Why do I fight? Wesley mistook that for entire sanctification. It's not. Your sin's not gone. It's just stopped yelling all the time. It's stopped complaining. And the prayer of simplicity is a wonderful gift that comes every so often. When you do contemplation and adoration and praise, sometimes the Holy Spirit gives you the gifts of the prayers of quiet and the prayers of union, which we'll talk about some other time, where the Holy Spirit, in a sense, comes down on us. And here I am praising God, but gives us an unusual experience of the glory and beauty of God. Those are not things that you can program. They're not things that you can plan for. You can plan for the stuff below the line of listening, moving in, moving up, moving out. But you can't plan for the stuff above the line. That just sometimes happens. Now, what I want to talk about tonight is what's been called affective prayer. I was very surprised. It's an old word, affective. A-F-F-E-C-T-I. What surprised me is, in the Protestant tradition, it was very important to talk about the affections. Jonathan Edwards wrote the greatest book on the subject ever, which is his book called The Religious Affections. But to my surprise, when you get into Catholic spirituality, they also say that the first thing that tends to happen, if your heart catches fire in meditation, is affective prayer. They use it too. Now, for a minute, let's talk about what the affections are. Before I show you how to do it, I've got to talk to you about it. If I just tell you it's repenting, you'll say, oh yeah, yeah, I know all about it. And I don't want you to say that, because I don't think you do, and I don't think I hardly do at all. What are the affections? The affections are not exactly the same thing as emotions. The affections are spoken of by the old Puritan, Protestant, and Catholic spiritual directors, because it's a more biblical view than the view we have right now. We have a tendency to talk about the head and the heart. I'm sure I do it sometimes. I just fall into it. You have the head, you know, that's the intellect, and then you have the heart, the emotions. But the old pastors and priests that knew something about this realized that it's not as simple as this. The affections are not the emotions. The affections are not like happiness and sadness. The affections are the things that your heart most loves, and therefore the affections are your root motivations. Now, emotions are part of that, but it's more than that. Your affections are your root motivations. They are the things that your heart most passionately wants, and therefore they are the things that your heart serves. Your affections are the things that incline the whole person in a particular direction. The affections are the things that your heart most passionately loves, and therefore they are the things that your heart serves. Now, to give you an idea of the affections, take a look here at this passage. Try, okay? You know, if you're Kathy and me, you're going to be looking like this. Even my bifos don't work on this. I'm sorry. However, go down to the part. This is a very famous sermon by Thomas Chalmers, Scottish pastor, who was, even though he lived quite a bit later, was essentially a disciple of Jonathan Edwards. Pretty much knew the Religious Affections book by Edwards by heart. And this is a very, very famous sermon called The Expulsive Power of a New Affection. Very famous sermon. And I have here a very, very important section of it. And even though I'm not going to read with you the first half of it, it's very important. Because the first half shows that your affections are only changed by the gospel of grace. And he spends a great deal of time explaining that. But now, go down to the one, two, three, four, the fifth paragraph on the front, where you see in brackets, you see it says, why is this grateful love so important? See that? Okay. He says, It is seldom that any of our bad habits or flaws disappear by a mere process of natural extinction. At least, it is very seldom that this is done through the instrumentality of reasoning or by the force of mental determination. But what cannot be destroyed may be dispossessed, and one taste may be made to give way to another and to lose its power entirely as the reigning affection in the mind. I know this is not, you're not used to hearing these words. Bear with it. He's talking about how does anybody change? He says, you can say, I should stop doing it. You can reason with yourself. You can... here's what he says. It is thus that the boy ceases at length to be a slave of his appetite. Okay? You know, he stops carousing around. But it's because a more mature taste has brought it into subordination. The youth ceases to idolize sensual pleasure, but it is because the idol of wealth has gotten the ascendancy. See, I've got to buckle down and study so I can get a good job. Even the love of money can cease to have mastery over the heart because it is drawn into the world of ideology and politics. See, now, oh, I'm going to get rid of all this money. I don't want to be a materialist. I don't want to be a capitalist oppressor. But now, ideology and politics has taken hold of the heart. And he is now lorded over by a love of power or moral superiority. But there is not one of these transformations in which the heart is left without an object. Its desire for one particular object is conquered, but its desire to have some object is unconquerable. Therefore, now look, the only way to dispossess the heart of an old affection, you're beginning to understand what affection means? The affection is your root motivation, what you most love and therefore what you completely serve. The only way to dispossess the heart of an old affection is by the expulsive power of a new one. It is only when admitted into the number of God's children through faith in Jesus Christ that the spirit of adoption is poured out on us. It is then that the heart, brought under the mastery of one great and predominant affection, is delivered from the tyranny of all its former desires and the only way that deliverance is possible. Thus, it is not enough. And boy, this is important. And actually, I'm sorry, it's me. Preachers of the world need to hear this more than anybody else. It is not enough to hold out to the world the mirror of its own imperfections. Huh? It is not enough to come forth with a demonstration of the evanescent character of your enjoyments. To speak to the conscience of its follies. Rather, try every legitimate method of finding access to your hearts for the love of him who is greater than the world. See? He says, you know, berating people or berating yourself and saying, look how foolish, look how stupid, look how dangerous, look how wrong, look how fleeting. That doesn't change you. You're still doing the same old thing. So there's absolutely no way for you to ever change unless something grabs hold of your affections and casts out what already, what already has captured them. See? You've got to love something more. You can't just say, I've got to stop this. You've got to want something more than this. And that's what the affections are. Now, therefore, effective prayer is, what is effective prayer? Let me give you, I didn't write this down here, I'll just give you a little definition. Effective prayer has a negative and a positive aspect, as we're going to see. But basically, in effective prayer, what you're doing is you're identifying, after the meditation has hit you, you're identifying the things that your heart has its deepest affections on. Think of your affections like long nails, okay? Guys, this is hard for you to understand. Imagine your affections are like hands with long nails, and you've got your claws into this thing. You've got to find out what it is. You've got to find out what those things are. And in effective prayer, what you're doing is you're taking your hands off old things, and you're putting your affections on the only thing, or the things that really will liberate. That's what effective prayer is. That's where you're basically saying to things that have the title to your heart right now, you can't push me around anymore. And essentially, you're offering yourself to God. You're taking your heart out of the thrall of your covenant lords, things that you've made covenants with, and you're turning to God and saying, I want to serve you. And that's why affective prayer sometimes is called a deeper surrender, deeper consecration, a sense of offering of the heart in a new way, offering of the life in a new way. And that's it. I mean, if you're a workaholic, your affections are set on money or status or something like that, if you are going berserk over the fact that the person that you love doesn't love you back, you've put your affections on that person, and it's an effective prayer that you do surgery. Now, let's give you some examples of this. How do you actually do it? And I want to kind of take you through it here. When you're done with medicine, you're studying a passage and you're listening to it in all the ways we talked about the last two months, sometimes you just start to get convicted and you can almost skip number one and two, all right? You can skip them. But most of the time, I have to do them. And what I mean is I have to go to the text that I've been listening to and I've been meditating on and I have to look for ways in which this convicts me of sin. And that's why I put down number one, here are questions for transitioning from meditation into affective prayer. Some of you are looking at me like, I know this is, a lot of these terms are different. Well, if this is the first time through this stuff for you, got to start someplace, all right? You may not walk out of here ready feeling, I'm all ready to do this, but we got to start someplace. Often during the natural course of meditation, your thinking will naturally discover subjective topics that will convict you for your lack of love of Christ or your inordinate love for something else. Conviction means you feel some spiritual warmth over the subject. It means your affections are starting to get stirred. But if that has not happened, here's what I suggest. I always go to the text with these three questions. Not always, but sometimes. I say, one, what sins of omission or commission are revealed in this text? And here's three sub-questions. Are there promises here that I'm failing to claim? Are there examples here I'm failing to emulate? Are there commands here I'm failing to obey? Those are three awfully, you take those three questions, ask them of any text, and you'll find sins. Okay. If you're having trouble feeling convicted, no problem, you know? They're good. But then, B, now you got to be very careful because effective prayer goes, tries to get onto the surface. B, this is a little different. This is, if you have found in your meditation some great things about Jesus or some great things about the Lord in general, God, you ask this question, what false emotions or wrong behavior or bad attitudes result in me when I fail to remember this truth about who God or Christ really is? Okay. Right. So, you know, it might be, you see Jesus Christ, you know, commanding the waves to be still and the ocean to be still, or not the ocean, whatever it was, still in the storm. And you, and you write in your meditation, you reflect and say, this shows that he is absolutely in control. He didn't get up and say, stand back, I can handle, he gets up and says, shut up. Right? Basically, that's what he's doing in Greek, you know, or whatever he said. He gets up and he says, shut up. And it stops. When you forget that you've got a savior like that, look at your life. What bad emotions, what false, uh, false emotions, bad attitudes, wrong behavior result when you forget you've got a savior that powerful. Think about it. Okay. Now that's actually a better question than the first one. The, as far as getting you to affective prayer, then see how is this sin? Now, if you're looking at a sin, looking at something you're doing wrong, a false attitude, a bad, bad behavior, false emotion, sins of omission or commission, promises. How is this sin being caused by an inordinate hope for someone or something to give me the satisfaction that only Jesus Christ can really give me? Now, these are hard questions, right? But that's what, this is, we're trying to get in. Okay. This is not, you know, bless mommy and daddy and aunt Ethel. We're trying to get in. And it takes time to get in. And to get in means this, this kind of level of, of reflection. Now, at this point, you're still in a sense meditating. But as you start answering these questions, you may find the heart start to burn. You may find that you start to begin to see your inordinate love for certain things and you begin to see how, you know, the need for greater love for Christ. But what you really want to do is you want to not love Christ in general. You want to love Christ in such a way that replaces, that replaces the way in which you're looking to other things to give you things, to give you satisfaction that only Christ can give. Now, there's another way to move into effective prayer. And that way is to make a transition, not from your Bible study into effective prayer. But I've got a way here to get you from just looking at your life. Like, you could sit down at the end of the day, if you want, and look on your life all day. Just look at the day. And here's three questions to ask. Okay. If you're angry, if you've been angry today, fairly angry, pretty burned up. Now, I don't want you to think that all anger necessarily root. You know, what Edwards would call a distorted affection. However, often it does, especially if it's been strong, especially if it's been debilitating, especially if it's made you feel sick. If you've been angry, ask this question, is there something too important to me? Is there something I'm telling myself I have to have? Is that why I'm angry, because I'm being blocked from having something I think is absolutely necessary when it's not? Write down what that might be. Now, you deal with these other two. If you're fearful or badly worried, ask, is there something too important to me? Is there something I'm telling myself I have to have? Is that why I'm so scared, because there's something being threatened that I feel like is absolute necessity when it's not? See, these are all, and then you can do the same thing with despondency. These are all versions of one C. These are just, these are ways of saying, is my anger, is my fear, is my despondency, really because there's something I'm looking to and hoping in to give me that which only Jesus Christ can give me. Now, see, you can do that without a Bible text. You can sit down and reflect on your day with those three questions. However, if at the end of that, you, nothing's going on, you might not be able to go on. I mean, what I mean is, I kind of oversimplified when I said, you know, on the front page, I said, here's the line, and when you meditate, you go through your time of effective prayer, which is repentance and, and, and surrendering and giving up, you know, your overloves over here, and, and filling your heart with love for Christ and saying, I want to serve you. I don't want to be serving this anymore. That's the reason why, that's, that's what effective prayer is. Catholics, I was reading a, let me see, Jonathan Allman, Jordan Allman, who's a major Catholic spiritual theologian, says, effective prayer is defined as the type of prayer in which the operations of the will predominate over discourses of the intellect. It's often simply meditation filled with love. I have oversimplified when I've said, sometimes the spirit kind of descends, and you get into the prayer of simplicity. You just feel your will melting into his will. The fact of the matter is, there's gradations. And sometimes, you, you can do this, this, these questions, trying to transition from meditation to effective prayer, and your heart just doesn't take off. It just doesn't happen. So what you can do is, you can finish by saying, it's, it, you basically have come to a, something of an intellectual awareness of your sin, and you feel a little bad about it, and you kind of know these, all right, make, move on. Move on to praise, and move on to supplication, and then just say, one of the things I need is, I need to feel more strongly in my heart these things, or something like that. But, if your heart does start to warm up, and you really begin to get insights, and the Holy Spirit begins to show you these things, then, here are guidelines for effective prayer. Now, there's three kinds. And actually, there's actually three parts. Do I do this every time? No. Of course not. But, in the course of your life, you've got to do all three. The first one is called mortification prayer. And mortification prayer means, this is the negative, you're looking at what your heart loves too much, and you're repenting for it. But you're not repenting like, oh, no, I love this too much. You're actually trying to wither the attractiveness of these objects to your heart. And I'll show you how to do that if we have a minute. Then, if you turn over to the next page, see, that's the negative part of effective prayer, is mortification. Looking at the things you love too much, and basically asking yourself, why? What is so great about these things? It's sort of withering its attractive power. The second part is rejoicing in grace. And I can't possibly go through all this tonight, but I have a short version near at the end I'll show you. You can't just simply say, you can't just unmask the things that your heart loves too much. You have to turn to Christ and say, how can I, in a sense, move my heart toward Christ by thinking of his grace? What he's done for me or what he's given me? And that's some ideas on that. Then lastly, if you jump all the way to the back, the third part of effective prayer, which I hardly put anything in there, because you have to really fill in the blank, is the prayer of surrender or offering. The prayer of surrender means, having done all this, is make some concrete resolutions, make some promises. Consider an action step or two, which you promised to God, you know, beware of rash vows, but beware of no vows. And so by, you, you, you, you, much, and you use the gospel and grace to just warm your heart up and to turn your heart to begin to desire and to pant after Jesus, and then finally, after you've worked on that, you're doing some tremendous work on yourself at this point. Tremendous stuff. This is really where you change. This is where you change. Then finally, offer your heart up in a new way, especially be as concrete as you can. Now, you say, what do you mean? All right, I've got time to give you some idea. Go back over to Guidelines for Mortification Prayer, which is a form of... The word mortification is not something that Catholics use. The Puritans liked it. And it comes from the old King James Version of Romans, chapter 8, verse 13. Does anybody know that by heart? If ye do, by the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the sinful flesh, ye shall live. And the word mortify means put to death. But here's what I mean by this. These are some thoughts that I've used. This is stuff out of my own journal, see, at this point. So here I'm kind of stripping in public. One of the things you do when you realize, I just love this too much. I just, here's something that's just too important to me. Well, see how weak and poor these things are in themselves. See, idols create delusions. They appear more wonderful or all-powerful than they really are. Stand back. Get some perspective. Look at them. In prayer, confess that these things are good, but they're finite, they're weak. Praise God for being the only source you need. In other words, say something like that. Here's sample prayer language. Lord, this is a good thing. Why have I made it so absolute? Why do I feel so pointless without it? What is this compared to you? If I have you, I don't have to have this. This can't bless me. This can't love me. This can't help me like you. This is not my life. Now, my suggestion is you write your own prayer out and you use it. Another way to weaken your heart's attitude toward these things is to see how dangerous they are to you, at least in this form. Generally speaking, these are not bad things, but they're dangerous. Idols enslave. They'll never be satisfied. Realize they increasingly destroy you. So look now in prayer. Confess that these things are absolutely lethal and ask God for help. Say things like, Lord, why am I giving this so much power over me? If I keep doing it, this is going to strangle me. I will be dead. I don't have to do this. I won't do this. I will not let this jerk me around any longer. Another is you can see how grievous, I can look at how grievous, sometimes the idols are leading me to do things that are just wrong. You know, the idol is leading me to say bitter things to people or to hold a grudge or the idol is making me so absolutely scared to do things that God wants me to do and I'm just chickening out and I'm not doing it. And maybe I'm even lying to people about it. So when that sort of thing happens, you have to ultimately say I'm being cruel to the heart of the one person that really deserves my heart. So you might say things like this, Lord, you're not enough to me. This is more beautiful, fulfilling, sweet to me than you. You're negotiable. This is not. Despite all you've done for me, I'm only going to use you as long as you help me get this. This is ridiculous. See? Now you write your own out. These are mine. I mean, or use them. I don't care. But now if you turn over, the question is how do you rejoice in grace? Now I don't have, I really do want to end in about five minutes. So what I would suggest you do is turn over to the very last page where I give you an example of quick strike praying for rejoicing in grace. I, by the way, look at me. I realize as I'm talking and I'm sensing this and as I'm looking at you and when we got to meditation, I can tell that a lot of you have never done anything like that. Fine. And therefore, it's a little strange. It's a little odd. But a lot of you have. A lot of you have made efforts at it. I realize when we get to this, we're really getting into very unfamiliar territory. And I don't want you to get in despair saying, I don't know, what is this? Like I said, if this is the first time into all this, then fine. This is the first time. It takes time for me. I have to get, I have to go through, I have to listen to things over and over. Like my wife knows this. I have to listen to music over and over again. I have to read things over and over again. Kathy is much smarter than me. She picks things up once and then she gets bored if you keep repeating them. But I'm, I don't know whether you're like me or like Kathy. I got to go through this. And if this is your first time and you're saying, what in the world is all this? But fine, this is your first time. But don't forget, we're talking about going higher and deeper, as Narnia says. You know, we're talking about going into realms where, where we really need to go. But most of us live in the lowlands. We never get up into the mountains. We never get up into realms. Okay. All right. the day. I don't have time to sit down and really think things out during the day. When, let me show you how this works. You use grace and the thought of grace and the thought that I'm saved by grace. The thought that Jesus has died for me. You use that when you start to experience the really, really negative, destructive emotions that always come from idolatry. And you don't want to have to wait until the next morning or whenever you pray in order to do something about it. But the reason I'm going to read these things to you is because they're good examples of what you would do in your structured time anyway. If I'm filled with anxiety, are you there? If I'm filled with anxiety, here's what I say. I say, if I slip up, if I make a wrong move here, I could lose everything. That's why I'm anxious. But we have to think instead, all the things I've done, all the things I have are just gifts of grace. They aren't here because of my wonderful performance. Everything I've got is a result of God's generosity. And if he loves me enough to lose his only son for me, surely he's going to continue to give me what I need. Console yourself with grace. See, in other words, whenever I get anxious, I'm forgetting. What am I, I'm afraid I'm going to lose this. Lose, why? Because I'm not being smart. I'm not being savvy. I'm not working. Everything you've got is a gift of grace. Everything. And if God wants to bless me so much as to have his son die for me, for crying out loud, he's not going to keep me from something that I really need. Console yourself. He's going to be good to you. Secondly, we may become filled with pride and anger. Pride and anger. Okay? And that means I'm thinking, I'm not getting what I deserve. People are not treating me right. Who do they think they are? But we have to think instead, hey, all the things I have are gifts of grace. Everything is grace. I've never gotten what I deserve. I'll never, and I never will if God gave me what I deserved. I'd be dead. Humble yourself. Okay? Okay, number three. We may become filled with guilt. I've blown it. My problems mean he's abandoned me. God's abandoned me. But we have to think instead, all the things I have are the result of God's grace. I never earned them to begin with, so how the heck can I un-earn them now? He accepted me long ago, even though he knew I would do this. This was in my heart all along. I didn't see it. He did. When he accepted me ten years ago, he knew I was going to do this today. And there's all kinds of other stuff in my heart I haven't seen yet. Okay? He's with me now. Be confident, self. And fourthly, if you're just filled with boredom, if you are bored, it's because you've forgotten the gospel. Sure, I'm a Christian. Listen, I have good things. So what? What's he done for me lately? But we have to think, instead, all the things I have, every one is a gift of grace. The very fact that I'm a Christian is a miracle. Be amazed. Be in wonder. What's the matter with me? In other words, so, you know, during the day when these things come up and grab you, what you're doing is, what you're doing there is you're using the gospel of grace to take your affections off the things that are bothering you, the things that are driving you. That's the reason why you're guilty. That's the reason why you're upset. That's the reason why you're angry. That's the reason why you're afraid. And turning them and saying, look at Jesus. Look at him. Look what he's done. And you're healing yourself with it. Now, basically, that's what you do in the affective prayer, to the degree that the Holy Spirit helps you, to that degree, you know, and that very, very much varies, very, very much varies. Okay, I guess, wait a minute, sorry, let me just close reading you a passage here, Colossians 3, I would say, suggest that if there's one passage that tells you about affective prayer, it's Colossians 3, 1 to 5. I'll just read it. We're not going to study it. It's five minutes of, and I've got to close in prayer here. But here, listen to it. I'll just read it slowly. And you'll see this is everything we've been talking about. Since then, you have been raised with Christ. Set your hearts on things above, where Christ is seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things above, not on earthly things. For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ and God. And when Christ, who is your life, appears, you will appear with him in glory. Put to death, therefore, whatever belongs to your earthly nature. Get rid of, put to death sexual immorality, impurity, inordinate over-desire, and greed, which is... you've been raised with Christ, see this is, that's the gospel. You're already, what do you mean I'm going to, what do you mean I've been raised with Christ? I'm going to be raised with Christ. No, Paul's talking about the gospel. You're already as perfect and as beautiful in God's sight as if you've been raised. See, in other words, everything that's happened to Christ has been imputed to you. That's the reason why Paul can sometimes say, we're going to be raised, obviously I've got to be, I still need to be raised. I hurt, I'm dying, I get sick, obviously I want to be raised. But in another sense, I'm already raised. Since you're already raised, he says, now what are you going to do about it? Set your hearts on things which are above. Not on these earthly things, which are filled with inordinate desires and idolatry. Say to these things, you are not my life, Christ is my life. That's what it means to put your heart on things which are above. You take them off the things on earth, and you say to these things, you're not my life, he's my life. You're a good thing, but you're not my life, you're not my hope. It's all there. And basically working it into your heart through prayer after meditation, in the particular vein that is brought up by the text that you're studying. Doing that day in and day out over the years will lead you to liberation. It also leads you on to contemplation and to praise, but that's next month. Let's close in prayer. Our Father, we are so grateful that you don't just save us, but then you show us how to know we're saved, and then how to use the assurance of that salvation to really free our hearts from the things which enslave us. We pray that some of us here have heard about idolatry for a long time. Now in this material and in this subject of effective prayer, we see what we can do about it. And I pray that for some of us here tonight, we might really pick up and do something about what we've really known about for a long time and really see it effective in our lives and in a new and fresh way. For some people here tonight, Lord, this is very new and perhaps a bit overwhelming. I pray that you would teach everybody here tonight something, something significant. And if there's a lot of other pieces that have to fall into place, we pray that we'd be patient and we would go on until they're all in place. Because we know that you've called us to live as if we're raised with you, to live like that. Teach us how to set our hearts on things which are above, where Christ, who is our life, is now hidden but will appear. And when we see him, we will be like him. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
