TITLE: Meditation – How To Start
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Spirituality (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/meditation-how-to-start/

============================================================

I'll turn to your little sheet. Those of you who are my age or older, and I know there are a few of you out there, you're saying, why do you do this to me every month? This little print, and actually I'm just trying to have, and by the way, I'm serious, I'm having mercy on trees. I'm just trying to cut down on the paper use. Here's what we are doing. Every month, and all year, at these meetings, we're looking at prayer. We're looking at spirituality, and particularly, we're looking at how to go deeper or higher. It depends on your metaphor. How do you go higher up and deeper in, into the presence of God? How do you keep your prayers from staying the way they are? How do you grow in prayer? How do you grow? And one of the points that we've made all along, and I'll make it again, is that it is a point that's made by C.S. Lewis so vividly in his Narnia Chronicles, which are the fairy tales that he wrote about their children's stories. And one of the most vivid images in there is the fact that Narnia is this wonderful place, but you never can get back into it the same way twice. You got into it through the wardrobe. You can't get through the magical wardrobe again. All of us, almost everybody who's been a Christian for a while, got into Narnia. Somewhere, someplace, somehow, we experienced, or we at least tasted the reality and the presence of God, and it was just, it was just a, it filled us up. And it was, it creates sensory overload, you know, and you're, and you, and you suddenly realize things open up and you get a perspective when that happens. And you say, why would I ever be, why would I ever sin again? Why would I ever be scared again? Why would I ever be unhappy again? That's how you know you've come into his presence. You can't remember, almost. And you certainly don't anticipate losing that perspective, but you do. Sometimes, in worship and prayer, you, things open up, you get into Narnia, and then you try to get back in through the same door. Dr. David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, when he started his ministry, he was only about, let's see, he was born in 1898. That means, when he was about 28, he started a ministry in a little town in Wales called Aberraven. I think it's, I don't know how to say Welsh things. And when he started there in a mission field, he found, he met a lot of people, mainly in their 50s or 60s, and some in their 40s. And there was a Welsh name for them, and I don't, I can't even pronounce it, so I'm not even going to try. But in Welsh, the name for them was the Children of the Revival. They met all sorts of people who were called Children of the Revival. Because in 1904, there was an enormous revival in Wales. And one of the problems with the Children of the Revival, this is like 1930 now, so it's 25 years later or so, is they're all pretty miserable people. And they're pretty miserable people, by and large, because they could never be happy in any church anymore. Things have changed. They couldn't be happy with the new music. They couldn't be happy with a new way of doing things. They couldn't be happy with preachers that didn't preach the same way and on the same topics. They got into Narnia, and they kept trying to get back in through the wardrobe door, and it doesn't happen. They kept trying to get back in through the same style, or the same music, or the same, sitting in the same pew. Now, what we've been saying for last week and this week is, ordinarily, the way to, not routinely, whatever, but the way to have a sustained, over your life, a sustained number, a sustained amount of almost regular times in which the presence of God becomes real to you, and sometimes it's really overwhelming. The only way for that to happen regularly through your life is through meditation. Those of you here last month, did I make that clear exactly? I don't know if I did, but I'm going to try it again. The ordinary way that you can make sure that you continually experience the presence of God in deepening ways is through meditation, because in meditation, you're going to the Word of God, and that has an infinite number of doors in it. In fact, a lot of people try to go back to the Bible verse. I mean, hasn't that happened to you? It's a Bible verse that just opened up one day, and you just, you walked right into the glory of God. And you can go back, and you know, it stayed radioactive for several weeks. Do you know what I'm talking about? And then, I don't know, the isotopes were off, or something happened, and now you read it, and I know that, and what happened. And so what we've been saying, and that's what I have here at the very top of the page, this is a review. You haven't actually seen it done schematically like this. We've said, if you want to move beyond simple prayer, jump over to three, four, and five. If you want to move into... deep sense of surrender, that's a hard thing to get to in prayer, haven't you noticed that? Isn't it wonderful? Sometimes, when you're in a worship service, and if somehow the sermon or the music or something hits you, you suddenly realize, I can give it all to him, effortlessly. You want to give it. That's affective prayer. It has a remarkable breakthrough. Then, of course, we have contemplation, which means the glory of God becomes real, your adoration. I even put a little sign up at the top where it says, sometimes, and we'll talk about this eventually, it can really bring you into, there can be major experiences of God's glory. And then over to the right, I said, out of that comes tremendous intercession. So, you see, moving in with being able to humble yourself and offer yourself to God, moving up to see the glory of God, gazing at his beauty, and then moving out into the world armed with kingdom-centered prayer and intercession. How does that happen? You know, you say, I've experienced that in the past. It happens mainly if you learn how to meditate. If you meditate on the scripture, and we talked last time about pretty much what it is, and so I'm not going to go any further, but how does it happen? Now, I was, if those of you who are really careful and you've been reading the notes I've given you every month, you realize that I had written down that I was going to do that this month, and then we move on, but it's going to take two months. It's going to take two sessions, absolutely, for a couple reasons, and here's why. Anyway, if I do what I'm going to do next month, if I lay down a set of principles that I think would really help you in meditation, and some of you are going to take it very seriously. You're going to say, Tim Keller does it this way. So what? For some of you, that's just not going to work, and I'm afraid of telling you what I do too soon. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you four, sort of three and a half as you see, I'm going to give you, I'm going to walk you through three or four other methods of meditating on the Lord's word that have been used for, in some of them, for centuries by thousands of people or maybe more than thousands. And the reason I'm going to show them to you, we're going to go through them, and then we're actually going to take ten minutes tonight, unlike other nights, I'm actually going to ask some questions. I want to ask, what do you see happening in here? I mean, what do you see the commonalities being? But they all, the reason I want to give you historical examples is two reasons. One is I want you to see the difference between principles and methods. There are some basic principles of meditation that we'll talk about next week, but I want you to realize I'm afraid of giving you a principle that you turn into a method. There are many methods. There are many ways of skinning this. So one of the ways, by giving you some historical methods, that will keep you from enshrining whatever Tim Keller gives you as his method next time and saying, this has got to be the way. You know, it doesn't have to be the way, not for you. Secondly, I have found it's best to start with somebody else's method and not try to piece your own together and use it and learn to use it and then branch out and put your own together. So actually, I have started, I'll tell you where, but I have chosen one of these in the past. Actually, I've moved back and forth, but a couple of these I've used very, very strictly. I've taken them and I've used them just the way the person did it, and it's almost always the best way to start meditation. Choose some time-proven method, not the only one in the world, but a good one to get started, and then you can make your alterations as you go on. Now, I'm going to just walk you through them, all right? And then at the end, I'm going to ask you for some commonalities. I might give you an example on a couple of verses if we have a chance, but I'm really going to do that next week. Next week, pardon me, next month, I would like to actually not only give you a kind of a method, but maybe we could actually do it together. Group meditation? 200 people? I don't know. We'll see. Anyway, this is a very famous one. The first one is the Lutheran approach. Very, very famous, even though it's one guy's approach. Martin Luther wrote a letter. You may have heard me mention this before. Martin Luther wrote a letter called A Simple Way to Pray for a Good Friend. And he wrote it to his barber. And he was getting his hair cut, and his barber said, Master Luther, how do you pray? And this is what happened. It's a 40-page letter. And it's really not so much on praying as on meditation. And actually, it was the basis for many, many other guides to meditation. What I have written down here is a little bit altered from what you might find if you pick the book up, because actually, Luther spawned a whole series, a whole approach to meditation that some people call evangelical meditation. One of the things you have to remember is the word evangelical, at different times, has meant different things. And in Europe, evangelical basically means Protestant, or especially... one, find a quiet, regular place. I'm sticking pretty close to what he says. Ask God to illuminate your mind. I'm sorry about the weird English here, but I just, I jod these things down for myself. And then I said, oh, what the heck, I'll give it to everybody. And then I didn't go back over and work it out. Ask God to illuminate your mind, warm your heart, and mold your will. And that's sort of a way of preparation. Don't just jump in. Spend some time asking God for that. Second, now second, partly because of my font, you're not noticing the bold, you can't even tell what's bold and what's not. All right. He says here, start with slow reading. And Lectio Divina means divine reading. And it's a very, very important phrase that means to read and taste the sweetness, or taste the bitterness, or to read with the heart. To read slowly, probably twice, and denote or mark whatever strikes you. And after you've read your whole chapter, let's say, once or twice, marking, then choose a very short portion. Small. He suggests a verse or two at the most. Reread that three or four times, and ask God, speak to me through this. Distill the main teaching. Now, that's interesting. What it means is, after you've chosen that portion, distill the main teaching is, what is this teaching? Now, you can have, I sometimes, partly because of the way my mind works, I can read a verse and I have a tendency to come out with three or four or five or six things that it teaches. But basically, what you do is you ask these two questions in Luther's method. What does this tell me about God or Christ? About who he is, what he's done. And secondly, what does this tell me about me, or us? And notice, he breaks this down two ways. What does it tell me about what God or Christ is and does? His person, work. But when it comes to thinking about us, don't ask that. Ask, what does it tell me about what we should be? What does it tell me about what we, oh, pardon me, that's my mistake. Who we are, and, yeah. See, that's wrong. One is, who we should be and who we are. That's the two. Who we should be, what we should think, feel, and do, and what we actually are. Now, you know, those are only four questions. What does this tell me about God slash Christ, Holy Spirit? Who he is, what he does. What does it tell me about us? What we should be and what we are. You'd be amazed at how much you get out of a verse if you ask those four questions. And then after you've written out the basic distilled teaching, the main teaching you get, then you do what Luther calls garland meditation. Now, the reason he calls garland meditation is he's referring, he basically, he says, if you're, you know how you make a garland almost, or how you intertwine various strands to create a rope or to create a garland? And he says, around the T, which is the teaching, you wrap adoration, confession, and supplication. And so what he would say is, you take each teaching, and you should have no more than three or four, each main teaching from the reverse, and ask this, how can I love and adore God on the basis of this? Secondly, how can I confess to God on the basis of this? And thirdly, what can I ask God to do on the basis of this? Now, Luther, by the way, I didn't put this down here, but what Luther would do is he says he would warm up. Now, I didn't put this down because I'm not sure this is such a smartest idea, but this garland meditation, where he thinks of the teaching, and then he does adoration, confession, and supplication, before he would go and read his passage and do this, he would warm up on the Lord's Prayer, or the Ten Commandments, or something like that. Like, he would take the Lord's Prayer, and he's many times done garland prayer, he says, okay, I don't know if any of you have heard me do this, he says, okay, let's take the Lord's Prayer, hour, stop, let's meditate on that. What's the teaching? Well, the teaching is that when Jesus Christ taught us to pray, he didn't teach you to pray my Father. Isn't that interesting? You come up to Jesus, and you say, teach me to pray, and he says, pray like this, our Father, what's the implication? Yes, he doesn't expect you to only be praying by yourself. That's pretty interesting. So, right away, what's the teaching? The teaching is that God has put us in a family where we can worship together. Okay, so let's adore God. Oh, Lord, thank you for giving me, Christian brothers and sisters, let's confess. Oh, Lord, I don't like to pray with other people, I don't like to open my heart to other people, or I've been neglecting. Thank you. he's on to Father. So what he will do is he'll do garland prayer, he says, until he feels his heart warm up. And then he'll turn to his passage. Now, that's a lot to ask, but anyway. He was a monk, you know, okay. Now, number four. After you've written this down, and you've sort of thought this out. Now notice, the thing about meditation is that it's thinking in the presence of God. Because you're starting off by saying, Lord, help me. And while you start reading your chosen portion, you say, Lord, what are you saying through me? You see, it's sort of study, but it's prayer too. You know, if you think of a pendulum swinging back and forth between study and prayer, meditation is right here. It's sort of, it's study becoming prayer. Or maybe it's prayer, you know, something like that. But, even though you've been doing this prayerfully, finally pray your meditation. You know, you've written out your TACSs or something like that. And I, usually what I do, frankly, is I, on my journal, what I'll do is I'll write the T, T1, T2, T3 out of my passage. I'll put on the top A, C, S, and I'll just start writing. I just create a, that's what I do. That doesn't mean you have to do it. And then what I'll do, I'll just pray through the chart. And, usually, your heart warms. It says, you begin to pray your various praises, confessions, supplications to God directly. And, this is what Luther always says, If, as you are meditating, or as you're praying your meditations, you suddenly have a lively set of new insights, suddenly clarity comes. Write everything down, he says. It's the Holy Spirit preaching to you. Because, stop. If you're working through your chart, or you're working through the Lord's Prayer, suddenly, some new ideas come, some insights. Stop. Write everything down. So... Second. Now, let me give you a Catholic approach. Now, what I call a Catholic approach is, is, around the time of the Reformation, partly, I mean, if you're a church historian, or a Catholic, or a Protestant, I'm sure what I'm about to say sounds like an oversimplification. Of course it is. It wouldn't be interesting if it wasn't. The Protestants started to really become successful, and the Catholics said, Why are they so successful? And they looked, and they realized, because the Protestants had really taken religion back to the individual. And said, You can have a personal relationship with God, in a way the Catholic Church had not given them. So, the Counter-Reformation, right after the time of Luther and Calvin, was a flourishing of Catholic spirituality. And so many of the greatest names in praying and spirituality, St. Teresa of Avila, John of the Cross, St. Francis de Sales, Ignatius of Loyola, all lived around the same time. Now, what I've given you here, is actually not from any of those, even though you can get some pretty good stuff from all of them. But there was a very famous, and well-known, because it was so simple, was a tract on prayer and meditation, and it was written by two guys, Luis de Granada, and Peter Alcantara, I think I'm saying it right. And this is a method that was very, very close, it's extremely close, if you, to anything De Sales says, or Loyola says. Preparation. Take appropriate place and bodily position. Seek help for full attention. Ask for illumination. And the goal is, and this is a quote from the tract, interior recollectedness. What that means is, pull yourself together. That's what I think. Get rid of the distractions. Stop thinking about anything else. Some people, you're just going to have to have a, I have to, because I can't do that. I have to have a pad of paper right next to me. So when suddenly a thought comes, I have to write, that has nothing to do with the meditation, something about something I have to do later, or today, I have to write it down immediately, and put it aside. Otherwise, I don't know how you ever get through it. So in my case, that's one of the important things to interior recollectedness. Now, reading for sweetness, that's the way he would put it. You read slowly, and at appropriate places, pause a little in it, in such a way that we may taste the sweetness of what we understand. And then he says, this is what you do with meditation, and he suggests two different ways. Now this is not going to be quite as simple. I'm trying to give you, each one is a little bit heavier. He says you can do the imaginative or intuitive way, or the intellectual and analytical way. And he suggests the imaginative way for narrative, and he suggests the analytical way for discourse. Okay? So if you're studying a history, or you're studying Acts, or the Gospels, or something like that, you do imaginative way. If you're studying the epistles, or the law, or Psalms even, you take the analytical way. The imaginative way, is especially, well, the picture. So, for example, I did this yesterday, if you were in church. The parable of the hidden treasure, which is in Matthew 13. Now, that is not much of a narrative. It's only one verse long. But when I started to meditate on the thing, and I gave you part of my meditation. I imagine this guy running into the center of town, you know, to the land office to say, I've got to buy that piece of land, who's the owner, and so on. And everybody's saying, old Joe is crazy. Remember what I did? In other words, what happens is if you put yourself in the position of the people watching him or the person, you're meditating. And all sorts of things come on out. And you begin to realize, wait, what this means is a Christian is somebody who looks beneath the surface in a way the rest of them will not. And that was one of the points of my sermon. And it came out of what you might call imaginative meditation. Let me give you another example. Something that really has hit me recently. And if you come to church on Sunday, you'll hear it again. What I'm telling you now. Go to Luke chapter 8 verse... No, don't do it. I mean, if you go to Luke chapter 8 verse 37 to 50, you have this interesting situation. Jairus is a man that comes to Jesus and says, I've got a little girl who's dying. Would you please come and heal her? She's dying. Jesus says, okay. On the way, he meets a woman who needs healing. And she touches him. Remember this story? And he spends time with her and he asks her questions. And he's on the way to heal a little girl who's about to die. Father's at his elbow. He stops and spends all this time with this person. And then in the middle of this conversation he has with this other lady, up comes one of the servants to Jairus and says, she's dead. Now, if you get into that passage, and unless you get into this passage and ask yourself, what would it be like to have been Jairus? What's it like to be him? I never noticed that before. That's a fight. That's a terrible thing. Here's a guy who says, this is my last hope. And Jesus will not be hurried. And Jesus lets it go right on through. And it looks like Jesus' timing is absolutely terrible. Now, are you beginning to see how you could preach that to yourself? Yes. But it only happens through imagination. In other words, you put yourself in there. And by the way, I don't have time to say that by and large I'm scared of what an awful lot of meditation techniques mean when they say use your imagination. I put down here, look on down here, do not go beyond the scripture or spin out things that are not there, but the purpose of imagination is to get into what really is there. In other words, don't use your imagination to imagine things the Bible says nothing about. Don't use your imagination to speculate. Use your imagination to try to see what Luke is actually trying to tell me or what Jesus is actually trying to tell me. So you use your imagination to get what's already in the text. You don't use your imagination to get beyond the text. Anyway, the intellectual side is basically very similar to what Luther's already shown us. The intellectual side is to be used on your didactic section. So, for example, Luke 16 to 18. You can tell I've been going through Luke lately. Why is the kingdom of God like light? Now, you see, it says the kingdom of God is like a light set up, don't put it under a bushel. Well, now, clearly, the only way you're going to meditate or get anything out of that is to ask yourself, what is light? What is light? What is like light? How could the kingdom of God be like light? And that is discursive analysis. You sit down and, I mean, here's some things that may happen. If you take a look at the text, it might mean light illumines, it gladdens, it exposes. Those are three things that light does. Very different, you know. Light shows me things, but it also exposes things, but it also is delightful to look at. What does it mean to me? What would it mean for me to be the light of the world? To be consistent, to be attractive, to be courageous. Now, it took me about 20 minutes, frankly, of meditation to get to that. But it took me a long time for some reason that day. I think I was a little sleepy. But when I got to the end, I began to apply it to myself, and it really helped. Purpose is to find reasons to desire and love God. That's the purpose of meditation. According to Peter of Alcantara, your purpose is not to understand new, interesting things, but to find reasons to love and desire God. He says, don't treat so much with the intellect as with the affections. He says, the whole purpose is, what in here helps me to want God? What in here helps me to desire God? To simply use the intellect and not the affections dissipates the mind rather than gathering it up. Turn over. Then he would say, pray your meditation. Pray your meditation. Pray your meditation. says, this is kind of interesting, is it not? I doubt that he read, I don't know, who knows, it's hard to know. I'm not enough of a historian to know whether there's been borrowing here. But he says, do these three things. Thanksgiving, in light of what you've learned, give thanks and praise to God. Then secondly, offering. In light of what you've learned, offer yourself to God in new ways. This may take the form of repentance or resolutions. Number three, petition. In light of what you've learned, make petitions for people you know, for yourself, for the church, for others. And that's his method. Now, let me give you the 20th century method. It can take five minutes because I want five minutes to just have you respond to me in a couple of ways. Anyways, I put down here two 20th century message methods. Obviously, I know a lot more about one than the other. So I'll skip over this first one. Where it says navigators. The only Protestant, conservative, Protestant church organization, well, it's not a church, organization in this century that has put a lot of emphasis on meditation are the navigators. I don't even know if any of you have heard of them. But they were, they originally actually were, I think they originally were actually a military ministry, within the military, but they went out. Anyway, it doesn't matter. They have, this is a sort of distillation of several works by them, but it's kind of involved, but I'll just lay the thing out. And it's also been something that I've borrowed from and helped me a great deal. They would say that meditation has three sides, three parts to it. Thinking, internalizing, and applying. Now, this, you can tell when I show you this, this is somewhat of a departure. And I think I even show you that it's really more intellectual, and it's really a step removed. The Catholic approach is really the most mystical, and this is the most cognitive. Thinking is this. In meditation, the Bible study is done once and fairly quickly. Oh, this is interesting. They say, this first, well, see, look, even here. Thinking is something that happens quickly and once. Whereas internalizing, once you get the hang of it, it can happen all day. And applying sometimes shouldn't happen until the next morning. I have found that when I do step one for about 15 or 20 minutes in the morning, I'm just starting my internalizing by the time it's time to get up and go. If you understand this internalizing, you can do it all day. You can do it at meals. You can do it while you're walking around. You can do it at various times. And sometimes you're not ready for number three until the next morning because you haven't really marinated in the scripture until then. Thinking, in meditation, Bible study is done once and fairly quickly while the next two stages are done over and over and over again. Okay, so thinking is A, selection. Choose a short passage, a verse or two, or even a sentence. B, analysis. Find a way to chew on it this way. For very short sections, stress every word and ask, what truth comes out when I consider this word or what would be missing if this word were missing? Or paraphrase it. Put it in your own words. If you want to meditate on a very short section, do that. Can I give you an example? All right? Follow me and I will make you to become fishers of men. Stress every word and every time you stress it or think of what would happen if it was out of there, you have a new aspect or a new truth. Like, follow me. It means what is Christianity? It has to do with not just what you believe but how you live. Follow me. Jesus is not saying follow that, but it's a personal relationship. It's not like just setting rules. Follow me and, which means if you follow me, there's a promise involved. Follow me and I will make you, which means, of course, that Jesus will personally come and do something in your life. It's not just a matter of, you know, following an example. Follow me and I will make you to become means what? It's a process that doesn't happen overnight. Follow me and I will make you, see? You just, every one, you just take one out and you say, well, what does this bring? If you have a longer section, outline it by clauses or sentences. If you have a discourse, look for relationships between the statements, like cause and effect. I just gave you one. Follow me, that's a clause, and I will make you to become fishers of men. What's the relationship between the two clauses? You know, that's analysis. So, and if you have difficulties, get out a commentary. You know what BST means? Of course you don't. You might know. There's a great series of commentaries. They're not exactly commentaries. They're very readable. It's called The Bible Speaks Today. It's put up by InterVarsity Press. Almost the whole Bible is handled by it, and it's a wonderful, wonderful thing to read along with meditation because it's not too technical. And then finally, an application question. Is there a promise to claim? Is there an example to follow? word, paraphrase it, outline it, which means you have to see what the relationship between the clauses is, and ask those three questions of application, you're done thinking. And you have a lot. Well, you have a heck of a lot. Now, internalizing goes like this. This is done over and over again. You can do it right there, or you can do it all day. A, memorize it. You know why? Because if you meditate, you end up memorizing it anyway. So you might as well just go ahead out and try it. Memorizing is inevitable. Repeat it to yourself. If you want to memorize something, don't just repeat it. Write it on a piece of paper so you can visualize it on the paper. You'd be amazed at how much easier it is. Because when you memorize something, you don't just memorize the sound of the words, but the look. Or better say, you're taking two senses. It's easier to memorize if you involve two senses instead of one. Write it. Okay, memorize it. B, visualize it. Which means, what does this mean to be like the risen Christ? What does it mean to be the light of the world? What does it mean to be comforted by his rod and staff? Or, what would I be like if this truth were explosively present in my life? What would happen to me? What happens to me if I forget this truth? Visualizing what it means for me to really know this. That's the main thing. That does take a long time, by the way. C, pray this back to God. Make it into a prayer. Pray the truth. Praise him with it. Confess him with it. Thank him with it. Petition him with it. But pray him. Pray it back. And then D, listen to God. Very, very often, after you're done memorizing, visualizing, and praying, you will very often find insights coming that get very big and very effective. Write them down and say, Lord, is this, you know, you're talking to me. And then E, enjoy God. I find that if you have a time in which you really feel God speaking to you, you can turn, if it's been a very affecting experience, and just sort of look toward him, and you're on the doorstep of something we'll talk about a couple months from now, which is contemplation. When God gets real enough to you, you can just sort of gaze with the eyes of your faith. But it doesn't always happen. You can simply sit quietly and enjoy God and what he's shown you. You don't ask him for anything, and you don't think that much about him. You just admire him. And that would be a complete internalization process. Then finally, applying. As we said above, internalization may go on for a while during your formal time, and it may continue all day. Applications idea may come. You might want to actually, I find, I have to get back to application the next morning, because it's taking me a whole day to think about it. And what do they suggest? An action plan, which is, what concrete things can I do, which will express what I've learned or help me realize it in practice? And you not only need an action plan, you need a sharing plan. Who will you tell about this for both accountability and also ministry? Now, are you exhausted? That's the way navigators have always been. Very, very, very exhausting. Too many steps, probably. But at least when you look at that, you get all kinds of ideas for your own method. All kinds of ideas. Now, let me ask you a question. What do all these have in common? I only have a minute or two. What do all these seem to have in common? Or what do you notice? Compare them. Compare them. What do you notice? Not just what they all have in common, but if you want to, what they don't have in common. Just, you know, just speak it out. Compare them. What do you notice about, when you put them all alongside of each other, what do you notice? Anything? Well, that's nice that both of you saw the same thing. They absolutely say preparation or centering yourself, collecting yourself, very important. And we'll have, next week I'm going to give you a lot of stuff on that because that is actually the place where a lot of people just never, there's a tendency to say, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, you know, oh Lord Jesus, help me. And then you get right into it. No, no. The people who knew this meditation knew that this was extremely important. And sometimes you may not actually get past it. Only once in the last three weeks have I actually had about 15 minutes on this because I just could not collect myself. But, yes, very important. What else do you notice? Yeah, David? Can you just look at a short passage? A short passage. Absolutely. Which we don't do, I don't think. You can study a long passage. You cannot meditate on a long passage. Not usually. Unless it's a complete story. You know, sometimes a long passage tells you about he did this and then she did this and he did this and then she did this. Yeah, you can have a longer passage if it's a total story. But otherwise, make it short. That's right. They all do that. What else do you notice? What else do you notice? What else do you notice? What else do you notice? Thank you. Yeah, you can have a longer passage if it's a total story, but otherwise make it short. That's right. They all do that. What else do you notice? If you want to, you can bring out a contrast, but I mean, what do you notice when you put them side by side? You go from thinking to feeling, and then to acting. They basically all kind of move in that direction, exactly. The, right, anyway, I've talked enough. Give me some other insights. How much time do you think? When you look at these, I mean, how much time do you visualize this taking? Hmm? Beverly says a couple hours? Okay, that's that. Put that in the file, right? I didn't put the numbers down because I think partly this is a cultural thing, but you couldn't possibly do this in less than about 20 minutes, I think. You have to read a passage, you have to recollect, you have to read a passage, you have to find a short portion, and then you have to chew on it and chew on it, and then finally pray what you've learned. That's 20 minutes, I think, when I do my fast evening meditation in the evening, when I'm working through the Psalms right now, it takes me 20 minutes, maybe 15 if you get good at it, I guess. Or, you know, sometimes the Holy Spirit just goes, and then, you know, 10 minutes, but it doesn't happen that often. Actually, actually, there is a cumulative effect, though. There is no doubt. The more you do this, the faster you can recollect, the faster you can collect yourself, I mean, the faster very often the heart warms up. There's no doubt about it. It's cumulative. It seems to me that there's a lot of mention of praise, but as soon as you move through some of these stages, it gets very soon to praise. Yeah, did you hear that? Ellie was just saying, praise is a very, very important factor. It absolutely is. What else do you notice? Take a couple more here. Probably not, and more than it, and what we probably learned about it. Yeah, I mean, because this is about, pardon me, some people say there's informational reading in which you're studying the Bible to break it down, and you're asking it questions. But this is formational reading in which the Bible and God are studying you, and so you see, in a sense, you're out of the driver's seat, and it's all about God. Whereas, actually, informational study is really all about you. Your questions, your issues, you see, your problems, your difficulties. This is different. This is all about God. And you're trying, basically, you're trying to get a sense of him on the heart, not just an idea about him in the mind, but you're taking the mind and descending it into the heart until it catches fire. The navigator is an action-oriented. Yes, right. Yeah, and you know, there's no doubt about it, personality types get attracted to certain movements, and probably, is Dick here? He's not here tonight, I don't think. Oh, yeah, there you are. Which of these, basically what you have is, the priestly is the Catholic way, the prophetic is the Lutheran way, and the kingly tends to be the navigator's way. And the navigators are kind of close to informational instead of formational, and it would certainly take a lot longer. Okay, oh, yeah, I'll take a couple more. Sure, go ahead. So, it's interesting that revelation for us being created in God's pleasure, and these ways seem to be his, specifically, are enjoying him. Yes, exactly, yeah. That's your, your goal is to enjoy him. I saw one more hand. Was it Claude? Go ahead. All of them come back to another thought about doing something, but they don't want to leave you floating around in the spiritual heat, but that's something you need to pray or, for others, to God, thank you for something, but it's never just stopped in the social and light. Right. It always moves to the sun. You're trying to move up, yeah, you're trying to at least move up to him or out into the world in a new way, or, as we said, even inward, where you finally find, I can really offer my heart in a way I haven't been able to do. I sense the surrender now. But it has to do a movement, or you have, but I want to be honest with you, sometimes, especially in the early stages of your, if you start this disciplative meditation, don't expect movement right away. It just takes time, and it does accumulate. It doesn't mean that it just gets better and better and better and better indefinitely. There are still seasons. movement up, and the movement out, which you can't always predict, that's what's so exciting. You can't always predict what that movement is. And if you have a, you know, every, you know, three or four times in your life, you'll have a complete, you know, you know, you'll have a, you'll have a, you'll have just an incredible experience in which they all happen. But it doesn't have to happen for a while. In fact, if you stick at this, if you do a 30 minutes of this a day, or even four or five days a week, well, we talk about this later, the practical side of it, I wouldn't expect to feel a whole lot of movement right away. I would say give it a month. Let me close up in prayer. Time's up. Sorry. I know, I'd love to keep talking about this, but we will. Next week, next month, we will do it again. I'm sorry. Our Father, you have said, well, your son said to the woman at Samaria, the Father seeketh such as worship him. Lord, you don't need, but you love people who enjoy you. You don't need it. But I, Lord, there's every indication that the reason you invented us was so that we could share in the glory and the joy that you, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit have meditating on each other's beauty. It's very possible that the whole purpose of our lives is to enjoy you. And if that's true, then we believe you'll bless what we try to do with this material that we've talked about tonight. If we go out and say, Lord, we finally want to give you the joy of our hearts in a way that we've been giving to other things. Lord, we believe you'll bless that. And I pray, Lord, that the hundreds of people, a couple hundred people in this room might find you in new ways because we spent this time together. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
