TITLE: Men are from Brooklyn, Women are from Queens (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Sexuality Marriage Family and Relationships
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/men-are-from-brooklyn-women-are-from-queens-an-open-forum/

============================================================

about this subject, and I want to be simple, and I even, though of course I probably won't be able to help it at some points, I'd like to avoid being funny. I'm going to try. There's two reasons. First of all, this is so inflammatory, this subject, that people are always being funny as a way of compensating for how upset they are and how deeply they feel. And besides that, there's an awful lot of people that when we come to talk about the gender divide, the gap, the chasm between male and female, some people have been so beat up, they have been so, they've been blown up by this in this battlefield that it's really not something very funny. It's also, as I'm going to show you in a second, important for us to be general. And for a minute, I'm going to tell you, in a minute, I'm going to tell you why. But right now, it's important to be general and to be simple, and so let me do it this way. First of all, I'd like to talk about the debate over the gender divide briefly, because it's a lecture, so I need to quote somebody. And secondly, I'd like to talk about the three R's then, after we look at the debate for a minute, the reality of the gender divide or chasm, the gap. The reality of it, the reason for it, and our response to it. The reality of it, the reason for it, and our response to it. Now, the debate for a second. The book from which we took our title to tease, to get you out, to give you an idea of what it was about, Men Are From Mars, Women Are From Venus. It's an extremely popular book. And when I read through it to get ready for tonight, amongst four or five other books, I was really surprised, I was very surprised, because I was educated in the late 60s, early 70s in college, I was surprised to see what it said so boldly. In the very beginning, it comes right out and says, well, here's the premise. It says, this book reveals how men and women differ in all areas of life. Underlined all, okay? Men and women differ in all areas of life. Not only do men and women communicate differently, but they think, feel, perceive, react, respond, love, need, and appreciate differently. They almost seem to be from different planets, speaking different languages and needing different nourishment. And what should we do about this? When you remember that your partner is as different from you as someone from another planet, you can relax. I was trying not to be funny. All right. Try harder. But think about that. When you realize your partner is as different from you as someone from another planet, you can relax and cooperate with the differences instead of resisting or trying to change them. So there's the premises. Men and women are almost like two different species. You don't try to change. You just try to navigate the rocks. Now, and then, of course, he insists that all the many, many differences he talks about in the book, the author, John Gray, are based on surveying 25,000 people. Over 90% agreed with him. And so there. And that's the book. Now, popular books never start trends. They always, they ride trends. And I'll tell you the reason that I found it so surprising. And if you're wondering why I found it so surprising, perhaps the best explanation I've seen over the tendencies and the trends in thinking about gender differences was an article in the Atlantic Monthly, the Atlantic back in October of 93. And a woman named Wendy Kaminer wrote an article. And in that article, she said something very, very interesting. She said, in the 60s and 70s, as she was giving an overview of the different ways in which over the last 30 years, people have understood gender. She says, this isn't a quote, but a paraphrase. In the 60s and 70s, like I said, when I was in college, the dominant stream of intelligentsia and understanding was that men and women's differences were all the result of the environment. That all the differences were the result of conditioning, socialization. Therefore, all differences were socially constructed. And, as she said, therefore, the way in which we can ensure equality and individual freedom and to get over the differences and the conflicts between men and women was simply to change the environment, change men and women. And the idea there, she said, was originally was you raise children not as men or women, as male or female, but as people. And if you see differences, fight them a little bit. You know, Wendy Kaminer was saying, the idea was that you change the environment and you press the girls to be assertive and you press the boys to be more nurturing and raise them just like individuals. Is that because of that? I wasn't saying that you were yet to stay. Don't you see you. There's no Wendy Kaminer was saying the idea was that you change the environment and you you press the girls to be assertive and you press the boys to be more nurturing and raise them just like individuals as people don't raise them as men and women and eventually we'll get over this alienation we'll get over the oppression the injustice the the divide and uh Wendy Kaminer says that changed and that's one of the reasons why I was so shocked actually in a way to read men are from Mars women from Venus to realize what a tremendously big seller this is because when I was in college that's exactly what I was told I was told that what you do is you you change the environment and and we'll get over these things you teach people because the differences are basically from the environment and uh Wendy Kaminer says that the tide really changed she said it started changing in the early 80s with Carol Gilligan's book in a different voice and she says in that book and in many other books afterwards the uh statement was that uh men and women have different values and different developmental tracks and we have to honor those developmental tracks and honor the peculiar virtues of women in particular but men and women and it's it's a whole different movement it's a whole different approach and uh this is a quote from her Wendy says Wendy Kaminer says she calls the difference a change from equal rights feminism to gender feminism and she says and by the way she's very critical of uh Carol Gilligan but she believes that this is now the dominant stream she says this is the reason this is the way the books are going this is the dominant stream and she says believers in gender differences tend not to focus on changing the cultural environment to free men and women from stereotypes but as equal rights feminists did 20 years ago instead they celebrate the differences and the virtues now Kaminer herself is very critical of the change but she says uh this is the way it's going uh this is the reason why another book which I read recently Deborah Bloom brand new book called Sex on the Brain and uh what she does there is she simply goes in and looks at the research and says because of uh the way which we're wired we're different and these kinds of books which when I was in college would were really considered not not only not intellectually respectable but even taboo are now hot now what happened I'm not totally sure what happened you can't just say uh that uh a few books came along and people changed their mind there's there's a number of reasons I mean some of them are funny uh my whole generation worked very hard at raising our children as people not as male and female and there were an awful lot of cartoons about it usually in the New Yorker did you ever see Doonesbury Doonesbury is that one famous cartoon where the the uh you know the uh the parents bought their little boy a cooking set you know a uh you know pots and pans and sort of uh you know kind of domestic uh domestic science kit I guess and uh the next thing you know they say we're really trying to you know bring out the nurturing side next thing you know the little boy has taken the pot put it on his head and has taken you know the forks and you're running around going ak as and there's just been innumerable jokes about it but maybe that's it maybe that's it I have another theory I mean these are just theories it could be that over the years what's happened is uh is just my whole generation of people that were really bought into that idea that the differences are are superficial they're environmental we found it was really rather different very difficult another possibility is that uh in traditional culture in our parents generation uh men and women were told and taught not to expect much out of the other gender not to expect rationality for example uh not to expect the other gender to really make sense you know you just get along a little bit more like uh the the guys and dolls uh uh song from the 50s marry the man today a little bit more along those lines and maybe when my generation came up and decided we're really going to treat each other as people we're going to share our thoughts with each other we're going to let our hair down we're really going to we're really going to get to know each other we we got we got burned we found it wasn't that easy it was very hard who knows why but the reality of the gender divide is pretty much consensus and it's a problem and here's why there's really been two competing views of why men and women have trouble getting along why there is alienation why there's anger you as an individual may not feel it you know most of all of us know some people that are extremely bitter against the other gender and you say yes only some people but yes but it's some people and those some people are not in a hermetically sealed little container but they're just they're just the end of the spectrum and there's a and as you get older in particular when you're younger very often you say i don't see a whole lot of differences but when you get older as time goes on there's a tendency for you to see those differences nevertheless though you as an individual might not feel it in general you have to realize that there's a great deal of disappointment there's a great deal of disillusionment there's a great deal of perplexity confusion alienation and anger over this subject and and one of the difficulties and one of the difficulties account for what's really happened. The old environmental view, which in right now is a little passe, but it's still pretty strong. And a lot of you probably have it. I know. The average person that I meet of my age still believes it. But the environmental view could not deal with the reality of gender differences, the persistence of them, the depth of them. It couldn't deal with it. It couldn't account for it. So we've been training each other. It couldn't account for it. It could deal with a distortion, but not the reality. It could say, well, the reason why there's oppression, the reason why there's injustice, and the reason why there's all this alienation is because we've trained people wrong. And they could deal with a distortion, but it couldn't account for the reality. But now the reigning view, which is not an environmental view, but it's a biological view. It's an evolutionary view that our gender differences have come down to us through evolutionary biology. And there they are. That's why Deborah Bloom's book, Sex and the Brain, you know, and that's just the way it is. That view can deal with the reality of gender differences, but it cannot account for the distortion. What do I mean? Well, it was intriguing to me when I read Deborah Bloom's book. Very interesting book. A little long, but very good. And she goes through and just shows all of the research on the difference in the way men and women's brains work and emotions work and so forth. And she also goes back and she shows how in the animal world, all these things are true too. That the differences between male and female are extremely deep in the animal world. And it's true that monkeys and fish and sea lions, and I've read a lot about this in her book, that though they may actually have differences from species to species as to how the male and female adopt their role, yet in every single, in every single species, the roles are not interchangeable. So she goes on and she shows this and she shows about the differences and she says, there they are. But then at the end she says, this is tough because there's alienation and there's oppression. How are we going to change things? That's very interesting. She goes on through and she says, the reason that men, now this is her view, the reason that men tend to be powerful and they tend to oppress women is because she thinks, and a lot of scientists would say, that over the years men learned that in evolution, they had to go out and they had to be powerful and they had to kill one another in order to get on top. And the women learn nurturing skills. She has all kinds of reasons why. But then at the end she says, now if that's true, if that's evolution, how are we going to change it? And here's the question. If evolution is the reason for gender differences, not the environment, why should anybody feel we should change it? Not only that, why is anybody upset with it? In fact, let's go further. Why is anybody alienated over it? In the animal world, there is a physical meshing, right? Just like cogs. There's a physical meshing. That's what the male and female difference is. But not only is there a physical meshing, from what we can tell, it's not creating a problem. The animals are working together, fine. Now why does Deborah Bloom say, here's what evolution has done. It's created these gender differences. See, she can account for the reality of them. But then she says, there's problems. We're using each other. We're abusing each other. We're oppressing each other. There's injustice. Now here's the question. How can she say that there's a problem? She can account for the reality, but she cannot account for the distortion. There's two things going on. And each of those views cannot account for both of them. The one is that there are gender differences that are real, that are persistent, that cannot go away. We can't get rid of them. But on the other hand, we also believe there's distortion. There's something pathological. There's something wrong, too, in the way in which men and women relate. Neither the environmental view or the evolutionary view can account for them. But I believe the Christian view can. Now, let me move into this. The Christian view, almost alone, though I haven't been studying the other religions, but you see, the Christian view can account for what we see, and here's why. The Christian view says, on the one hand, that gender differences are created by God, but gender differences are distorted by sin. And I don't know, unless you believe that, how you can account for both. You're going to find yourself with one view, the environmental view, or the evolutionary view, you're going to be able to account for one part of the phenomena and not the other part. But the Christian view goes this way, and let me use it. I believe it makes sense what we see. First of all, the Bible says, if you look carefully, and it's very nuanced here, inherent, they are deep, they are profound, and they're good. The Bible says when God created human beings, He created them male and female to reflect the glory of God. He made them in the image of God. And the phrase image of God is a profound one, but it's very much like a mirror. It has to do with being a mirror. Men and women together reflect the glory of God. Together they reflect His attributes and His qualities and His characteristics. But there is some way in which they reflect them in a complementary way. How do we know that? Because when the Bible talks about male and female, we are told that woman was created as a help for man. So that's the first thing, and that is that the Bible says that there are gender differences created. That can account for the prevalence. But, now as soon as you, let me show you what you think I'm going to say is not what I'm going to say. What are, what does the Bible say those gender differences are? What does the Bible say men are good at versus women, that women are good at versus men? And I know I'm going to get everybody mad at me at this point. The Bible insists that there's gender differences, that they are inherent, they are profound, they go all the way down. They're not just environmental, they're not just socially constructed. But the Bible also insists, by way of omission, that the differences are mysterious because the Bible never delineates them. Now, that doesn't mean the Bible doesn't say certain things about male and female, which I don't need to get into, about duties and responsibilities. But where does the Bible actually say men are better at math? Where does the Bible say, necessarily, see, women are kinder? When the Bible says, this is the way I want human beings to be, it says, this is the way I want human beings to be. Love. Not, you're better and you're not so good, so don't worry about it. Joy. Peace. Peace. Patience. Kindness. Goodness. Meekness, see. Self-control. There's strong, you know, tough, and there's soft traits in all of those things. But it's not, here's one for men, here's one for women. Now, I want to show you the wisdom of this. First of all, the Bible says that gender differences are there. And then secondly, when the Bible gives traits or fruit of the Spirit, things it wants human beings to do and be. It is not gender specific. Why? Because the Bible tells us that, though in some ways, human beings are different, male and female are different, in every culture, those differences are going to work themselves out differently. I have come to the conclusion that if two Generation X people, excuse me if you don't like that term, but Generation X people from the Northeast United States get together, if you get married, for example, or if you're friends, or if you're brother and sister, in other words, if you have a close relationship, you will find gender differences. If you are two people living in a traditional culture in Asia 200 years ago, if you're baby boomers living in the suburbs of Atlanta, my guess is that those gender differences are going to play out. That's one of the reasons why the Bible, being a very, very wise book, and being written, I think, and inspired by God for all people, all places, did not make a list. The Bible says, on the one hand, you need to expect that there is a fundamental gender difference, but the actual way in which it's going to work out is going to be different in every culture. But here's the important thing. When we were created in the image of God, some of the glory, some of the majesty, some of the mystery of God went into the other gender in a way, I don't know, differently. It's reflected differently. And as a result, there's an attraction for something in the other that completes or complements us. But men and women are in the image of God. That means there, it means all that that other gender has that attracts me, that I find deep, that I find mysterious, that I want to complete me, is only a reflection of the glory of God. And as a result, unless you understand that sin has distorted those gender differences and how sin has distorted those gender differences, you're going to do exactly what the early people, the early songs did, which was refuse to give the other gender your heart or what the latter people did, which is sell your soul. And here's the reason why. The Bible says that sin is a desire to be your own God. And if you look carefully in the book of Genesis, as soon as Adam and Eve decided to be their own God, the first thing that happened was they were alienated from the other generation. to really see them. They went away. They hid. And here's the reason why. Every human being, according to the Bible, senses that they're not right with God and knows that there's something in God that alone will complete them. But we hate that knowledge because we want to live our own lives. We want to be independent. We don't want to know that we need God to complete us. And as a result, we go off into the world looking for something else to save our soul and complete us and cover the nakedness we feel. And the most likely thing in the whole world that could counterfeit or substitute for God would be the other gender. The other gender is not the thing that really truly completes us. The attraction we have to the other gender is a signpost, the Bible says, for the fact that we need closure with God himself. Jesus Christ lived here on earth as a single man. He never got married, but he was complete. Why was he complete? He had a perfect relationship with the Father. When we are on this earth, if we do not have the relationship with God we need to have, then we look at the other gender. And the other gender is the most powerful example, in a sense, here on earth, image of God that we have. The other gender, there's something mysterious, there's something attractive. And there's two possibilities for the way in which we can use the other gender to justify ourselves and cover our nakedness and to try to save ourselves. The one thing you can do is actually hate the other gender and become very self-righteous by looking down your nose, by being condescending. Then that's your way, like a Pharisee. How do Pharisees feel that they, how do they cover their sense of shame and guilt? By feeling superior to other races or feeling superior to other religions. Well, there's a gender Phariseeism. And you feel superior to the other gender. And that's your way of saying, I am righteous. It's your way of covering that sense of nakedness. But the more likely way to do it is to look at the other gender and say, I don't know why, but I feel like this will complete me. If I have the love, if I have the affection, if I have the adoration of someone of the other sex. And that's the reason why back and forth people go from hating or being enslaved to the other gender. The Bible can account for the reality of gender differences. The Bible can account for the distortion. And as far as I know, other views of the world can't make sense of that. Now, that's the reality. That's the reason. What should the response be? I don't know if there's any way for you possibly to get away from either being afraid of the other gender or being enslaved to the other gender unless some other mysterious person comes into your life who is like the other gender, other, awesome, perplexing, glorious. And only if he comes into your life and only, according to the Bible, if you become his bride, whether you're a male or a female, are you actually liberated from slavery to gender? You're liberated from, guys, you're liberated from the need to be very masculine. You've got to look masculine all the time. You would never want to look weak. Why not? You're justifying yourself. You're covering your nakedness. You see? You'll only feel like you've got self-worth if you're a macho guy, okay? Or if you've got women falling all over you. And women can do the same thing back. The feminists are absolutely right about the Cinderella syndrome. I need to have a man taking care of me. But what's the alternative? What is the alternative? Do you want to do what many, many people have done, and that is to hate the other gender? That's just as self-justifying. You need somebody in your life, the true spouse, the true partner. You know, I'll tell you something. If you need to be married or if you're scared of being married, you shouldn't be. You've got to actually give it up before you'll ever be ready for it. And you know what? Giving it up means to know that I don't have to be married to be complete as a human being. My suggestion is, you go to the one who says, the spirit and the bride, right? Say, come to the bridegroom. That's in the book of Revelation. Jesus Christ says, all of history is coming together into a moment in which he will come down. a wedding feast, the wedding supper of the Lamb. That's the wedding feast, and those are the arms that we have to have if we're going to move out into the world amongst both men and women without fear, without enslavement. Now, please, here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to make this suggestion. If you would like to talk more about this, this whole idea was to provoke you to think, and what I'm really trying to say is what Pascal said. Pascal, years ago, said, every human being has got a faith position. Everybody either believes in God or doesn't believe in God, believes human beings are sinful, or doesn't believe human beings are sinful. You either believe human beings are physical only, or you believe their body and soul, and you know what? You can't prove any of those things. You believe there's an eternity. You don't believe there's an eternity. Those are faith positions. You can't prove any of those things. Everybody is betting his or her life on some religious position. Then how are we going to know which position is right and which one is wrong? The answer is which one makes sense of what you've experienced? Which one makes sense of gender? Which one makes sense of what we see? And so I'm provoking you. I'm saying, does your view make as much sense as the Christian view? Now, what we usually do at this point is two things. We give you a chance to reflect, and right now the musicians are going to come on out, and they're going to play, not sing, I've grown accustomed to her face, which is one of those songs that points, okay? It points in the right direction. Surrender to the other. And the Bible tells us that every good romantic relationship here on earth, if it's not going to be enslaving or alienating, has to point you toward the one person who can give you real closure. Now, during that time of reflection, we take an offering, and the only reason we do that is because ordinarily here, there is a worship service most Sunday evenings, except for open forum nights, and people who are members of the church or who regularly come to this church, this is their way of supporting the work here. If you're a guest or you're a visitor, and that plate comes on by, we're not after your money, please. It's time for you to reflect. And when that's over, I'll tell you what to do next, which is, if you want to stay, we have discussion time. We have free books, but I'd like you to stay put and think about what we've just seen, what you've heard. And when that is over, I'll come back with the final announcement as to what to do next.
