TITLE: Men’s Breakout With Tim
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Marriage, Sex and Singleness Conference with Tim and Kathy Keller
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/mens-breakout-with-tim/

============================================================

We want to talk about sex, largely. I know a lot of you are single and I know a lot of you are married. I want to talk about some important issues, but briefly enough that there's plenty of time for questions. So, let me go at it like this. First, it's pretty well known that a lot of people who otherwise, and especially a lot of men, who are otherwise pretty sold on Christianity, sold on the basic idea that it's a book based on a text, the Bible, and basically accepting classic, orthodox, historic Christian doctrine, and you hold your nose when it comes to what the Bible says about sex. Because it's pretty well known, and even I hear all the time from women, that they come to Redeemer, they go out with guys who come to Redeemer, and the guys expect them to have sex. And so, when the question comes up, well, yeah, okay, you go to Redeemer, Bible, Christianity, stuff like that, and essentially people, well, come on, we live in the real world. And this isn't just a Redeemer issue, it's a New York issue. It's not just a New York issue, it's an American issue or maybe a Western issue. So, that's a big issue, it's a big deal. It's a very big deal when almost the average male, from what I can tell, that comes to a church in New York City, and certainly comes to Redeemer, ignores that part of Christian teaching. So, don't we have to talk about it? I mean, and that's why we're here. Maybe you didn't know that's why you were here this morning, but that's why I'm here. So, let me give you some ideas, what I consider Christian teaching about sex inside a marriage, and sex in general. I'll start with sex in general. You need to know, I think, the Bible everywhere assumes that sex is only for inside marriage. Not only, very often does a word like, there's a Greek word, porneia, from which we get our word pornography, which is used all over the place. And it just assumes, it's very often translated, don't commit adultery. Sometimes it just says sexual immorality, which doesn't really help as you're reading the translations. But it's a word that assumes that all sex outside of a covenant between a male and a female inside a lifetime of marriage is wrong. But you see it, the assumption everywhere. In 1 Corinthians 7, Paul says, it's good to be unmarried. It's fine to be unmarried. Singleness is great, which is another subject, but there's too many subjects to cover, and I'm not going there right now. But he says, however, if you're burning with passion, I mean, what it literally says, it says it's good to be unmarried, but it's better to marry than to burn, so get married. And almost all commentators say what he's talking about there is that if you're burning with passion for somebody, marry her. What's the assumption? The assumption is not if you're burning with passion for her, have sex. The assumption is you've got to get married or you'll burn with passion, burning in a kind of frustrated way. That's the assumption. Go a little earlier in 1 Corinthians, which is a very important book, by the way, on this, on sex. 1 Corinthians 6, Paul says, if you have sex with a prostitute, how monstrous, don't you realize that you are one flesh with her? If you have sex with her, you're one flesh with her. Now, that takes a little bit of nuancing here. When the Bible talks about flesh, sometimes it's talking about the physical. And of course, obviously, when Genesis 2, 24 says, a man shall leave his father and mother and shall cleave to his wife, the word cleave is a covenant word, and the two shall be one flesh, it is obviously at least talking about the actual sex act, in which during the sex act, the two fleshes come together, they interpenetrate one another. But the term flesh means obviously more, the two shall become one flesh. It doesn't mean, he doesn't say the two occasionally become one flesh when they're sleeping together. The two become one flesh. And you know, there's places in the Bible where it says, God says, I will pour out my spirit on all flesh, and he doesn't mean I will only pour out my spirit on bodies. A flesh is another way of putting, talking about a person. And when it says, a man shall leave his father and mother and cleave. say a new unit. Every part of your life comes together. You're personally together, you're legally together, you're economically together, you're socially together, you're together. You're a whole new unit. And when Paul has the audacity to say, even sex with a prostitute, which obviously has supposedly no emotional involvement at all, even sex with a prostitute is essentially becoming one flesh. It's his way of saying sex is a unit of act. Sex is supposed to go along with you uniting not just your bodies, but every other part of your life. And if you unite physically with somebody that you are unwilling to unite in every other way with her, it's a monstrosity, because they go together. That's the way God thinks of it. You must not say, I want my own life. I want to stay independent. I want to be my own person. I want to be able to make my decision. But I want to unite physically. According to the Bible, that is an absolute monstrosity. It's everywhere understood. So that's it. Sex is God's appointed way for one person to say to another person, I belong completely and exclusively to you. If you use sex to say anything else, if you use sex just to say, I'm digging on you. In other words, if you can't say, I belong completely and exclusively to you, you shouldn't be having sex. And how can you belong completely and exclusively? And how do you know you belong completely and exclusively? Only if you've actually gotten married. Now, let me give you, let me talk to you about a few myths that people have that I think undermine that idea, that biblical idea, that sex is a covenant renewal ceremony. Sex is supposed to be a way, it's like the Lord's Supper. It's commemorating your vow. It's remembering and reminding yourself of all you mean to each other. It's a kind of reuniting. It's a renewal of that unity and that covenant you've made. That's what sex is supposed to be. It's a nurturing discipline that brings you even closer and closer together. Sex is a commitment apparatus. It's a way to emotionally become as committed to the person as you are legally and socially and every other way. That's what the Bible says sex is. Now, here are some myths that undermine it. One of the myths is that basically sex is for pleasure. Let me just, let me, oh, okay, here's one. Some people say to me, and they often say this, that how do I know I'm compatible with the girl unless I've had sex with her before I get married? Otherwise, how do I know? I'll get back to sex inside marriage. But right now, you should know, and you do know, and some of you do know, that having sex with somebody that you're not married to does not in any way prepare you for sex inside marriage. You ought to know that. They are not the same thing at all. I mentioned it last night. Sex outside of marriage means you're performing. You've got to perform. You've got to do well. She's got to do well. You're enticing. I mean, one of the reasons why sex outside of marriage is in some ways more electrical than sex inside marriage is because of the danger and because of the enticing and because you're trying to impress the person. That is utterly different than what sex is about inside marriage. You're not trying to impress anymore. You're not trying to perform anymore. Inside marriage, sex is a gift. Inside marriage, sex is a way of serving. Sex, we'll get to that in one second, just a second. But outside marriage, sex is a way of getting and a way of impressing, and they're completely different. So to say, well, shouldn't you have sex outside of, you know, before to find out whether or not you're compatible, you have no idea. In fact, let me keep in mind, it doesn't prepare you at all. I actually do believe sex is a commitment apparatus that if you use outside of marriage, you damage. Here's what I mean by that. But women feel it, but even you feel it. Think, when you have sex with somebody, even like a teenager in high school, what happens? Why is there all the jealousy and the hurt feelings? I mean, you know, you had sex, but you're not married, and you don't owe each other anything. But automatically, having sex makes you feel like this other person belongs to you somehow. And you don't like the idea that this person just can go off and do anything that she wants or have sex with somebody else. Why? The way God intended marriage to operate in your life is functioning. Sex is a way of feeling a unity with this person. You feel it wasn't just sex. You feel some kind of emotion. acts any old way, it really kills you. So what happens is if you have sex outside of marriage, as time goes on, you've got to push against that natural tendency of sex to make you feel committed and make you feel bonded and make you feel that there's some sort of mutual obligation to one another. You actually have to kill it. So that sex is just sex. It's just sex. If you do that, then you get married, you'll find that the commitment apparatus doesn't work in the same way. You've damaged it. Sex outside of marriage does not prepare you for sex inside marriage. It actually de-prepares you for sex inside marriage. Let me give you another thing that people say to me. is, in the end, sex is a private matter. No. Let me just... First of all, of course, as some of you know, that even if I wasn't talking to Christians as a Christian, you can say that that's a myth that sex is a private matter. Unwanted pregnancies, venereal disease, there's all sorts of ways in which sex outside of marriage is everybody's problem. And the more a society has people having sex outside of marriage, more social problems... In fact, if you just want to be mercenary, and some of us are, your tax bill is way, way bigger because we live in a society where people have sex outside of marriage. So it's not a private thing. But just let me remind you, as Christians, there is... I know of women... I know of women who have come to Redeemer, and listen, if I know of them, there's got to be... For every one case I know of, there's got to be ten cases that nobody told me about because this is a kind of private thing. I know of women who have come to Redeemer who have thought about Christianity. They're exploring Christianity. Okay? They're thinking about Christianity. They're kind of skeptical. Okay? And they're single. They come. They meet a guy. The guy says, let's go out. The guy is evangelical, from the heartland, born and raised, you know, card-carrying, born-again person, has been coming to Redeemer for a couple years, has a nice job here, and he wants to sleep with her. That's the end of the credibility. Even though she's not a Christian, she knows that the sex ethic, the Christian sex ethic, goes with everything else. And he wants to sleep with her. And that's it. Oh, gosh, you guys are a bunch of hypocrites. I always, isn't it, what does the Bible say? And it's over. For every one of those stories I know, there's got to be ten that I don't. I mean, why would people walk up to me and tell me about things like that? There's got to be twenty. Don't you tell me that sex is a private issue. It is not a private issue. And let me say one more thing about pornography. Because Jesus makes a pretty good case. And actually, in our preaching team at Redeemer, as some of you know, we've been going through, up to Easter, we're going through the life of Jesus in the book of Matthew. And we've been going through the episodes of the life of Jesus. Starting in the week after Easter, we're going to go through the teaching of Jesus in the book of Matthew. So we're doing Jesus as Savior, Jesus as Teacher. And we're going to go back through the book of Matthew, which means we're going to get to the Sermon on the Mount. And one of the most famous parts of the Sermon on the Mount is where Jesus says, you've heard it said, you shall not commit adultery. But I say to you, if you look upon a woman with lust in your heart, it's as if you've committed adultery. You've committed adultery with her in your heart. Jimmy Carter got a lot of flack and jokes years ago when he pointed out that he believed that, that you can commit adultery in your heart, lust. So what we have is a trillion dollar a month industry in this country now or in the world now, the porn industry, it's pervasive amongst us males. The younger, the more pervasive actually it is, but that's partly because you live in an internet world and us older ones still don't exactly. Let me just say, somebody needs to get a hold. You guys ought to all get a hold. It's boring because it's an academic book. You ought to get a hold of a book called Premarital Sex in America. There's two sociologists. The first one's name is Mike Regnerus, R-E-G-N-E-R-U-S. The other one's name is Euchre. They're believers, but they're academic sociologists, and it's an Oxford Press book called Premarital Sex in America. And there's a section in there where they talk about pornography. This is all empirical. This is not really a culture war thing or anything like that. now, here's another example, the use of pornography by men is affecting absolutely everybody. Absolutely everybody. He says the idea it's a private thing, crazy. Don't believe it. It's absolutely everybody. I'll give you four examples, three of which are probably the most compelling. You do know that pornography, hopefully somebody's told you this, pornography really, really deep prepares you for marriage because it gives you a, you know, it's a conditioned response. If you smell a dirty sock and masturbate about a thousand times, next thing you know, dirty socks will be arousing to you. Or you may not be able to get aroused without a dirty sock. Your sexual instinct is unbelievably programmable. What this means is if you do pornography, there's a certain, the looks of a woman and the performance of a woman that you find arousing is probably not something you can reproduce in most marriages. In fact, or certainly not permanently. I mean, even if your wife does in the beginning look and act like somebody you saw in pornography, that cannot last, right? And therefore, there are, first of all, one of the reasons why a lot of men are not getting married is because of impossible standards of what really turns you on. And one of the reasons why men aren't, are doing very badly in the marriages is because of that. That's point one. That's only point one. Point two, Regnerus points out the fact that pornography is an outlet. And because it's an outlet, there's an awful lot of people who are saying real relationships just are too complicated. To actually have a sexual relationship with a woman, even a sexual relationship, not the ones I'm talking about, just a sexual relationship with a real woman is very complicated. She's always getting her feelings hurt. You're always, you know, having to, you know, patch things up and all that. So just the fact is pornography is a, is an outlet. It gives you all the kind of a sense of having sex without how all the mess of actually having to be with a real person. And it's shrinking the pool. It's shrinking the pool of, of men who are willing to be in relationships, not just willing to get married there. It's empirically showing us that pornography is making it, uh, for us to, uh, relationships with women are very complicated. Male relationships are relatively uncomplicated compared to a relationship with a woman. And, and so increasingly men are just not doing it. They're just not going there. And pornography is one of the reasons. Thirdly, by the way, women are being pressed to dress and look along the lines of what men want and more and more, what men are, um, wanting is what they've seen on the screen, the porn screen. This is one of the reasons why more and more women are looking like what you see in the porn screens. And a lot of them don't like it. They do not like it. And yet they feel pressed by it. By the way, in when you, and here's one more thing. When you use pornography, you are keeping the market afloat, which means that other people who are really going to be destroyed by it, maybe you're not being destroyed by it. Maybe somehow you're holding on and keeping it in under wraps. There's other people's lives are being totally destroyed by pornography and they're being destroyed by pornography because it's available. It's available because you are a customer. It's all, it's systemic evil. It's corporate. And even when you click on, even when you're not spending any money, you realize that you're keeping the whole thing going and you're part of the problem and you're destroying lives and you're destroying people every time you look. Now, one more thing. If you're married, I got four things to tell you about sex. Number one, you know, first Corinthians seven says that your body doesn't belong to you, but to your wife and your wife's body doesn't belong to her, but to you. You know that place? You realize how absolutely and completely radical that was for the time. I mean, back in the day in which most cultures saw the whole woman and her whole life is virtually your possession. I mean, there's plenty of cultures in which you could kill your wife if you wanted to and nobody would say anything because after all, she's yours. And in that time, in that place for Paul to say, you, your, your, your sexual capacity and body does not really exist for you. It exists for your wife and your wife's for you. What does that mean? Well, here's the radical idea. I never forget. I was in my 20s, I was having to, I was a newlywed, I was a pastor in a small town where there were no counselors, and everybody came to pastors for their problems and issues. And there was this young couple that came and they had no sex life at all, and they didn't like sex with each other, and they came and talked to me and said, you know, help me. And I, fortunately, I only had the Bible at that point, and my own experience, because I've been married for two or three years. But I came up with something that actually was very helpful, and it's been helpful ever since. I studied 1 Corinthians 7 with them. And I sat down and I said, all right, what does this say? I said, it looks like it's saying that the purpose of marriage, of sex inside marriage is not to get pleasure, but to give it. The purpose of sex in marriage is not for you to sit around saying, I'm not getting mine, I'm not, you're not, you're not turning me on. Why don't you dress like this? Why don't you do this? Why don't you do somersaults? That turns me on. You know, um, you know, somersaulting chicks, that's, that's what I want. And, uh, you say, what, how did that turn? When did you ever learn? And everyone, so, uh, well, we were with a circus, and so grew up on the circus. So instead of sitting around saying, I don't like it, and I'll, the whole idea was, say, what will give you, what will turn you on? I don't care what's going to turn me on. I don't care what happens to me. I'm just going to care about you. I'm going to find out what, what you love, what, um, arouses you, what pleases you, what delights you, and all, my goal every single time is to bring delight to my partner. Don't even think about what happens to you. But if both of you are doing it, don't even think about what's happening to you. Don't even say, that's not helping. That's not helping. That doesn't work. I don't like that. Just, just ask the other person. And, um, every night, have sex every night, unless you're really tired or something. And so, after one week, they came back, and I said, how's it going? And they said, it's really weird. And the second week, they came back, and I said, how's it going? They said, better. Hmm, better. And the third week, they came back, and I said, how's it going? They said, incredible. Just stop thinking about yourself, and just start thinking. I mean, it was awfully simple. And I didn't find it in any book anywhere. It was just 1 Corinthians 7, the basic idea of that my body doesn't belong to me, it belongs to you. And so, what, how, how can I serve you? How can I please you? The pleasure of giving pleasure. Now, another thing I think needs to be, um, it's important is, and this is something, it's similar. It's similar. Um, there was a time in which, it's similar, it's overlap. There was a time in which, uh, sex was something that both, even, even Kathy and me, even, even years ago, we felt that there's something, somehow it's hypocritical to have sex when you don't feel like it. Um, we come to realize that, no, it's, it's very close to what I just told you, but it's the idea of sex as a gift. Um, sex has to be really, really regular. And this is tough during times, like when you're, the babies, the kids are little, or one of you is having, you know, is really, really, really tired. It is absolutely critical that one, on the one hand, the one who would like to have sex more often, but the other person is pretty tired, kind of strung out, that sort of thing. It's very important that you realize that, that the, uh, the world right now, the culture kind of gives you the impression that sex has to be something that you really want. It can never just be a gift because then it's mechanical or something like that. Not if you put your heart right and say, of course, of course, um, let's just do this because I just, you know, I mean, there's a, somebody once wrote this, it says, um, the best sex makes you want to weep tears of joy, not bask in the glow of a good performance. The best sex makes you want to weep with tears of joy. You just want to cradle the other person. You just want to say, you know, I don't, I don't know what's going to happen here. I just want to be intimate. I just want to be naked. I just want to feel the skin. I just want to tell you how much you mean to me. Uh, you know, you can do that. All you have to do is think about all the person means to you and all that you've done together. And that you just, you know, just do that sometimes, even when you feel like that I can bring myself to climax. I don't certainly know that I, I do, I certainly don't have this sort of sexual itch right now. That's not quite the same thing, but number one, know the pleasure of giving pleasure. Number two, make sure that you know how to keep your frequency of sex up, even if it means that a certain period of time, sex is more of a gift than anything else, but make it a gift. And then thirdly, sex is a test. This is the only three things I'm going to say, because it's time to start taking questions. Sex is a test, meaning problems in your relationship elsewhere will tend to show up in bed pretty quickly. If sex is really bad, or it's not working, or one of the people never wants it, instead of saying, we have a sexual problem, we need to go to a sex therapist, maybe, by the way, maybe. And there are, after all these years of working with people and counseling people, there really are people who have a problem with sex per se, that they freeze up. There are people who actually probably need to take some medication, because there's, like, no libido at all. I'm not saying that they, that may not be a problem. But I'm saying that probably more often than not, something's happening somewhere else. There's resentment somewhere else. There's, there's a feeling of abandonment somewhere else. There's some, and, and it shows up in bed. Instead, so sex is sort of like a litmus test, sort of like a test. And look around. Don't just say the problem's sex. In many cases, it's not. It's something else. I think there's, gosh, why in the world do I, why did I even say anything? If I just say, let's talk about sex, I'm sure we'd have all the questions we'd want. So let's just do that. I would like to open up, and what I'm going to do is I'm going to have you ask a question. Probably you need to stand up, say it. I'll repeat it for everybody to hear, and then we'll go from there. Yeah, Bruce? I mean, if, if everybody has got, if everybody that has a seat next to you move toward the center, then there probably would be some seats that create, okay. Meanwhile, who's got a question? Okay, Webb, stand up, speak it out in English. Right. Oh. I believe Webb just said, and I'll check my hearing, is that I have just said that sex outside of marriage, extramarital sex, damages your commitment apparatus. At least it teaches you a lot of bad habits that are not good for sex inside marriage. Given what we know, that's probably the norm now, that plenty of people have had sex outside of marriage before they get married. In that case, how do you do any kind of repair work? Is that what you're asking, basically? Yeah. You don't, first of all, you don't know how much repair work you need to do until you actually get married. But the three things I just mentioned, which was sex is a test, sex is a gift, and sex is the pleasure of giving pleasure, are, I would say if you start practicing that, the difficulty with which you move from the old mode, which was sex is impression, sex is complete self-absorption, am I getting mine, am I happy, I don't know how fast you're going to be able to make the jump. Some people say, okay, and they do it and they do fine. The idea of sex as tears of joy instead of basking in good performance. I mean, for example, there are plenty of guys I know that have trouble not thinking about pornographic images as they're having sex with their wives because their wives aren't as, I mean, I have talked to plenty of guys, here's what I say. The answer is sex is the pleasure of giving pleasure, sex is a gift, sex as creating, being incredibly personal. in one another rather than simply performing. Some people can make that transition. They just do it, Webb. They just do it. I mean, they get the teaching, they think it's better, and they don't seem to have a problem. At the other end of the spectrum, there's plenty of people who I've talked to over the years who say, I can't get any arousal unless I'm thinking about pornographic images in my head that I've known over the years, because my own wife just doesn't arouse me. If I look at her, she's overweight, and I'm not as turned on as if I think about some image I've seen in the past. See, that's a serious problem of not being able to make the jump. Other people make it. Some people can't. What do you do with that, by the way? Here's the advantage of being male, I think, from what I can tell. Our advantage is that our sexual response is not as complicated. I mean, we all make jokes about the fact that most of us can. I just said that our sexual, I think our sexual response is very programmable. You got it someplace by pornographic images, and now, you know, only a certain kind of picture turns you on. And by the way, this is also true for people who are making a transition from a bisexual or a homosexual pornography, and now they're trying to have a heterosexual marriage. I've been through this with an awful lot of people. It just takes time. You have to use the gospel on yourself so you don't feel ashamed. You find, I just had sex with my wife, but actually, if she knew that I was thinking of something else, I feel horribly guilty about that. What do I do? Well, what do you do with any sin? You get forgiveness. Christ loves you anyway. It's not, it's, as bad as it makes you feel, it's not the worst thing you've ever done. Next time, keep your eyes open. You will find yourself slowly being able to change what arouses you. Or another way to put it is, sometimes a lot of guys say that if I'm watching a pornographic film, I get this extremely strong response. Because over the years, I've been conditioned to be aroused by tall, thin, blonde women. And I'm married to a short, slightly overweight brunette woman. I remember having a talk with a guy like that. And I said, you need to get reconciled to the possibility you'll never have the same kind of absolutely electrical response to her that you have to the porn princess on film. But so what? Maybe you will end up loving your wife a little more the way your wife loves you. And I said, why? I said, well, men, men's sexual response is a little bit more very visceral and very physical and very electrical. Women's sexual response is a little more diffuse. It's a little more based on context. You might find that in the end, you can still, you know, you can still have sex, but it may not be, you may, your arousal may, you may end up finding yourself attracted to your wife more the way your wife's attracted to you. So don't say, unless I'm feeling toward my wife exactly how I feel toward the porn princess I see on the screen, I'm a failure. Why? It's your job to love your wife. And it's her job to love you. And as time goes on, you'll probably find it more and more emotionally satisfying, even if in the short run, it doesn't seem to be as volcanic as sex with a screen is. I mean, one of the problems with pornography is it's very fast and it's very volcanic. What you do is you figure out exactly what sort of thing turns you on, then you have conditioned yourself to it. And we're talking about just seconds in some cases. Now, suddenly, you're in a marriage and this is a real person. She doesn't look like that. And it can't go that fast or else, frankly, you can't bring her along. And it's very frustrating. And what I would say is some people can make the jump quickly. Some people need someone to hold your hand and say it's all right and say in the long run, you'll probably find it very satisfying. In the short run, it won't be as volcanic. And maybe it should never be as volcanic because maybe that's not really what sex is all about. It's supposed to be the unity of two persons. The volcanic one is absolute selfishness. Everything is impersonal. It's all about you. It's completely physical. There's no emotional involvement with the thing on the screen. For you to think that's what I have to have with doing to you right here is, I told you, some people can make the jump. That is, they can work it out. Some people need counseling. They need somebody who's been through it before. And what I'm just doing is giving you the kind of counseling I've given over the years. So, the answer is, yeah, don't be too scared. If you're a single guy, you're not married, you realize you've been into porn, and am I totally frightening you? I'm sorry. I want you to know it can really definitely be worked on. But you are going to have to recognize the difference between sex with a screen and sex with a person. Sex with a person, in the long run, is like a deep river. It's wonderful. Sex with a screen is like a noisy, babbling brook. It's impersonal. It's visceral. Sex with a real person is far more transforming, far more sustaining, far more wonderful, but it may never be as volcanic as what you had there. And don't think that somehow the two things have to be merged. They don't have to be merged. Okay, yes, right here. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, the question is that most churches and even evangelical churches don't talk much about the Bible's mandate that we be fruitful and multiply and fill the earth. There are plenty of places where you see people having few or no children. And I think the answer to my response to my response to that is it depends on the motivation. But there is a, the Bible does talk a great deal about children being the fruit, children being a reward, children being a blessing. Stanley Hauerwas in his book Community of Character talks about the fact that the, um, uh, he thinks the reason why Christians have, should be, should have children is because of their eschatological hope. He says that, uh, people who are afraid of having children because the world sucks or people who are having, are afraid of having children because they feel that it's going to hurt their lifestyle, that those are, um, hopeless and selfish motives that you should recognize in yourself. Uh, he says Christians have children because they have hope for the future of the world. Uh, they're, they want to bring their children up, hopefully to know Christ so they can be part of the new heavens and new earth. That's, if you believe that, then certainly you want to populate that new heavens and new earth. Um, the, the, uh, a fear of having children because it's a sacrifice means, um, uh, a certain selfishness. So that needs to be spoken to. Now, how many, it's obvious that, um, that I don't think the Bible tells you how many, because there's no doubt that if you live on a farm in a pre, uh, you know, pre-industrial place, frankly, the more children you have, the better for everybody. I mean, Proverbs talks about the fact that, um, the more children you have, the, the happier the king is because the king has, the nation is stronger and people aren't going to come and try to conquer it. So, you know, the reason why sometimes you see in the Bible, in the Old Testament especially, women that have children are like the heroes because the more children you have, the stronger the country and the more money you have because you've got more people to work in the shop or you have more people to work on the farm. Um, you have to keep some of the really, really strong statements in the Bible that some people have twisted to mean if you're, if you're a Christian, you ought to have 10 or 11 or 12 children has to be put in its Old Testament context, pre-industrial, um, without children, you didn't have a, you know, a good society. Uh, you might make the case that obviously societies collapse if you don't have children. And we do have places in Europe where societies are actually aging and collapsing because nobody has enough hope to have children. They're too selfish and they're too hopeless. My friends in Europe tell me the main problem is hope that they, people in Europeans are so pessimistic about the future, they don't want to have children. Well, Christianity should deal with both of those things. And so you should have children, but I do still think it's a matter of conscience, conscience as to how many. I would never tell people it's too few or too many or anything like that. Okay. Two really good questions. Yes, right here. Um, what's, um, Tim, uh, what's your advice on, uh, singles, uh, singles in the church, um, people who might be affected by Christians in this, or, at the same time? Right. Okay, so a little bit of advice for singles. By the way, thank you for the questions. The question about how bad does extramarital sex and porn affect me for marriage, I hope I gave you a realistic answer, but not too frightening. In other words, I wanted to scare you, but not too much. I don't know if I did or not. The question about having children is extremely important, especially in New York, where you're probably going to be more prone to say we shouldn't have children, but I think the Bible pushes against that. This question is general advice for single people who just, single men, obviously, because that's who I got here, who do want to move forward as single people in a biblical way, any kind of general ideas on dating and marriage seeking, yeah. I already told you one is don't have sex, but besides that, here, I would like you to consider a spectrum. This might be of some help. At one, and let's call this a dating spectrum, even though I know by using the word dating, I'm dating myself. I know that. But, you know, the word dating first shows up in the English language in 1914 in quotation marks. So it's about 100 years old, and it's about to go away again. I don't know what it's going to be next. But let's just say a dating spectrum. At this end is the fun and the event and the activity is more important than the relationship. So you've got an activity. There's a concert to go to. There's something you want to do, something pretty exciting or something that really is engaging, and you would like to take a girl with you, take a woman along as a way of getting to know her. It's not, it's not like totally non-relational, but the point is the emphasis is on the activity and the fun, not so much the relationship. At this end of the spectrum is the emphasis is all on the relationship. Is this the person I want to be with? Some of you know what shidduch dating is. The Orthodox Jewish community does a pretty good job of this, I think. And by the way, I'm afraid, I'm telling you this because most guys don't like the idea. If Kathy tells the women about this, they're all going to want Redeemer to put it into effect. Shidduch dating is basically you've got matchmakers out there, and what the matchmakers do is they are looking at everybody, and what they'll do is they'll come to you and say, I got a girl for you. I really think I want you to meet her. I really think that you could, you have real possibilities together. So in shidduch dating, the matchmakers bring you together, you've never met each other, and so you go out once or twice just to decide, do I want to keep going? Shidduch dating is really cheap because all you're, I mean, generally it means can I buy you a Diet Coke, and then you have to just sit down anywhere and talk for an hour. What are you, who, what do you do, that kind of thing. So in shidduch dating, you're at the other extreme where you're strictly getting together just to figure out, is this somebody I want to go forward with. So one end of the spectrum is you have an activity to do something, but it's all about the relationship. At the other end, you have a relationship with somebody, you know this person, but it's mainly about the activity. Now, the younger you are, like you're in, if you're a teenager, you need, all your dating needs to be down here. It really shouldn't be in this direction at all. You shouldn't be getting that serious. You shouldn't be saying, well, you're my, you know, and we, we're alone and we're, you know, you shouldn't be seeing other girls and you shouldn't be seeing other guys and that kind of thing. So the younger you are, the more you need to be down here. And the fact is, the older you are, the more, and what happens is men move down this spectrum, this direction, way slower than the women do. So if you are out of college in your late twenties, or certainly if you're in your thirties, and you go out with a woman who's in her late twenties and thirties, and you think you're down here, almost certainly she's down here. And you've got to, you've got to acknowledge that. You've got to acknowledge your age and you've got to acknowledge where you are on that spectrum. And you've got to admit it and not think, well, I'm just looking for a girl who just wants to have fun. After a while, there's nobody who's just looking for fun. So you need to recognize where you are. You need to know your age. You need to move on down as far as you can. You need to make sure you almost immediately judge where she is instead of saying, I don't know why she got like this. I mean, we were just going out. There was no commitment. That's naive. It's male naivete. You should know women better than that. So number one, I'd say, remember the spectrum. Number two, we haven't talked about this, but I'll just say it. You should not get deeply emotionally involved with somebody who is in person. you are spiritually. I would say next to sleeping together outside of marriage, this is the other thing that at Redeemer just happens all the time. You really find you're attracted to somebody who's really not where you are spiritually, and so it's evangelistic dating, all right? And I've seen plenty of happy ends. And by the way, there's nothing in the Bible about dating, so I can't say you're sinning if you go out with a girl and she's not a Christian. But I just want you to keep this in mind. If she doesn't share your faith, she doesn't understand you. And that's the reason why it sounds very narrow-minded to say, don't marry a non-Christian. I wouldn't say don't date. I say don't date, don't marry. Don't date seriously. The older you get, the further down the spectrum. Don't be with, don't get emotionally involved with, don't marry a non-Christian. I say that. It sounds so narrow-minded, but what I always say is don't you want to have somebody who understands you? If she doesn't share your faith, she doesn't understand you. She will not understand the decisions you make. And it won't be intimate. There'll be no intimacy. Whenever I've had, when somebody says, she's not a Christian, I am a Christian, but we want to get married, either you have an incredibly superficial relationship, unbelievably superficial, or you've kicked Jesus to the margins of your life. Because in other words, he's not really that important to how you make decisions. He's not really that important to how you think. So either you have the most incredible superficial relationship, or you've kicked him to the margins of your life. So find out where you are on the spectrum, number one. Number two, don't get emotionally involved with somebody who doesn't share your beliefs. Number three, get over obsession with her looks. Listen, guys, I can see it in a way you can't. You're afraid. I can see it. There are an enormous number of incredibly wonderful marriageable people, women around Redeemer, and they're not size eights. Some of you don't know what that means. But anyway, the point is, and that's good. That's probably good. You've really got to get past that. I've got to get past that. Because they're not going to stay looking the way they look now anyway. And besides that, you really think you're that great looking yourself. So the point, when you walk into a room, there's 10 women there. I'll tell you exactly what you do. It happens so fast. You screen seven of them out immediately because of their looks. And you start to talk with three of them. And you hope one of the three will be a spiritual goddess. The fact is, you probably screened out your best marriage prospect before you even started talking to people. So get over the looks and understand comprehensive attractiveness. That's what I tried to talk to you about last night. Where something that as you get older, the thing that you should most admire about your wife is something that will grow as you get older, not diminish. Now, if I was with a woman, I know it's a stereotype. I say to you, get over looking at her looks. And I'd say to the girls, the women, get over looking at his wallet. But I don't have any women here. So there we go. Those are a few tips. You know what? I probably should go to my left. I have a tendency because I'm right-handed. I'm always calling people on the right. So I need to call on people on the left. And that's not a political statement. Down front, I'll get all three of you. Yes, sir. Question. In what sense, if any, can being selfless go to an extreme or be a penalty in any sex? Well, the question is, that's good because it's a specific question and it doesn't take a long answer. Can you go too far on the selflessness when it comes to sex? Can you go to an extreme? The answer is, yeah, because the woman wants to please you. See, that's the thing. If it's reciprocal, if you're not thinking about what you're getting but only trying to give, but she's doing the same thing, then she's going to ask you. See, the point is, let her ask. And instead of you telling, you know, she will ask. I hope so. Because she wants to please you. So there won't be a problem. Obviously, if you're being selfless and she's not, keep at that for a while. Don't immediately say, didn't work. Didn't work. No. Keep at it for a while. sees you not worrying so much about how you're feeling, and you're worrying all about her, and you're giving her what she wants, she'll respond to you and say, well, what do you want? That's all. Jonathan, yeah. In a married relationship, which comes first, the problem-solving or the sex? Which comes first, the problem-solving or the sex? And you know, oftentimes problems show up in the bedroom. Yeah. No, I would say unsolved problems show up in the bedroom. So the problem-solving comes first, I would say. But if you have a conflict and you work through it, it doesn't show up in the sex. In fact, that can enhance it. There's nothing sexier than having, frankly, as you all know, there is no better aphrodisiac than having had a fight and made up and both weeping, or especially her. I really do love you. I'm really sorry. I shouldn't have said that. No, I shouldn't have said that either. Oh. It's a wonderful time. So, no kidding. So, yeah, that's right. So that's right. That's right. You want to improve your sex life? Fight. But then you have to truly repent. It can't be the faux kind of, oh, I'm so sorry, honey. I'm just such a big, you know. So I would say problems that are not, problems that are solved don't, you know, no problem. It's problems that you've worked at, and then it seems like it just comes back every week. That's the sort of thing that starts showing up in bed, where you feel like she says she's going to change and she's not. And you sense your coldness, or she, you sense a coldness in her. Okay, yes, right here. Yeah. Yeah, it gets harder as you get older. No. Okay, first of all, sex is, in the early days, of course, it's easy to make it regular as you get older. As you get older, there are things like illness, babies, and child care, pregnancy, and babies and child care, times in your job in which one of you is going through a transition. By the way, being unemployed for a lot of men feels emasculating, and you don't feel like having sex. You feel like there's something wrong with you. I mean, there's a million, there's psychological issues you're dealing with, just exhaustion because of a time. Is it, so, some ideas. First of all, is it hokey to actually schedule sex? No way is it hokey. Especially if you go along with this idea, it's a pleasure of giving pleasure as a gift. Look, I will say, I can be, I know I'm being recorded, so I just hope, Kathy, that doesn't feel like I'm going too far. My wife, Kathy, had a five or six year period when she was very sick. She had Crohn's disease. She was having major surgeries, taking out big parts of her body. And there were plenty of times in which she was under orders, long periods of time in which she was under orders not to have sex by the doctor. But we still knew you have to be intimate. So it just wasn't intercourse penetration, but it has to be intimate. And even when she didn't feel at all like it, and I didn't, because she was so sick and so unhappy. We felt like we've got to keep the intimacy, or next thing you know, we really are just business partners. We're just roommates. You've got to keep it going. And if that means just scheduling it. And you know what? When you're all done, you're always happy you did it. I mean, in other words, the point is, even when it feels mechanical, she's sick, it's been too long, it's not right, you can just feel it. Somebody once said that sex is not like, if a marriage is an engine, sex isn't a piston, or it's not a part of the engine, it's the oil in the engine that makes the engine, takes the friction away. So we, over the years, and we've had some times in which I said, the doctor ordered me not to have sex. Did you show him 1 Corinthians 7? He wasn't impressed. My surgeon was not impressed with 1 Corinthians 7. But we just did it. We did what intimacy we could, and even though it's in the beginning, you're just doing it because it's time to do it, when it's done, you can feel it. It softens you. There is an intimacy. You know, there we go. Okay, right here. Then I'll come to the right. Go ahead. Let's see more about when we get a question. Let's see more about when it's done. Yeah. Go ahead. Yeah, you're now, right. If you're saying every, on the basis of what I just said, there's actually a relatively larger pool of women out there in the church that you might move forward with, right? How do you even begin to cut it down? You don't have to know it's the one, but how do you even begin to cut it down? That's actually, I love that question. I love it. Because, you see, I'm so much better than what I usually hear, and there's nobody, there's no good women out there, there's no good men out there. And I'm thinking, what are you talking about? What Kathy always says, as you may have heard her say, she says, you're looking for a finished statue instead of a great block of marble. And that doesn't necessarily mean the person is filled with flaws and you're going to save them. That's always a danger, too, like, you know, that you don't want to get into the savior mode. I can rescue this person from all her problems or vice versa. But what you're looking for is just a good block of marble. I would actually say that you have an advantage in a place like Redeemer. Because you have, I don't know of any other part, any other kind of community. I mean, if you're just going to, there's a lot of other things. You can be in the glee club. You can be, you know, intramurals. There's all sorts of ways you meet girls. And there's the bar. But here, you actually do get to see their personality and their heart through groups, through classes, through seminars. You really do. And you get more of a window into the kind of person she is than you could in most other venues. So I would say don't be afraid to follow your intuitions and feelings. The things that we talk about, a person who's also a Christian, a person, we talk about a lot of pretty prosaic things. The poetical is the thread. Didn't you use the word thread? What Kathy mentioned last night is it's the same thing with a guy friend. When you find a guy that also really has some similar passions. So you're looking for a woman with some similar passions. And if you see a person with similar passions, and the person just appeals to you. Especially if you, yeah, I would say, honestly, it can be pretty subjective. Because I'm a Calvinist. And years ago when I wasn't, a Calvinist believed in God's sovereignty, that everything happens according to his will. And I went to Kathy in seminary, and she was a convinced Calvinist, and I was not. I thought Calvinism was a cult. I thought it was, you know, I believe in free will. Of course, if you're a smart Calvinist, you believe in free will, and you still believe that God is still in charge. And so you work that out. But I didn't understand that. I remember we were painting somebody's house, somebody's room or something, when I hardly knew her. See, this is how you get to know her. And we were doing something, and she said, well, all I know is, we were talking about Calvinism or something like that. And all of a sudden she said, all I know is if you're a Calvinist and you can't relax about life, what good is it? You know, she says, to her what it meant to be a Calvinist is you can relax. You can just make your choices and move ahead, and you know you're not going to muck up your life. And she was, that was one of the first things I ever heard out of her mouth that gave me a kind of window into her soul. And I said, boy, that's smart, and boy, that's insightful. And she actually, frankly, if you know her, that is, she's still like that. She'll suddenly zing you with these brilliant bits of wisdom. She's not a scholar. She's not really patient enough for that. She doesn't ever read footnotes. She never reads what's in the back. She's cut to the chase, and she oversimplifies things without a doubt. And yet the same, but the, you know, the positive side of a person like that is they just, they can just pull it all together and just say something brilliant and kind of get, summarize the whole book like that. And I saw that, and now, I'm applying that to you. Relax. In other words, you're right. They're out there. Move forward with one that God just happens to put you with in a particular day. And there is an appeal. You know, move forward and say God's going to let it happen. Don't be too afraid of screwing things up. Okay, one or two more. I need to move. I've got to move right, guys. Sorry. I've been doing the left for a while. Yes, sir. Okay. Okay. So, paraphrasing the law, it's taken, you know, if you're in a church, you know, if you don't have sex, I don't have sex, I don't have sex. That led to an opposite problem. My wife hated dating Christians, and they were so... Yeah, right. So what do you do about the sexual impulses when you're waiting? In other words, so how do you keep from burning while you're trying to find somebody to marry? You know, this is funny. The only reason why I'm not right on top of it is I'm 62 years old and I've been married for 37 years. And so I'm trying to remember. And in the dustbins of my memory, I recall that it had a great – I remember reading something that I think worked for me. And that sexual energy – one place I read, sexual energy is just energy. Instead of thinking of sexual energy as something completely unrelated to emotional and physical energy, it's not. So spend yourself physically and emotionally on things and you will find you're not all pent up sexually. It did mean, for example – and I'm sorry, it's going to be – you're going to laugh at me. It does mean exercise, by the way. There's no doubt about that. But it also means just being not bored with life, really putting yourself into things. But honestly, I think that might be a little bit of a thin answer. But to some degree, it's been a while. Seriously. But if you think of energy, not just sexual energy, it's not just sexual energy. I just pan it up. A lot of your sexual energy can be spent. It can be released into other areas that aren't sexual. If you think like that, that might be a fruitful way to go. Okay. All the way in the back. Yeah. I've been a closer to the year for – I catch you. And my church are always 90% when I'm single in women. Yeah. How can we get more better to turn? Why are men afraid of – Yeah, you know, there have been some books written. The question is – well, now, by the way, the women don't think that's your problem. Not really. The point is, most churches are – how do I – the most balanced churches are like 60-40. And the least balanced churches are like 80-20. And that's across the board. We're talking about Catholic, Protestant, Pentecostal. Some of you may know that the bigger the church, the more likely it is to have more men in it. In other words, the percentage of men grows as the church gets bigger. Smaller churches tend to be more – even more predominantly women. I'm not sure why. There have been some books written recently on why men hate church. One thing that helped me a little bit, but it still hasn't made Redeemer 50-50, is that I was told that new churches, because they're very goal-oriented and results-oriented, and big churches tend to have higher percentages of men in them. And so Redeemer is not – you know, nobody walks around saying Redeemer is like three-quarters women. But on the other hand, it's still – the women are very aware of the fact there's more of them. Very aware. And there's still plenty more of them. I think, frankly, guys have to bring their friends. If you – the question, actually, is how do you get more men there? Guys have to bring their friends. I think the – it's also possible that – that we might want to be asking ourselves the question of is there – is there – and I'm part of the New Canaan Society that is over the years. Did you all – some of you are part of it. I know that. You know what it is. It's a men's ministry. There are people who criticize men's ministries, and yet the fact is that there's an awful lot of guys that won't – will open up better if it is a – you know. I think that's even true of younger men, though. I got to stay in touch. I know my – guys my age very often find the church too feminine, and even the sermons will have a tendency to talk too much about feelings and about your emotions. And – but I – at this point, I think the number one answer is you do have to be willing to reach out to your own friends. But there – a church that is like Redeemer, which is fairly young and fairly single, sometimes all you have to do is get your friends to come once, and they'll come back. Just because they look out there and they say, you don't want – you don't want to encourage superficiality, but the fact is that Redeemer looks fairly like a New York church. In other words, it looks young. The people don't – hey, there's a lot of other people here like me. And I think very often, if they think the sermon was better than they thought it would have been, which I hope that every week we give you sermons that non-Christians or kind of, you know, people who are not sure what they believe, if they come, they're going to say, this is better than I thought. The music, the speaking was better than I thought. And I look around, I see an awful lot of other people. And in an urban setting, people like to network and like to meet other people. So if you're willing to stick your neck out and bring male friends, I think we'd have more, I think. Way in the back. Oh, nope. Sorry. Brent bounds. Brent is leaping up here, bounding up here, to tell you what you're doing next.
