TITLE: Ministers and the People
SCRIPTURE: Galatians 4:12-20
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Discipleship and Spiritual Growth Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Galatians: New Freedom, New Family
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/ministers-and-the-people/

============================================================

In your bulletin you've got a place printed out where we have a text from the book of Galatians on which the teaching is based tonight. Would you turn to it? We've been going through the book of Galatians, which is Paul's letter to a group of churches that he planted some years before, and we've been going through it consecutively. Let me read you the passage we get to tonight. Hmm. Guess what? Confession of sins. You know, it's one thing to confess your sins, but it's great to get a chance to confess somebody else's sin. And somebody printed the wrong passage. So here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to read to you from... It's probably a punishment for confessing somebody else's sin. What I want to do is I want to read from Galatians chapter 4, verses 12 to 20. Just one little note, one little number of Galatians chapter 4, verses 12 to 20. It goes like this. This is Paul talking to the Galatians. I plead with you, brethren, become like me, for I became like you. You have done me no wrong. As you know, it was because of an illness that I first preached the gospel to you. And even though my illness was a trial to you, you did not treat me with contempt or scorn. Instead, you welcomed me as if I were an angel of God, as if I were Christ Jesus himself. What has happened to all your joy? I can testify that if you could have done so, you would have torn out your eyes and given them to me. Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth? Those people who are zealous to win you over, but for no good. What they want is to alienate you from us, so that you may be zealous for them. It is fine to be zealous, provided the purpose is good, and to be so always, and not just when I am with you. My dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth, till Christ be formed in you, how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone, because I am perplexed about you. Okay, there it is. I am sorry it is not printed in the bulletin, but it is printed in the Bible. You just have to trust me. Now, actually, I hated preparing this sermon. I am sure I won't hate delivering it. I am sure a lot of you will find it helpful or interesting or intriguing in various ways. But you know, there are sermons and there are sermons. There are passages and there are passages. One of the reasons why it is good and bad to take a book of the Bible and go through it like this consecutively and get to every verse is because you go to verses, you go to passages, and you have to preach on passages that ordinarily you would never choose. I mean, there are some passages that when you are done reading them or done listening to a sermon about them, you say, I have often walked down this street before, but the pavement always stayed beneath my feet before. You know, you feel good, in other words. All at once am I several stories high. There are some passages that build you up and lift you up and send you out. This is a joke. And soar. But this isn't one of them for a couple of reasons. I had a lot of trouble as I prepared it. It's a very, very icky experience because this is about the relationship between people and pastors, between ministers and pastors. Now, there's two reasons why it's very icky. I'll just mention them real briefly. One is, you know, if a parent needs to go in and talk, you know, when I have needed to go in and talk to one of my sons about how he needs to listen to his parents, I mean, it's pretty silly in a way. Why would he listen to a parent telling him about how he needs to listen to a parent? If one of his friends would come in and say, you know what, I used to not listen to my parents, and boy, I got screwed up, and I listen to my parents now, he'll be all ears, you know, wow, I want to hear this. But, you know, for a father to come in and say, you need to listen to your father and your mother, give me a break. Now, there's places in the Bible that say, there's a lot of places in the Bible that talk about the relationship between people and ministers. And unfortunately, they're in the Bible, and the job of a minister is to teach what the Bible says, and so I'm in this situation. I'm in a situation which I've got to talk about something that I'm not, can I trust my motives? Can you trust my motives? I mean, I don't even know if I can trust my own motives. But it's my job. icky. When you look at what the Bible says about what ministers are supposed to be like, it becomes very clear that there's an awful lot of bad ministers. But as soon as you say that, you know, it means I'm talking about other ministers. I mean, maybe not by name more, and hopefully I'll stay very, very far afield of any individuals. But how in the world can I talk about what the Bible says without essentially criticizing other ministers? So it's an extremely icky situation. Nevertheless, we need to plow through. And one of the ways that we can probably, one of the ways in which we can mitigate some of the difficulty would be to remember this. Don't forget that if you care, and if you're a mature enough Christian, or if you're a mature enough individual, if you're an emotionally mature person, there are other folks that you know, that you care about, that you see that they're hurting, or they're messed up, or they're grieved, or they're in denial. And if you have any kind of emotional or spiritual maturity, there are people who you would like to be an agent for change. You'd like to help them change their lives. You'd like to free them. Now, if you don't have anybody around that you ache for, if you don't have anybody around like that, if you don't have anybody they just ache for, and that you would just love to be an agent of change and freedom in their lives, you yourself probably need somebody to minister to you. If you're not in a position, yourself are probably all bound up. If you're not in a position to ache like that, you yourself are just too self-absorbed, and you're too much in denial, and you're too emotionally immature yourself. If that's true, then in some ways, the things that Paul says here do not just apply to professional clergy, but they also apply maybe at a different level, maybe in a different dimension, but they also apply to anybody who wants to be an agent of reconciliation and change and healing in the lives of other people. Now, what Paul is doing here is simply this. There were a group of teachers that had come to these churches that Paul had founded, and those teachers were teaching a very different kind of message. And if you've been coming to the evening service, we've been going through that, and essentially it was this. Paul taught them that you are not saved by what you do, but through faith in Jesus Christ. And these teachers came and said, no, no, no, you'll never please God, you'll never be saved, you'll never be accepted by God unless you obey all the law fastidiously. Now, let me make sure I summarize this again, just for a quick recapitulation. These teachers, these pastors, these ministers taught that Christianity worked this way. They said, believe on Jesus Christ, obey God's law, and then you'll be saved. And Paul had taught them, no, believe on Jesus Christ, you'll be saved, and then you'll obey God's law. In other words, they said belief and obedience go together and result in salvation. And Paul said, no, no, no, belief and salvation go together and result in obedience. And Paul's point all through the book of Galatians is that if you don't, for example, if there's anybody here right now that doesn't understand what the big deal is between those two things, you say, I don't understand the difference. Paul said that those two approaches make all the difference in the world. They're two different religions, they're two different philosophies, they're two different views of reality, and they result in two completely different personalities, two different psychologies, two different sociologies, two different everything. Absolutely different. And Paul's fighting about this, and he's saying to the Galatians, don't do this. Now, he brings up something pretty interesting. The difference between his ministry, when he went to them, and he was a shepherd, and he was a pastor, and he was a minister, and he was a teacher, and a preacher, and a counselor, and he's now contrasting his ministry among them with this group, these other ministers. And what it does is it shows us what the essence of real ministry is, what the relationship between ministers and people should be. And that's what we're going to take a look at. Let's take a look, okay? Number one, the first thing, actually there's two things, but I'm going to put it to you in a nutshell. It's in this verse 12. In this verse, though I'm going to show you the rest, in this verse, you have got an absolutely remarkable little compendium of how to help somebody else change their life. If you can do this with somebody else, you can see their life changed. You can see healing. You can see liberation. And this is what Paul says was his basic philosophy of ministry. I plead with you, brothers, listen, become like me, for I became like you. That's very interesting. He says, become like me, because I became like you. I'll tell you, there's two sides. There's two clauses. There's two sides to that sentence. And only by the power of God can you do both. But if you can do both with the help of God, you can change people's lives. Now, look and see what Paul said. First of all, he says, I became like you. Now, let's not look at the first part. Let's look at the second part first. I became like you. This is remarkable. What he is saying is, when he came to the Galatians, he didn't say, become like me. First, he said, I became like you. This is a way of saying, that he became flexible. He was adaptable. He talks about this another place in the Bible, and that is 1 Corinthians 9, 20 to 22, where he says, he says this, to the Jews, I became as a Jew. To the Greeks, I became as a Greek. To those outside, I became as one outside. To those inside, I became as one inside. To the weak, I became weak. I became all things to all that I might by all means win some. Boy, now, some people really get scared about all that language. But listen, of course, there's qualifications. We'll talk about the qualifications, but let's not talk about the qualifications before we feel the weight of this. When he says, to the Greeks, I became a Greek. To the Jews, I became a Jew. Now, right off the bat, you say, wait a minute. That sounds manipulative. But now look, when he says, to the weak, I became weak. Now, you begin to see, he's not a spinmeister. When he says, to the weak, I became weak. Paul got into people's heads. He learned to get inside their questions. He learned to feel what their feelings were. And he adapted his ministry to their problems, to their needs, to their difficulties, to their issues. He became like one of them. Now, what's fascinating about this is that this statement comes in the middle of the book of Galatians. And if you read the whole book of Galatians, you will know that Paul was absolutely unyielding, inflexible, and hard-nosed about what? About what he calls the gospel. He says the difference between saying, you believe in Jesus Christ, obey the law, and then you're saved, and you believe in Jesus Christ, and then you're saved, and then you obey the law. The difference between saying, I'm saved by my performance, or I'm saved by Jesus' performance. He says, I will die for that. I will fight for that. I will take on the apostle Peter for that, which he did. Let God be true. At one place, he says in the book of Romans, he says, let God be true, and every man a liar. He says, I don't care if all the rest of the apostles stand against me. He says, I don't care if an angel, remember what he says? He says, if an angel from light comes down in the middle of my sermon, and his beams are coming out, and you have to cover your eyes, and in his thunderous voice, the angel says, don't listen to this man. Don't believe the doctrine that we're saved by grace alone. We're not saved by grace and faith alone. We're saved by our performance. What does he say? He says, help me. I'm going to rush that angel. I'm going to choke him. I'm going to kick him. I'm going to throw him out. I'm going to say, I don't care. Experience doesn't matter. This is worth fighting for. This is worth dying for. Now, so he's absolutely inflexible about this, and yet he says that when he came to the Galatians, I became like you. And here's what we learn. The mark that you do understand the gospel, the mark that you do believe you're saved by grace, is that you do not make a federal case out of details anymore. You major in the majors. You don't sweat the details. The mark that you, in your heart, I don't care what you say on the outside, but the mark that in your heart you do not know that God loves you because of Jesus. You are trying very, very desperately to overcome your insecurity. You're trying to patch up a self-esteem. You're trying to make yourself feel worthy of God. The way you can tell that is that you take the details of how a church does things and the details of how a culture works and the details, and you insist on everything being done right, and you will make no changes. Why? It's your way of trying to convince yourself that you're right and other people are wrong, that you're good and other people are bad. And Paul says one of the marks, frankly, of a person whose life has been transformed by the gospel, is that you are absolutely unyielding about the centrality of the gospel. everything else. You know, now, I'm trying to think of some illustrations as I watch the clock go on by, so I got to keep on going here. But, you know, I give you, I think I may have used this once before, but it's an awfully interesting example of this, and that is there was a man who I heard lecture once who had gone to Africa because some missionary agency had asked him to come and consult with them, and what this missionary agency had a problem with is a number of young men had become Christians on the coast, and this missionary agency had sat down and they had discipled them and helped them grow in their Christian faith, and they all said, we want to win others for Christ. And so, what the agency did, the missionaries did, what they said was they trained them to be preachers, and they sent them into the villages of, very often back in the rural areas of Africa, to go into the villages and to gather everybody in the village together in the center of the square or the center of the village and begin to preach the gospel. And they got absolutely nowhere, absolutely nowhere at all. And this man had flown all the way over because the missionaries had asked him to come and consult. So, he sat down with these young men, and they said, oh, it's terrible. Nobody believes, you know, they just won't listen. And we say, what's the problem? He says, and he says, well, here's the problem, is that in our culture, whenever you gather the village together and you begin to preach, it is incredibly rude for younger people to speak first. Whenever you get the village together, it's absolutely necessary, no matter what the subject, no matter what the topic, that the one or two or three oldest people in the village should get up and speak first. So, whenever I get people together to tell them about the gospel, of course, everybody says, well, let so-and-so and so-and-so and so-and-so say what they think about Jesus. And so, the consultant says, well, what do you do? And so, well, we don't do that. We don't let them do it. That's why everybody's insulted. Everybody's upset. Because some young man, and the consultant says, why not? Well, the missionary said, we must never let a non-Christian get up at a Christian service and say something. Why not? Well, that would compromise the gospel. I mean, that's not how you'd preach. Now, listen, listen. There's nothing in the Bible that says anything about that. Nothing at all. In fact, if you read the gospels, you'll see that Jesus Christ, very often when he preached, was dialoguing with people. He would ask a question. People would say something. Then he'd respond. But what happens is we get locked into our ways. We say, there's one way to do things. We've got to do it. It's not just the gospel. It's everything else. And what we do, when you add things to the gospel, you subtract from the gospel. When you say it's not enough just to believe in Jesus Christ, but you have to do all these other things right or you're not really a Christian, you can't add without subtracting. You ruin it. You destroy it. It can't be altered at all. And that's why Paul says, if you understand the gospel, you are a flexible person. But on the other hand, he says, because I became like you, I want you to become like me. He came and he adapted. He came and he he learned. He came and he fit in. Like Jesus Christ himself, he was incarnate. Jesus Christ did not come as just a supernatural being. He became flesh. He became one of us. He became somebody you could hug. And now what happens is Paul says, I did that and now you become like me. Now, this is a, this takes my breath away. Because here what he's saying is not just the gospel ministry is flexible and adaptable, but it is normative. When he says, become like me, he's saying two very breathtaking things. First of all, he is saying, I'm not going to let you stay the way you are. I'm going to make you change. I'm going to press you to change. I'm going to call you to change. I'm going to urge you to change. I'm not going to let you stay as you are. And worse than that, even more breathtaking, he says, I have come to embody the kind of life that I want you to live. Now, the reason it takes my breath away is because there isn't anybody without, I've said this before, without the power of God who can say both these things with integrity. This is not the natural way any of us are. On the one hand, some of us are wounded healers. Some of us are affirming, non-confronting, open about our weaknesses. I'm a sinner, you're a sinner. We just want to affirm and we want to love and we don't like to press. We don't like to push. And other people are demanding discipline, demanding of themselves, demanding of other people. And really nobody puts all this together. See, nobody in our natural temperament comes and says, become like me because I became like Thank you. become like me. I'm waiting, become like me, see? Or, I became like you. And now I'm just sort of struggling right alongside of you, trudging along in a swamp, sinking along with you. No, this is not what Paul says. He says, become like me because I became like you. How can you possibly be a kind of person who's able to really say this? Say it well, live it out. How can you become somebody who is so incredibly humble, respectful, somebody who doesn't sweat the details, so that people feel like I could share, they could share anything with you, that you will not come down their throat, you won't get all upset with them, that you'll be understanding? How can you be that approachable? And yet, on the other hand, be so doggone strong, so poised, so joyful, that people that you may, as Jack Nicholson said in his recent movie, you make me want to be a better man. Have you seen the movie? Maybe this is as good as it gets. And at one point, you know, he's obsessive-compulsive, and he just cannot possibly give a compliment. All he does is insult. And at one point, Helen Hunt says, I want a compliment. You know, basically, I think she's so mad at him, she gives him a, you know, she gives him an ultimate, and she says, you got three minutes to give me a compliment, or one minute, or something like that. And he looks at him, and he says, you know, the, you know, finally he comes out, and he says, you make me want to be a better man. She's blown away. There isn't any better thing than anybody could ever say to you. But how in the world can you become a person like this? I'll tell you. It's very simple. And basically, it's the theme of the whole book of Galatians. Do you believe you're saved by grace? Do you believe that though you're a horrible sinner, when you have faith in Jesus Christ, before and actually before, and apart from you cleaning up your life, you don't give God a righteousness, he gives you a righteousness. So when you believe in Christ, you're absolutely accepted in his sight and loved, even though you're a sinner. If you believe that, fine. Put you aside for a second. If you don't, then when you're living up to your standards, you'll be humble. You'll be bold, excuse me, and you'll be confident, but you won't be humble and loving and understanding. And when you're failing your standards, you will be what? You'll be so humble and understanding to other people, but you won't be confident and joyful. And therefore, you will either be in a position, when you're living up to your standards, to say, become like me, or when you're failing your standards, whatever they are, I'm talking about whatever they are, when you're failing your standards, you'll say, I've become like you, you see. But only in the gospel do you feel like a sinner and like a million bucks at the same time. Only in the gospel are you both bold and humble at the same time. Have you heard this before? Only the gospel can create that kind of duality in your nature. Supernaturally, it's the only way possible. And when that happens, and to the degree it happens, you can, on the one hand, enter into people's lives with that humility and with that respect, with not a shred of superiority, and at the same time have a joy and a freedom in your own life, a freedom from self-righteousness, a freedom from needing to live up, a freedom, as we talked about last week, a freedom from creating idols, ways of things to worship, things to try to use in order to make yourself feel better about yourself. You're free from all that. You're humbled, but you're free. And as a result, you can say, become like me because I became like you. And when you can say that, you will change people's lives. You will utterly change them. Now, so far, you noticed, I have actually applied it as much as I possibly can to you. Now, I've got to pull back for a second. Paul says, ministers need to do both. And I must tell you that it's very, very tough. Here's what you need. And first of all, let me do some application here. Number one, this whole text, which unfortunately is not printed before you, but is here, this whole text, first of all, tells you that you need ministers. You need teachers. You need preachers. And you need other Christians who aren't necessarily clergy, but who are, but have the gospel in the center of their lives. There's a place in Hebrews chapter 13, where it says, obey your leaders and submit to them, for they're keeping watch over your soul. And it says, do not make them do their job with groaning, for that would be of no benefit to you. Do not make them do their job with groaning, there. them for they're keeping watch over your soul. And it says, do not make them do their job with groaning for that would be of no benefit to you. It's a great verse. And I've often preached whole sermons on the verse, but here's what it means. You need to have somebody who's ahead of you in the gospel to whom you're accountable. How can you obey that verse? Unless you're in some kind of relationship, unless you've gone to somebody, either unless you've joined a church or you've joined a church where you really look at the leaders, you look at the pastor, you look at the elders, you look at the deacons, the deaconesses, you look at the small group leader, you look at the leaders and you say, these are people who are further than me in the gospel and I want to be accountable for my life. You have to have somebody like that or you're disobeying the gospel, you're disobeying what the Bible says. Do you have them? You need them. Okay? That's the first thing. Secondly, and here's where I get kind of icky. Here's where I get kind of icky. Have you not noticed that by and large, the conservative brand of Christianity is filled with ministry said, who say, become like me, but they don't become like you. See, become like me, come to me, but they don't adapt. They're not that understanding. They're very rigid. They're very demanding. They're very condemning. And is it not true? I'm not talking just about clergy, but isn't it true that the leaders of conservative, but the leaders of the liberal mainline churches have become like you, but they don't say become like me. They say, well, who am I? I'm just a sinner. I'm falling down. I'm having all these problems in my life. It doesn't make any difference. Who's to say what's right? I'm just here with you slogging away. Don't you see that you really can't have either kind? Both of them are bad for your souls. You have to look for the kind that can say both of these things. Therefore, you have to look for the kind that understand the gospel. And thirdly, okay, so the first thing is you've got to have them. And this is not an easy, you know, I've had a number of people come to me and say, I come to Redeemer in the evening service, but I go to another church in the morning. Is that all right? Now, by the way, I happen to know that I'm, even though I haven't done a survey, something like 25% of you are in that boat. And I always say, it's fine. Absolutely fine. I got no problem. The body of Christ is bigger than any one church. We're not turf conscious and all that. But I always say, to whom in the end are you accountable? Some church, some place you've got to say, you're my church, I'm yours. It's in other words, you have watch over my soul. There's got to be someplace. And boy, I tell you something, modern people don't want this. Single people don't want this. New Yorkers don't want this. And the Bible says you need it. Secondly, you need this kind, as I said, become like me because I became like you. But then thirdly, now, and this is for especially ministers or people training for the professional ministry, but it's also true for all of you who want to be agents of reconciliation in other people's lives. Look at what Paul says at the end. He says, it is fine to be zealous, but I said, my dear children, for whom I am again in the pains of childbirth until Christ is formed in you, how I wish I could be with you now and change my tone because I am perplexed about you. Oh, dear, you're looking into an abyss. Let's be honest about this. This is the, look at, he says, my dear children, for whom I am again in the pain of childbirth till Christ is formed in you. Wow. Isn't that interesting language for a guy? Do you see what he's talking about? Listen, I, I kind of know. I'm very, very closely related to a woman that's had three children. Only, well, related to her by marriage, but very close. And my wife, of course. And I remember not long after the first child was born, and the first child can be pretty tough. I remember one time she just bowed her head. She says, you know, you know the place where, where, uh, uh, Garrison Keillor talks about the Catholic church in his little town in Lake Wobegon, and he calls it, uh, Our Lady of Perpetual Responsibility. Do you know that? And I remember one time Kathy just bowed her head, and she says, you know, it's like, I feel like my life's over. And I, she said, I was, I talked to her and said, why? I says, first of all, it's the responsibility. She says, there's nobody to give this kid to. There's nobody to say, here, I want to go home now. But more than that, and you know, uh, it was more than that. And of course, to some degree, at least at that stage, more of the day-to-day responsibilities of a child were falling on her than me. But the thing that I found that was, that she, she found first, and I found second, but you do find, once, once you have children, there's, there goes your heart. Your heart doesn't belong to you anymore. It's an awful thing, but you can never be happy again unless your kids are happy. Thank you. how hard you try, and this is a frightening thing because your children actually, at least when they're little, they're sort of under your control. And I mean, you have certain amount of control, but of course, as you get up, guess what? Your heart is no less bound up with them. Your heart's gone in a sense. Your heart is there with them. If they're unhappy, you cannot possibly be happy. You cannot feel safe. You cannot be happy unless they are. You've given your heart away. Now, there's a place in 1 Thessalonians that I pulled this out. The only farewell sermon I ever gave and the only farewell sermon I will ever give, I think, is a church in Virginia that I left in 1984, and I wrote a farewell sermon. And I wrote it and I preached it on 1 Thessalonians chapter 2 to chapter 3, but I was especially concerned about chapter 3, verse 2, where it says, now we live because you stand firm in the Lord. And you know what the opposite of that is? When I read that, it went right through me. And I had kids by then. I had three by then. And I suddenly realized what Paul was saying. He's writing the Thessalonians and he says, I got good news. I understand that you're standing firm in the Lord and you're growing and you're free and you're, you're in, and you know, you're, there's joy in your life and you're dealing with your problems. And he says, when I got the message, now I live because of I heard you stand fast in the Lord. But you know what that means? It means if you're a minister and you have, when you become a minister, it's like becoming a mother, your heart is gone. Your heart goes to the children. And if your children are unhappy, you die. And there's nothing you can do about it. Nothing at all. And if you want to be an agent of change in people's lives, you will lose your heart. Paul says, I am in labor until Christ is formed in you. It's a, it's, it's a, it's a wild mixed metaphor. It's unbelievable. You know, usually when you're in, you're in labor because, because the child's been formed in you. And, and Paul sticks all these crazy spiritual metaphors together and says, but what it means is God has deemed in his wisdom and in his grace to not work directly on people's souls, but to work through other human beings, men and women, lay and clergy, see, preachers and small group leaders, and just plain old fashioned spiritual friends who through the gospel can say, become like me because I've become like you. But if you get involved in that kind of relationship, say goodbye to your heart. Because the people that you're working with, if they, if they don't stand firm, you just die. But don't forget what C.S. Lewis says, if you don't want your heart broken, don't give it. Wrap it up in a casket of selfishness. And in that casket, it will stay. It will not be broken. Remember? He says, it will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The only alternative to ministry is hell. And therefore, find yourself some people who can be over you in the Lord, who got the gospel in their heart better than you have in your heart, who can say these things. And then, as you grow, let yourself be one of these people, recognizing that you need people in your life who love you so much that you can kill them with your bad spiritual, with your bad spiritual response, or make their hearts burst with joy by your growth. You want a person like that to oversee you, and nobody less than that. But on the other hand, become a person like that. Why? Because Jesus is like that. You'll never really ultimately know Jesus unless you're willing to get involved in ministry. You know that great place, boy, you know, that place in John chapter 17, where Jesus Christ says, Father, he's praying, and he says, Father, Father, for their sakes, I sanctify myself. And that word, that phrase means, to sanctify means literally, to set yourself apart. You know, we just saw, we had the Olympics. And if you want to get to the Olympics, and if you want to get a medal in the Olympics, you have to sanctify yourself for it. What does that mean? It means you set yourself apart for it. It means you eat it, you breathe it, you dream it, you sleep it. Everything comes before that, I mean, after that. That comes first. You sanctify yourself. The Bible says that Jesus Christ, the great God of heaven and earth, the creator, the stars flit through his fingers like sand. He's that great, and yet he has bound his heart up. He's with you. He lives for you now. Sanctify means he lives for you. for your glory. He lives for your holiness. He lives for your happiness. You are what he is doing everything for. I could show you this from the Scripture, but I don't have the time right now. And when you know that he has literally died so that you could stand firm in the Lord, you won't mind the little teeny deaths that happen when you follow in his footsteps, and you set yourself apart for people, and you give yourself to people, and you see people change through you, and you also see people hurt you and wring your heart. Because it's the only way you're ever going to get to know him is if you become like him. And the only way you'll ever get the power for doing it is if you know him. But he'll give you more than enough. And for all the pain of child, you know, of travail, there is the absolute joy of parenthood. And there's nothing like it in the world. You need ministers like this. You need to be a minister like this. You have a minister like this. Praise his name. Let's pray. We thank you, Father, that you, that we know that Jesus Christ is that minister who we all have. Redeemer has that minister, and it's not me. All Christians have that minister. Now we pray, Father, that you would show us how we can be ministers, and we also pray that, we pray for across this country that you would raise up both at the lay level and at the clerical level, people who truly can by the gospel say, become like me, for I've become like you. We ask that you would make us a kingdom of priests, a royal priesthood, a holy nation. And Father, we thank you for the men and women in our lives. Right now, we would all like to take a moment to thank you for the people without whom we would not know you. We would not be maybe here today. Our lives might be in ruins without them. We thank you for them. Make us like your son who came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many. In his name we pray. Amen.
