TITLE: Modern Identities (Q&A)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/modern-identities-qa/

============================================================

My name is Melissa Wahaby. I've been in New York for about nine years. Formally affiliated with Eastside. I'll be moving to Brooklyn soon, so I'll see more of you downtowners. I work for the State Department. I'm fine. I'm fine. Thanks. Before that, I was an Air Force officer, and so kind of have lots of identity issues in a lot of ways, so we'll talk about that later. We can help. Yeah, thanks, Tim. My name is Jonathan Agrilius. I work here in the city as a real estate sales agent. I've been here for about nine, almost ten years, and I go to the Upper East Side, a member there. Great. I'm Chantal Kim. I live in Brooklyn. As you can tell from my accent, I didn't grow up in Brooklyn. I'm a Korean Brit. I've been here six years, and I go to the downtown Redeemer Church. Great. Well, thank you. Thank you so much for helping us out tonight. So we're just going to fire questions at you, Tim. Let me just start with one, and then I'll let them ask for the remainder of the time. You mentioned at the beginning that you can grow up in the church, be exposed to Christianity, and yet have your identity primarily absorbed or shaped by the culture. You've been in New York for almost 30 years. Where do you feel like the primary disconnect is as you look out on the church, and where are ways that we are blind, maybe, to the ways in which we say one thing but are living out of that modern identity? Well, I sure hope the other questions are easier, David. I do think partly the way in which we teach doctrine, doctrine needs to be taught over and against the other. In other words, if you could say, when Jesus, in the Sermon on the Mount, when Jesus, before he says, I say unto you, he says, you've heard it said. So what he does is he doesn't just say, this is the truth. He contrasts it with the current view of the issue he's going to talk about. So he says, this is wrong, this is right. I don't think we do a very good job of showing, what did they say? When we teach our catechism, we don't tell our own kids what the world's catechism is. The fact is, the world actually has a catechism. It's got a bunch of questions and answers about identity, about happiness, about freedom, about truth, about morality. And we ought to be actually showing them, here's the catechism. Nobody's ever going to show it to you. You know, if you're a Christian in a Hindu country, Hinduism will say, here's what we believe. If you're a Christian in a Muslim country, the Muslim country, here's what we believe. If you're a Christian in a secular country, the secular people say, oh, we don't believe anything. We just see things as they are. We don't have faith. That's just not true. There's a whole set of moral values that are being imposed, as it were. And I think that when we teach our kids, here's the Christian catechism, you know, who is God and what is Jesus and all that. But we don't actually teach them the world's catechism. Then they don't see how this actually undermines this. And then when they watch a movie or something, they won't recognize they're being catechized. And therefore, they won't see what the connection is between the Christian doctrine and how it actually addresses what they're watching on TV or in the movie. And it comes in to the heart. You know, it doesn't come in up here. It comes in through the imagination. And then they have got no, how do I say it? They've got no defenses against it. And then after a while, they don't realize it because their imagination has been catechized by the world. Next thing you know, they say, well, the Christian beliefs just don't seem very plausible anymore. So I think it's partly, you know, part of the way we do information has not taken into consideration what the world, how the world is doing it, too. So there's an idea. Right. So the church has an apostle's creed, but the culture has a creed. It does. And we need to let people know both the creeds. Right. So they understand. And that's partly what we're doing this week. I mean, this weekend. Yes. Great. Thank you. Just to follow up on that, you talked about duty and desire. And in a way, I almost feel a little bipolar about it. I did mention, you know, being in the Air Force before. And we have this great honor and acclaim for those who serve and a significant amount of grief for those who die in service. At the same time, we also idolize those who come from a place of nothing, and they've built something, they've invented something, they've really made something. And we, as a society, really like both. We enjoy both and we idolize both. We talk about the church, right, and how the way we teach ourselves these things. As the church, is it our job to kind of like buck against this current system of modern identity or to embrace it because we're kind of, this is the world we live in, and we should learn how to communicate in it to ourselves and also to those outside of the church? Can you help, please? Yeah, well, I mean, what I, I, what I, I'll start right off to Mar and say, we, you cannot live in a modern world without to some degree having a modern identity. It's just impossible. And what you're actually describing is the military does have a traditional identity. It is, it's got the honor thing that actually the culture doesn't have anymore, but you're modern people inside the military. And so what you're describing is what I think all of us have to deal with, and that is if you, we're modern people inside the church. So the church, I'm going to show you, is neither a traditional or a modern identity, but nevertheless, when Paul says put off the old self and put on the new, I think he's assuming that you've got an old self, that it never actually completely goes away, that you, you're always negotiating it. You should never think that somehow you can put it away permanently. In fact, you just can't. But here's, here's, let me muddy the waters now, Melissa. They're very muddy. Well, the muddy the waters is the fact that the modern identity and the traditional identity are not all wrong. See, I mean, I'm going to be showing you, here's the traditional, here's the modern, here's the Christian. And at the bottom, they're different. But there's actually a lot of overlap. So you really shouldn't think of them as three columns. You should actually think of them as three different roots, but they actually, there is in the Christian, you know, identity a place for honor. And there actually is in the Christian identity a place for satisfaction of desires. And what I'll mention tomorrow, but briefly here, Augustine writes the confessions. When Augustine writes the confessions, it's the first book in the history of the world to go inside and explore the feelings. Because, you see, traditional, ancient identities always said your feelings matter nothing. Not, in fact, they just get in the way of honor. So just forget it. Why would you explore that? They're just problems anyway. Why, you know, Augustine comes in and he says the problem is not that we have desires. The problem is they're not properly ordered. That there's nothing wrong with having these passions as long as God is your supreme passion. And then when God is your supreme desire, then the other desires fall into line. They stop eating you up and they actually all get, they get more satisfied. So Augustine was weird because he understood that whereas a Christian identity was different, at the same time it wasn't, when you read Augustine, you see there is a place for feeling. And there is a place for passion. And there is a place for desire. As long as it doesn't, as long as God is still the final, frankly, God has to be the decisive validator. So I'm muddying the waters by saying the modern identity is not all bad. We're always going to have to be negotiating the fact that we've got a modern identity. When I talk to Christians from China, I see that the Christianity has relativized and sweetened their traditional identity. And I'm a modern person and I see that what my Christianity has done is put some backbone in my modern identity. But we really are still somewhat different. So it's never, it's not going to be as easy as I'm making out. As a teacher, I've got to say, traditional, modern, Christian, categories, you know, charts. But the reality is they overlap and they're not, there's a lot of common grace in a traditional and in a modern identity that you don't want to lose. So the reality is you have to take on a case-by-case basis and try to more and more live into the Christian identity. So, but you've got three things. You're modern, Christian, and you've got the military background. So I'd be happy to keep talking with you. Yeah, we've got issues. We've discussed that. Yeah, I know. No, don't, I won't. Anyway. Tim, you talked about the way to maybe combat that is to have like, to understand the world's catechism in a sense of what they're teaching. Over and against what it is that's, what's different that's being offered through the church or through knowing Christ. Like, why would that be attractive? And when you say the word catechism, in my mind, I'm obviously thinking, oh, this is question and answer, question and answer, question and answer, question and answer. It's like school and not a whole lot of fun. But yet, the world's catechism. a movie. Or Twitter. And that is question and answer almost. It is, but it's told to like a storytelling medium, which is very imaginative. And so I feel like, would it be possible if, as the church, as Christian believers, we understood what it meant to have a Christian imagination? And the larger cosmic narrative that we are part of, not just the little aspect of time that we exist and define, but the larger narrative from the creation all the way towards when Christ returns again. If we understood that more, would that be something that would totally change the way we interact with this world and identify? I think so. I know that in my formation, I've needed both. I've needed both the propositions, the question and answer, and the story. There's a famous place, I found it the other day, I knew she said it somewhere, Flannery O'Connor, who wrote great stories, somebody once said to her, she hadn't read the story, but she wanted to know, what is the message of the short story? Could you put it in a nutshell? And Flannery O'Connor said, if I could have put it in a nutshell, I wouldn't have written, I wouldn't have had to write the story. And her point was, the story gets across more meaning than you can put in a nutshell. So if you try to boil a story down into a proposition, and you read the story and read the proposition, you say, yeah, okay, that's helpful. And yet, the story is more powerful than the proposition. It enfleshes it. So you need both, I think. And therefore, you need a catechism, but you also need to say, here's the world's story. I mean, the world does have a story. I will put up a chart tomorrow. It's not all that illuminating. I'm going to give you a couple slides tomorrow. The world has a story. It's not the biblical story. And that's another way, I think, to train people. I do. I do think that you're absolutely right. And again, this is all part of formation. But it can't just be, you're totally right in saying, I've been saying that training people is not just a matter of teaching biblical doctrine. You have to talk about what the world teaches. You're saying, and it also can't be a bunch of bullet points. It also has to be story. Because then it's just traditional culture. Like, I understand the duty. I know the right answer is, therefore, I'm accepted by it. With no real change in how I see myself or others. Right. It really resonated with me when you said that many of us hold our Christian identity with our left hand. But it's actually our culture that dictates our identity. Right. And I think the most recent and significant example of that was the recent political elections, where we saw political identity very much influencing many people's gospel identity. So much so that we could even argue that gospel, sorry, our political identity became the more dominant identity. And so, I guess my question is, I wonder how we go about reversing that, especially when the church itself is fragmented and influenced by the cultural context that they're in. How do we go about making our gospel identity, you know, the top, the dominant identity that influences all our other identities? Well, in some ways, it's the processes we talk about tomorrow. All the practices that we're talking about this year in formation are ways of immersing you in your gospel identity. But let me talk to you about the politics for a second. I'm actually going to get to politics in spite of this illustration. And I have talked to men, especially, it seems like in the last couple of years I've talked to a couple like this. They were in the church for a long time. They seemed to understand. I'm not even questioning their Christianity, their Christian faith. But they got to a certain place where I discovered that they were having an affair and they were about to leave their wife of many years and go with another woman. And I would talk to them. And in both times, they said to me, I really believe in the end because I believe in a God of love and I believe God wants me to be happy. I know, you know, God just wants me to, I'm just sure God's not displeased with me. He wants me to be happy. Now, there's a person who, in spite of the fact that had all the doctrine, was in the church for many years, I'm not really questioning their, even their validity, their Christian faith. That's a modern identity. I mean, that's really saying, you know what, I made a promise and I'm not happy with her and I really can't. However, Jesus is not my significance and security because I'm putting that, that's kind of negotiable. My Christian faith is kind of negotiable. I got to have this woman because she makes me. What you've done is you've taken something that really is more important to you for your significance and security than Christ, okay? In politics, in a Christian identity, your politics is a way to serve your country, and a way to serve your neighborhood, and a way to serve people. You get involved because you think it'll make this a better place. But when you actually come to really despise the other side, really despise, so much so that you will, you know, you feel like anything but her, or anything but him, what you've actually done is your politics have actually started to become too much of your identity. You might say, how does that relate to that guy who is leaving his wife? What it means is your politics are no longer just a way to serve. They've actually become too much who you are. And I really do think that, look, you're a Christian first, and you're a conservative or a liberal second. You're a Christian first, and you're Asian or you're African or you're white second. And the stronger, the more the formation and the practices take you into your Christian faith, the more those things become good in your life but not the ultimate. And what that means is if I despise somebody from another race, then my race is too high up. It's too much my identity. In Christianity, Christ is not my identity. My race should be part of who I am, but it shouldn't be up that high. My politics should be part of who I am, and it shouldn't be up that high. But when I get to the place where I'm actually despising people in the other party, just hating them, or when I'm despising or looking down at people of another race, then basically I've got to go back to the practice. I've got to go back to devotion. I remember the practice. I've got to go back to devotion and worship and accountability and hospitality and Sabbath and all the practices until I get Jesus where he should be in my life. And so, yeah, I've certainly right now, and one of the other problems, of course, is the language of Christianity is being used. It's been weaponized for partisan ends. And Christians cannot say anything that unites people right now. You know, it's a terrible situation to be in where I actually can't even talk about, you know, you have to be saved through Jesus Christ. Right now, that sounds, in America, like a political position. Can you talk about that a little bit? Because it is a frustration, certainly for me, perhaps others, about aligning yourself with this label now that conjures up disgust amongst so many people. I don't know if it's a, it's not necessarily a modern identity issue, but it is a label and it's, it's a, you know, it's a relationship that I'm proud of. But at the same time, it's now become divisive and it's hard to be winsome in this environment. Yeah, I, you know what, put it this way, if you are too combative, I think a person, a Christian that I see, Christians I see are just too combative in the culture wars. I do think that what's happened is their identity is, they've identified too much with a conservative or a liberal or a political party. We just talked about that. On the other hand, if you're too afraid to take the hit, if you're afraid to talk about your Christianity, you don't have to use the buzzwords, but, but you know, if you talk about the authority of the Bible, if you talk about believing in Christ, in other words, if you just even talk about Christianity in a place like New York, you're going to take a hit. And if you're afraid to do that, then you might be also not living into your Christian identity because you've, if it matters too much what people think about you or that you're, you know, this is New York, there's all these inner rings everywhere. And, and also so much of our, so many of your jobs are dependent on relationships here and you don't want to get tagged. And yet you've got to be willing to say, I go to church. You've got to be willing to, in a non, in as winsome a way as possible, you know, be willing to identify yourself as a Christian. So I say on the one hand, if you identify too much with a partisan position, I think that, that your Christian identity has been compromised. On the other hand, if you are afraid, and I am, I'll just let you know, I am. And even though, you know, I'm a professional Christian, so some people might say, some people might say, well, you have to be like that. But anyway, I'm also, I'm intimidated just like everybody else. It's never, I've never been in a atmosphere like this, but you, you still have to just be willing to swallow and, you know, ask Jesus to help you and just be willing to. believe. Would the flip side of that, Tim, be also, maybe this will be part of the conference in February, because it is a new, I mean, I've been here almost longer than you, I guess, and that just the vocabulary necessary to live out your faith is different now than it was even 25, 30 years ago, and there's a sense in which not only maybe if you hold the Christian position, you feel somewhat silenced, but there's also a self-awareness that you don't really know how to communicate it. So the point is, is there a way in which we have to train ourselves with a whole new way of communicating the truth of this gospel? Because it seems like there is an opportunity, like Paul, when the church was started, one, the traditional group said it's a stumbling block, you know, the other group said it's foolishness, but he was in the synagogue one minute and he was in the public square the next. It seems like there's an opportunity in the public square, because there's a bit of a vacuum at the moment, because it is such a fragile situation to come in with a story that isn't threatening. And so I think for us to narrate and live out that story, there is maybe an unprecedented opportunity that we haven't had before, but we just don't, both the courage and the vocabulary to enter into it, it seems like, is the next level of... I think you're right. Those are both problems, the courage and the vocabulary. I think we sometimes hide behind, we're not even trying to find the vocabulary, partly because we don't have the courage. So probably the courage is the bigger problem. But I have to say, vocabulary is a bit of a problem. But let me, as modestly as possible, say that this weekend is trying to consider a way of using the term identity, which is not the way most Christians talk to non-believers, about saying, look, you know, for example, to say, your society has told you this is the way to get an identity, an identity, a sense of worth. Here are the problems with it. And by the way, the problems are, the criticism of it is not just a Christian criticism. It's a criticism that comes from a lot of people who are right in the midst of it. And here's the Christian identity, which we're going to talk about tomorrow, gospel identity. Look how stable it is because it's based, it's on something, it's received, not achieved. And also, look at how it equips you to really respect the people who disagree with you. And so if you actually start saying, without God, you are forced to get your significant security from your performance. And it creates a fragile identity that actually has trouble with people who are different. And that the gospel, if properly grasped, gives you an identity that's remarkably stable, that the person you adore most in the universe adores you. It actually reorders your desires. It doesn't tell you just to stifle them. So we're not talking about, oh, don't have a modern identity, just become traditional. It actually does not say stuff your desires, it says fulfill your desires. And it also puts you in a position where you actually are able to deal with people who are different because the gospel both humbles and and yet affirms you at the same time. Now, what I just did there, I'm not saying that's exactly what you say, but that's a whole set of different, that's a vocabulary. And you're using the vocabulary of identity. I do think it's, the Bible talks about putting on the old self, putting on the new self, putting off the old new. So it's not like I'm imposing something on the Bible. So I would say it's not the only way to talk to people, but this, I'm actually trying to give you some categories by which you can say, here's why I believe what I believe. And you're also not trying to say, I'm right and you're wrong. It's actually a way for Christians to say, I've got resources that I haven't found anywhere else for living a life of stability, getting a sense of self-worth that just is not up and down all the time and enables me to speak civilly to people who disagree with me deeply. And that's a testimony that I think has traction. And maybe to your point, Chantal, that's the rub for a lot of people, right? Because maybe they hear that, but they don't necessarily see that lived out by people who claim to be Christians. Yeah. You may be covering this tomorrow, but I guess the political divide has just highlighted the different interpretations of what your gospel identity should look like. And I wonder whether that's something that you'll be covering more explicitly. Maybe not. You want to ask me? Just take what little we have. Could you ask me something now to, because I'm not sure I will get to it? Well, I guess just... like what it actually looks like to live out you know the and as obvious as it should be there is different interpretations of what our christian values should look like and how they should be lived out um could you give me an example or two as a part of of the you know a place where there's disagreement over um with the mic um i guess um for example for example um issues such as immigration um and um the different ways that people view um this particular topic yeah look i i would say without throwing an entire group of people under the bus so i guess i guess i'm not really throwing one of the bus so i am stepping on toes it's not quite the same thing the bus kills you the toes um i would say look as a as a as a you know as a white man older white man if i had stayed in a completely mono-ethnic homogeneous situation i probably would not have learned or found out a lot of the resources the gospel has to help you work with people who are different uh because i wouldn't have needed it's like it would be it's sort of like a muscle in the gospel i never had to i never had a flex just didn't have to and uh you come to a place we will talk about this tomorrow so i'll just mention it here though uh you get to a place as a white man because i have a i have this bond in christ with us a a poor black woman and i can because of my common christianity i can realize this person has a better prayer life and has more faith than me if we if i wasn't a christian i would not be able to to probably be in a position to learn from her because i would say you know my identity is based in accomplishment blah blah blah and you don't have it i have it but if my identity is in is is in faith in christ i see she's actually got more faith in christ than me i'll sit there and i listen to her now once i listen to her and i begin to learn that that spills over into the way in which i look at all black people because i've actually learned from a sister in christ something that i would never have learned otherwise that spills over in my way of thinking about the whole thing the whole the whole country and all the policy and i guess without being too nasty to the people who live in more homogeneous parts of the country who are christians who are born again christians i don't feel like they've they've they've tapped that resource they didn't have to that doesn't mean they're okay it doesn't mean it's right that doesn't mean there's nothing wrong but i'm saying i also understand why they wouldn't have and that that's the when you talk about um attitude toward immigration i know that it has a whole lot to do with who your friends are and who you've spent time with and and and how multi frankly how uh diverse your your relationships have been and christians have never had that then they they don't realize what the gospel can do but i actually do believe that any real christian no matter where they are no matter what their position is that that that that um what i just talked about you know what's happened to me could happen to anybody who's a christian no matter who you are and it would take the edge off and it would take a lot of the pride away but i think a lot of folks just haven't had the experience for the gospel to do that to them and therefore they haven't lived into their gospel identity no and they don't know that but at the same time they don't know that so they they don't they don't know what we're talking about probably if they heard if they if they're hearing this live streaming so does that answer a little bit but i will actually talk more about that tomorrow which is a good place to end
