TITLE: Modern Identities
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Identity Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/modern-identities-2/

============================================================

Hi, I'm Tim, I used to work here, so let's go to work. Why are we talking about this subject at all, why? In every culture, or put it this way, every culture without our permission and without naming it as such, imposes an identity formation process on you, its members. Every culture without asking permission, without actually ever even calling it this, every culture pushes on you, imposes on you a particular identity formation process. And one of the reasons we're here tonight is to try to make that visible, make it visible. An identity process is a process by which you get a sense of who you are and a sense of your value. You get a sense of self, who am I, and a sense of value. Is what I am, does it count? And everybody has to get that. And I mean, 500 years ago, nobody used the word identity, nobody talked about finding themselves, but they were, using the script of their particular culture. And today, we think we're finding ourselves, we think we're determining who we are, but we are also working off the script of a particular culture, which is imposing its process on us. So we're going to make that visible. We're going to be talking about how that actually happens here in our culture, so that you will not just be swept along by it, so you won't just be sheep. And if you are a Christian here tonight, or this weekend, the reason you need to understand this is because I would think you would want to become more like Christ. That's why we're called Christians. We want to more and more become like Christ. But what actually happens for most of us, for actually all of us in some ways, is with our left hand, we hold on to our Christian beliefs. With our right hand, we let the culture shape our identity. So we let the gospel flit around at the top of our heads, but we actually get our identity from the cultural script down in our hearts. And by the way, for younger people, what happens is, if you grow up in a church, and many of you've experienced this, you grow up in a church, and you learn the Christian ethics, you learn the Ten Commandments, you learn the Apostles' Creed, you learn the beliefs, and you hold them with one hand, but meanwhile, you actually let the modern culture give you your identity. Or you find your identity using that script. And more and more, as you get older, Christianity somehow seems implausible. It just doesn't seem to make as much sense. It's because you actually haven't actually let Christianity affect, or in a sense, intervene and short-circuit what the culture is trying to do to you. So to become a Christian is actually not just simply to believe the gospel, but to let the gospel short-circuit the modern identity formation that's going to happen just because we live here. Only as you stop allowing yourself to be pulled into modern identities, and more and more live into and out of your identity in Christ, it's only as you do that do you actually become like Christ. Are you following me? When Paul says in Ephesians 4, 24, he says, put off the old self and put on the new self. He's talking to Christians. What does that mean? It means that becoming more and more like Christ is to recognize the fact that you're being pulled into old identities that your culture has given you, and live more and more into and out of the new identity you have in Christ. And that's what it means to grow as a Christian. That's what formation is. And if you're not a Christian, if you're here and you're not sure if you're a Christian or you know you're not a Christian and you're here, this actually is very relevant to you too. Why? Well, if you asked me, why should I believe Christianity? If I was here to tell you this tonight, I would at least, I would certainly name this. And that is to say, one of the best reasons to be a Christian is because Christianity gives you resources for an identity, a sense of self, and a sense of worth that is far less fragile, far less exclusive, believe it or not, and far less problematic than the modern identity your culture has given you. So if I was actually going to make a case for Christianity tonight, I'd be talking about this anyway. So let's plunge in. is, what is an identity? What is the modern identity, or what are modern identities? And lastly, what are the problems with modern identity? What are the problems you're going to experience if you let the culture give you a modern identity, okay? So first, what's identity? We can be brief on this. I've already kind of alluded to it. Here's a definition. An identity is, I already said, a sense of self and a sense of worth, okay? Let me put it another way. It's your core trust and your source of value and recognition. Now, by core trust, I mean this. You've got a lot of different roles. You know, in your family, you've got a role. At work, you've got a role. In your neighborhood, you've got a role. You know, with different people, you have different hats, we say. But what is the core you, you, you? That is, what are you so committed to? What do you trust so fundamentally that it's always there in all the roles? In other words, it's identical in every one of your roles, which means it's an identity because it's identical. What do you most rely on? What do you most fundamentally live for? For everybody's got a highest good. And that highest good is what you're trusting in and you're committing yourself to and you're living for. Everybody's got to have, got to have one. Whatever that is, is your identity. Because it's the thing that's so fundamental to everything you do that it's the, it's, it's at the core of every one of your roles. It's, it's identical in every one of your, of your relationships. So there's a core trust, what you most fundamentally trust and live for. And then there's the source of recognition and worth, which is to say, how are you doing at realizing your purpose? Who gets to say you're valuable? Who gets to say, if you say, well, here's my purpose in life, fine. How are you doing at reaching your purpose in life? Who gets to say that you're doing it? That you're realizing your purpose in life? If you say, well, my purpose in life is to realize this good, who gets to tell you whether or not you're realizing the good or not? And so here's the last way to put it. Your identity is whatever you look to for your security and your significance. Your security is what you most trust. Your significance is your sense of value and worth. So whatever it is, so for example, you can work, you may have a career, but if the main source of your security and your main purpose in life is to have a good career, and if your main sense of significance and your main sense of value is that you are successful in your career, then you don't just work, your work is your identity. If it's the ultimate thing, see, if it's your ultimate trust and your ultimate sense of significance, it's your identity. So your identity is whatever you look to as the ultimate source of both your security and your significance. Now, what's the modern identity? I just said all identities work like that, but there's a peculiar modern identity. And to explain the modern identity, I got to tell you the history of it. And here I am relying on a book that I in no way recommend that you read. And I know that that should come as a, you know, relief to you because you're constantly being told you got to read this, you got to read that. But you should trust anybody else who has read this book because this is the book. It's written in 1989 by Charles Taylor, a Canadian philosopher. It's called The Sources of the Self, subtitled The Making of the Modern Identity. And it's a history of how we got to the place where the modern identity processes are what they are today. And it's universally understood as the book that it really explains what the modern identity is. And he does it, Taylor does it through a history. And here's how the history goes. In ancient times, he would say, in the most ancient times, the highest good was honor. And honor was defined as sacrificing your individual happiness and interests for the good of the clan or of the tribe or of the family. So honor was actually sacrificing your individual interests and happiness for the good of the greater whole. And therefore, there were two forms of honor. There was the male form and the female form in most ancient times. The male form was to die in battle or be willing to die in battle to defend your people. The female form was to have children, lots and lots of children. In both cases, you were sacrificing yourself for the good. Both of those are very hard. That was hard work. People died constantly, both in battle and in childbirth. And what you were doing was you were putting it with you. a man of honor. Why? Because you were not thinking about your own interests. You were not thinking about what makes you happy. You're doing what's right for your family, for your clan, and for your people. In other words, this is a completely external identity. Because what you're doing is you're ignoring what's inside and you're saying this greater good out here, I'm going to sacrifice my feelings, my desires, my interests for that. Now as time went on, Taylor says, that changed a bit. And when you get to the place of Aristotle and Plato, and by the way, Confucius, I don't want you to think that I'm, you know, I noticed there's more than one hemisphere here that we're talking about, that both Confucius and Plato and Aristotle came to believe that there was some kind of cosmic order. Not so much a God, but a kind of cosmic order or moral absolutes that were out there. They were out there in transcendent universe. And it was the job of the good person to contemplate what those were, these moral absolutes, and then lead a virtuous life. Lead a virtuous life. So what Plato and Aristotle would say is that the highest good is to know these moral absolutes and then to bring your life into alignment with them and live a life of temperance and of prudence and of justice and of courage and so on. Not quite the same. But the idea is still the good around which your identity is organized is outside of you. It's out there. And your job is basically to stifle whatever inside you have. In fact, certainly, you know, one of the Greek philosophical schools were called the Stoics for good reason. Because basically all the ancient identities were always about stifling what's on the inside in favor of what's on the outside. And you say, well, where did you get your recognition? I mean, who gave you, who told you whether you're valuable or not? Or another way to put it is, what was the decisive validator? And the decisive validator was society. Especially the higher ranks of society or your parents. They were decisive. If your parents said you're a good person, then you're a good person. You feel good about yourself. If your society, especially the higher ranks, if you're a good enough philosopher, you were allowed into the society of philosophers. In other words, it was the top rungs of society that told you whether you were a success or a failure. Whether you're a good person or a bad person. They were the ones who were the decisive validators. You didn't validate yourself. You got it from outside. So ancient identities are totally external. And by the way, so are non-Western identities today. It's extremely important to recognize that those were, it's true that ancient identities were all like that. They were all kind of external. Even today, outside of the West, outside of Europe and North America, in non-Western, in the non-Western world, identities are still basically, I'm going to call them from now on, tonight and tomorrow, I'm going to call them traditional identities. And a traditional identity is basically external. A traditional identity basically is, you are a good person if you sacrifice for your family, for your people. If you say, I don't, I'm not going to take the job I want, I'm going to take what my family wants. I'm not going to live my life, I'm not going to marry the person that I want, I'm going to do what my family wants. That's a traditional, because it's an external identity. And it still exists with most of the people of the world today. It still exists outside the West, okay? Now, in Taylor's talking about history, things change. And they change when we get into the modern age. And I don't know what you think of the modern age is, but historians, intellectual historians usually talk about modernity starting around the 1600s or 1700s. And he would say that the modern identity happened in three stages. So in the 1600s and 1700s, here he's talking about people like Descartes and Locke. The early modern thinkers still believed that there was a good outside of us, moral absolutes out there that we had to align ourselves with to be good people and to feel good about ourselves. But what changed was they said, you don't go to the Bible to find out what those moral absolutes are. You don't go to tradition. You don't go to your parents. You don't rely only on your own reasoning. And you mustn't let anybody tell you what those moral absolutes are. You determine them. So you see what's happened. It's been a bit of a migration. you are living according to these moral absolutes outside here but basically how do you determine what those things are your own reason is a decisive validator the second stage follow i'm going a little quickly here but the second stage was the romanticism especially of the 1700s and 1800s and rousseau in particular uh was a uh is a is a key figure here and what romantic the romantics said was no it's not your reason the way you get in touch with the good out there the good of nature is you go deep into your own heart uh the romantics believed that human beings until society ruined them they were they were basically good and the way you actually get in touch with the good out there is by getting in touch with the good in here and so not science for the romantics by the way not science and um uh reason that wasn't the way to find the moral absolutes it was art it was going deep into yourself and finding what your own intuitions were and expressing them artistically and that's how you found out who you were and that's how you found out the good and that's how you found out how to live so even the romantics still said the good is outside and yet you have to kind of go inside to determine what that is by the time you get to the 20th century this is charles taylor finally in the 20th century somewhere in the 20th century people said yes guess what there are no moral absolutes all moral values are either socially constructed by your culture or there may be the product of evolutionary biology you know it helped our ancestors to survive that's the reason why we feel that and therefore there is nothing outside of you that is a good that you have to connect with in order to feel like a good person you go inside and you decide what is right or wrong you decide what is good and only you can validate yourself you don't look to anybody else outside you decide what it makes what it takes to be a good person and then you decide whether you're living up to that and you don't let anybody else tell you who you are or whether or not you're a good person or not you're the decisive validator now you see what's happened that's the history and here's what taylor says let me add this up we have gone from outward to inward right traditional identity is outward you submit your individual happiness and feelings to something outside and then you know you're a good person and you get recognized by society but modern identities are completely inward you not only go inside to discover the good but you create the good and only you can decide what is right or right or wrong for you so we've moved from outward to inward here's another one we've moved from let's just say duties to desires listen carefully traditional cultures and by the way some of you know this because some of you your parents have a traditional identity and you have a modern one so i shouldn't be some of you um i probably this is not news but maybe this is still making it all visible in traditional cultures you are your duties in modern culture you are your desires in traditional cultures you get your identity from being a person of honor who sublimates your inner desires and does your duty to your family or your people and then the people bestow honor on you as an honorable person but modern identity is exactly the opposite it works exactly the opposite in modern identity you go inside and you find those desires and you figure out who you want to be and what you want to do in life and then you come out and you demand recognition from everybody see in traditional tradition traditional identities you are your duties modern you are your desires traditional you go outside to find out what the true and good is and you come in and realign your life with it and if you do it well you get honor from outside modern identities you go inside figure out who you want to be and then you come outside and you demand that the community society your family recognize you see it's exactly the opposite traditional you sacrifice for your society your community over here you make the society sacrifice for you they have to adjust to you you don't adjust to them it's completely different it's completely the opposite and as a result uh by the way you've got a pretty big class here here's another here's two other here's one other way to put it the argument where's the big argument happen in traditional society traditional identities you go outside and you find out from your people your parents or whatever what it means to be a good person then you come inside and you argue with your I know you don't like this, but this is how you've got to live. So the argument happens inside, got that? But in modern identities, the argument happens outside. You go inside, you figure out who you're going to be. And then you come out and you yell at everybody and you say, you have to recognize me. You have to accept me the way I define myself. So the argument happens outside. So let's think about some examples for a second. Boy, that's not too hard to see. In modern culture, all the fairy tales, all of the stories, all of the science fiction, all fit in with modern identity. See, the way a culture pushes its approach to identity on you is not by sitting down with a set of bullet points like I'm doing tonight and saying, oh, here's the traditional identity, here's ancient, here's modern, you know, and we recommend a modern approach. No, nobody does that to you. Instead, they just, you drown under a tsunami of stories. So for example, the last J.K. Rowling kind of novel and movie was Fantastic Beasts, right? And where to find them? Nobody saw it, right? Okay. I did. I immediately said, Kath, this is a great sermon illustration. So I watched it to the end. But so, you know, you know what the, you know, otherwise it wouldn't have, but the, you know what the issue, basically the main plot issue is this. If you're a wizard or, you know, if you're a witch or a wizard and you don't practice your magic arts, in other words, if you oppress yourself, it forms something called an obscurus, which is a black cloud of destruction, which looks like a giant black amoeba that runs around and destroys people. And that means you're an obscurial. An obscurial is a witch or wizard that's repressing your magic abilities and not being who you are. And that's what the whole movie is about. You know, when Elsa, here's what's interesting. When Elsa in Frozen sings her big song, it is, it is the most obvious, almost spelled out, almost spelled out. She talks about her traditional identity, right? She says, be the good girl. A lot of you, if you have, if you have, if you have daughters or granddaughters, you know this by heart, the rest of you talk to somebody. But what she says is, you know, it says, be the good girl you always have to be. Conceal, don't feel, don't let them know. But let it go. So when she does that, she goes from traditional identity to a modern identity, right? It's time to see what I can do, test the limits and break through. No right, no wrong, no rules for me. I'm free. I'm free. And what she did there is she went, listen, you could not, I'm almost sure the songwriters never read Sources of the Self, Making of Modern Identity by Charles Taylor, but they could have. Because she moves right from a traditional identity to a modern identity. And of course, it's celebrated. You know, it's just a, wow, this is it. This is it. You know, you've come from a, you know, anyway. So in other words, the culture doesn't ask you. What the culture does is it vilifies and demonizes any other process of identity formation. And that's how it works. Just quickly, when they, there's a, there was a musical or a Broadway show. I don't know if it was a musical about Joan of Arc. And a year ago, New York Times piece reviewed the musical. Yeah, it was called the Joan, Joan of Arc. And the, the article, this was the, this was the headline, Joan of Arc and the Monotony of Sainthood. And what the author says is modern people cannot understand saints because they have no self-doubts. Yeah, let me just read. It says, he says, Joan of Arc and other ancient heroes who were completely devoted to a cause and so sure of themselves without great inner doubt and turmoil are now incomprehensible to modern people. And the reason for that is Charles Taylor says, the modern identity is this. If you want to sacrifice for a cause, it's not because the cause is objectively right and you have to sacrifice for it. No, it's great as long as you choose it. What makes it great is that you choose it. That's why it's great. And it's not that it's objectively great. And that's the reason why, and she's right. The writer said that modern, that modern heroes are filled with self-doubt. And is this really what I want to do? And is this who I should be? And I wonder, is this what I really want? Whereas the ancient heroes are just afraid that they're not going to be courageous enough to be courageous enough to be true to what they know is the truth. they had a traditional self and we can't relate to them. We don't understand them. Which leads to the third point, the third question, which, and one of the good things about being able to speak to you three times is what I'm about to say will bleed over. Into what we're saying tomorrow. And so I don't have to say it all. In other words, I can be rather brief tonight knowing I can elaborate a little bit tomorrow. But there are severe problems with the modern identity. It's not just, by the way, me saying it. But not only that, it's not just religious people talking about the modern identity. And Charles Taylor is not the only one either. But there's been, over the last generation, a lot of amazingly strong denunciations of the way in which our modern culture asks people to form their identity. And let me give you a quick rundown of seven, no, six criticisms, six reasons why the modern identity is so unbelievably problematic. Number one, it's incoherent. And you know why it's incoherent? Because if you go deep into your own feelings, see, if there's nothing outside that I have to align with, if no one has the right to tell me what is right or wrong for me, if that means I have to go into my own feelings and heart to decide what I think is right or wrong, to go into your feelings and say, well, what is it I most want? What is it that I most, I'm sure, is the right thing to do? The trouble, of course, is your feelings are filled with contradictions. Filled with contradictions. Your feelings do not add up. They contradict each other. And how are you going to decide which is the real you? And they change, which is one of the problems, of course. There's an instability of the modern identity because your feelings change all the time. And if you're basing your identity on your deepest feelings, your deepest feelings contradict each other. One is, for example, I'm in love with this person and I want this career. And guess what? One or the other is going to take a hit. Well, which do I love the most? Well, guess what? Maybe you love them both. Now what am I going to do? Well, you know what? You're up a creek without a paddle because you've got a modern identity and you're going to have to, you don't know what to do. And of course, what you're going to do is say, this is the thing I most like. And then two years later, you realize, oh, I was wrong. Francis Spufford, a very funny British Christian writer, says this about your feelings. He says, you are a being whose wants make no sense, don't harmonize, whose desires deep down are discordantly arranged so that you truly want to possess and you truly want not to at the very same time. You are equipped, you realize, eventually, for farce or even tragedy much more than you are for happy endings. And if you don't believe what I just said, you are very young. Number two, it's incoherent. The modern identity is incoherent. Number two, it's fragile. Now, David's already alluded to this. And it is remarkably fragile. And here's the reason why. If you, if, admittedly, if you, if a traditional identity, I really want to be a good, I want to be a good son. And if my father or my mother think I'm a good son, they're the decisive validators, are they not? Now, admittedly, I don't have a lot of freedom, now do I? I may not be able to do everything I want to do. If I take my identity from being a good son and being, you know, an honorable member of this family and of this people, and if that's where my identity is, that's a traditional identity, yeah, does that mean I don't have freedom? Absolutely, you don't have freedom. But here's the thing. If your mother and father say, you're great, it silences all other voices. Anybody else who criticizes you, even your own heart criticizes you, your parents say you're great, you're great. And in other words, when in traditional identity, you've got a, a decisive validator outside, but in modern identity, you're supposed to be the decisive validator. But here's the thing, and this is where Charles Taylor is so brilliant. Charles Taylor says, nobody can be the decisive, you cannot validate yourself, you cannot bless yourself, you cannot name yourself, you know why? Because human beings are irreducibly social beings. And at one point, Taylor says this, you know, this isn't terribly inspirational because he's a philosopher and he can't say anything inspirational, but he says, there is no such thing as an identity that comes through inward generation monologically. Now, what he means in a monologue, he says, identity must always be negotiated through relationships and dialogue with others. So the, the, the modern idea that you go in, you decide who you are, and then you come out and you tell everybody who you are. He says, it just doesn't work. You can't do that. You can't say, well, you know, I don't care what anybody thinks of me. I don't care what anybody thinks of me. I don't care what anybody thinks of me. about myself. You can't do that. You can't do it for long. And therefore, you've got to have somebody else outside. But here's the problem. You haven't deputized anybody. In the modern identity, you don't give your parents that kind of right. You don't give the church that kind of right. You keep it. So when you come out, what are you going to do? You're going to need endless recognition. And you're going to be constantly yelling at people, you've got to affirm me. And you'll never be satisfied. And Charles Taylor, this is where he's quite brilliant, he says, the modern identity is the most fragile in the history of the world. And it does several things. Number one, it makes you, you know, it makes you a dream for marketers. You see, 40, 50 years ago, the way you sold a product was you explained it was useful. Use this toothpaste because you'll get fewer cavities. Okay? Okay. Then I'll buy that toothpaste. But about 30 years ago, everybody realized the modern identity had changed. And that is you don't sell a product because it's useful. You sell a product because what you want to say is thoughtful people buy this product. Hip people buy this product. Glamorous people buy this product. In other words, we're going to help you brand yourself with this product. And what Charles Taylor says, you're just sitting ducks for advertising because deep down inside, you don't have a decisive validator. The good is not something that you are sacrificing for. The good is trying to realize some kind of, you know, inner person that you want to be. And of course, you're fragile. So you're, you're, you're duck soup for, you're a sitting duck for advertisers. But secondly, it's the reason why we cannot talk to each other anymore because you can't disagree with me because your disagreement means you're not validating me. Your disagreement means that you are attacking me as a person. You are, you are undermining my very identity. I said, no, I thought I was just disagreeing with you. No, that's not the case because we're much more fragile than we've ever been. So the modern identity is unbelievably fragile. And as a result of, so let me, let me, I'm going to keep brushing through here to my conclusion because we do get back to this tomorrow. Number three, it's crushing. Alain de Botton, who's a French philosopher, who's an atheist, says that the modern identity is much more crushing than the traditional identity. You know why? Traditional identity is basically about fitting in. Right? Traditional identity. You want to be a good father, mother, good, you know, son or daughter. You want to be a good citizen. You want to, it's basically about fitting in. But the modern identity is about standing out. You got to be brilliant. You got to be beautiful. And there's a, and you have to realize it yourself. In other words, you don't let anybody tell you who you are. You decide who you are. And then you go out and realize it and you put enormous pressure on yourself. It's absolutely crushing. Number one, two, three, four. It's fragmenting because the modern identity is destroying community. We talk about this all the time. This is Robert Bella. Robert Bella says, communities are eroding. This is, this is our Western society. Communities are eroding. Families, neighborhoods, and even the polity, meaning the political order, is falling apart. People are less willing to participate, to do their bit, and they're less trusting of others, and indeed of any institutions or any authority of any kind. Because modern identities are individualistic, which means every relationship I get into, whether it's a marriage, even my relationship to my children, if you're not fulfilling me, if you're not helping me achieve my identity, and don't forget, our identities are very fragile now, then I get to walk away. Therefore, there's no such thing as a covenantal relationship anymore. You don't, your relationship with your children, with your spouse, to your church, to your neighborhood, there's no, you never sacrifice your happiness and your desires for the greater good. Why? Because the modern identity is based on not doing that, which means there's fragmentation. Number five, it's exclusion, it's exclusive. Now, here's what I mean by that. Any identity that's based on your achievement, any identity that you have to perform to get to, by definition, is competitive. If you're proud, they say, if you get your identity that you're a hardworking person, then the way to bolster your fragile ego, and it is fragile, all modern egos are fragile, if you say, I feel good about myself because I am a hardworking person, you have to be condescending toward what you consider lazy people. And therefore, you actually define yourself over and against them. I'm I'm a conservative modern person, I'm not one of those liberal relativists. I'm a liberal modern person, I'm not one of those bigots, racists, and greedy capitalists. In other words, you actually find out who you are by demonizing somebody. And that is critical, that's a crucial part of modern identity. But lastly, it's just an illusion. Let me end like this, with a quote too. Charles Taylor says, this idea that you can decide what is right or wrong by looking into your own heart is just not true. Your society is telling you you're doing that, and you're telling yourself you're doing that, and you're not. 200 years ago, if you're a woman, and you were saying, here's my job, and here's my family, I love this man, and I would like to do this thing, what should I choose? Your culture will tell you, you choose the man. But today, if you're a woman, and you say, I can't have this man, and at the same time have this job, your culture tells you, don't you dare choose the man. And guess what, in both cases, are you doing it? You're not. Where's that value come from? You're not getting that from inside, you're getting it from your culture. You're just doing exactly what your culture wants. A thousand years ago, if an Anglo-Saxon warrior in the middle of London, he was there, I think, walks down and looks in his heart and sees aggression in his heart, he says, great, that's me. I like killing people. And he sees a certain sexual urge in his heart, and he would never say, that's me. Never. He would never say that. Because a thousand years ago, nobody would think of their sexual urge as the basis for an identity. Today, if you're walking down a street in London, and you look in your heart and say, you're a guy, you look in your heart and you see aggression, you like to kill people, you say, I need therapy. And if you see any sexual urge at all, you'll say, that's who I am. But here's the, are you really looking in your heart and figuring out who, no, you're not. You're doing exactly what your culture told you. There's a moral grid outside here that you are bringing in to decide, that's me, that's not me. Because you've got all these contradictory things inside. That's me, that's not me. You're not deciding that. And here's what I'm saying. Christian people, let God tell you who you are. Don't let your culture tell you. And if you think, by throwing off the shackles of religion and faith, and saying, these desires, these are the desires I'm going to, you know, don't get in my way. This is who I really am. You're doing what your culture tells you. 500 years ago, you wouldn't have said that. You see? It's an illusion. You need to have some greater good outside that you are bringing inside to decide who you are. There's got to be some moral absolutes out there. Everybody knows they have to be out there. And you need a word from outside. The decisive validator cannot be your parents. We'll see that tomorrow. And it can't be you. It has to be God. But if he's the decisive validator, when our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts. Kierkegaard condemned, Saren Kierkegaard condemned the modern identity. Here's what he said. He says, in fact, what is called the secular mentality consists simply of those who, so to speak, mortgage themselves to the world. They use their talents to amass wealth, carry on enterprises, try to make a name for themselves, but themselves they cannot become. Spiritually speaking, they have no self, no self with which they could venture everything, however self-seeking they are otherwise. But tomorrow we're going to show you a better way. Let me pray for a second, and then we're going to move on with our evening. Let me pray for a second. Our Father, we thank you that you've given us this reminder that you offer us, as believers, a way that keeps us from ever just working off the script of the culture or of the world around us. Father, traditional and ancient identities are smothering. Modern identities are not so smothering, but they are so fragile and they're so crushing. Show us another way. Help us to see how the gospel is not just a set of beliefs, and it's not even just a way. That's really cool. Let me pray.
