TITLE: Money and the Power of the Spirit
SCRIPTURE: Acts 4:29-37
TOPICS: Stewardship, Generosity and Money The Holy Spirit
SERIES: Money and Possessions – In the Teaching of St. Luke
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/money-and-the-power-of-the-spirit/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading comes from the book of Acts, chapter 4, verses 29 through 37. Now, Lord, consider their hearts and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness. Stretch out your hand to heal and perform miraculous signs and wonders through the name of your holy servant, Jesus. After they prayed, the place where they were meeting was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God boldly. All the believers were one in heart and mind. No one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they shared everything they had. With great power, the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and much grace was upon them all. There were no needy persons among them, for from time to time, those who owned lands or houses sold them, brought the money from the sales, and put it at the apostles' feet, and it was distributed to anyone as he had need. Joseph, a Levite from Cyprus, whom the apostles called Barnabas, which means son of encouragement, sold a field he owned and brought the money and put it at the apostles' feet. This is God's word. In the month of June, we've been looking at four passages from the biblical author Luke, who wrote this part of the Bible as well. He wrote the Gospel of Luke and the Book of Acts. And we're looking at how Christianity affects your attitude and your practice with regard to your money. And this text is notable because it depicts powerful spiritual experience and then immediately shows the impact of spiritual, Christian spiritual experience on the most practical thing, and that is how you deploy, how you spend, how you use and regard your money and your possessions. So all we want to do here is look at, first of all, what the text teaches us about spiritual experience, and then on the other hand, what impact that actually has in the way in which we regard our money and possessions. So in order to understand the text, you have to realize what preceded it. At the beginning of chapter 4, the leaders of the brand new, brand spanking new Christian church, Peter and John, were preaching publicly. They were preaching about the resurrection of Jesus publicly. And they were arrested, and they were hauled before the religious authorities, and they were told not to preach this or they would be imprisoned. In other words, they were threatened. And when they were released, they went back and all the disciples, Christian followers, got together, and they began to pray. And what you have at the beginning of the text that was read is the end of the prayer. See, notice how they say, now, Lord, consider their threats, because they've been threatened, and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness. And so as the prayer ends, what we're told is, after they prayed, the place where they were meeting was shaken. And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit and spoke the word of God boldly. Now, let's look at that passage first. And let's, first of all, understand something about spiritual experience. This term shaken, it's not just a little rhetorical flourish. In the Bible, when God's presence comes down, things shake. So, for example, when he came down on Mount Sinai, this is in Exodus 19 and 20, the mountain shook. Whenever something of greater being comes into connection with something of lesser being, there's a quake. So, for example, there have been times in my life, being that I'm a large person, in which I have come down on chairs that weren't really ready for my, the full weight of my glory. And they cracked. Or in some cases, you know, a person like myself, you know, you actually, when you sit down on things in strange places, you actually listen for the noise. And sometimes, you usually can get up before the quake is complete. And yet, here's, when God comes down on even mountains, they shake. There's a place in Isaiah where it says, oh, Lord, come down that the mountains might melt. And so, whenever God's presence comes down, there's a shaking. And they're filled with the Holy Spirit. Now, this immediately raises some pretty big questions. For example, Um... comes down? Isn't God present everywhere? Isn't that the teaching? And what do you mean they're filled with the Holy Spirit? In Acts 2 of the day of Pentecost, weren't they filled with the Holy Spirit? And the answer is the God they already knew and the Holy Spirit they already had. They were experiencing in a powerful new way. So let me give you a definition. Spiritual experience is to deeply sense with the whole person what you may already know with the mind rationally. Spiritual experience is to deeply sense with the whole person what you may already know with the mind. So, for example, we do know that in those days in Palestine and Israel, no one had ever tasted or seen sugar. Sugar only existed in Southeast Asia where sugarcane grew, and it was in India that they first learned to turn sugarcane into granules so it could be transported and also so it could be used in food and that sort of thing. And even though, of course, in Israel there were ways of sweetening things, there are fruits that are naturally sweet. They understood the difference between bitter and sweet. But imagine you were an Israelite in those days who went to the Far East and tasted sugar. It was electrifying, like nothing you'd ever sensed. So they come back. He comes back, let's say, and he tells all of his friends, sugar is very sweet. It's incredible. It's an amazing thing. It's sweeter than anything we have. There's no reason to disbelieve the man. And so now you have a bunch of Israelites that believe in sugar. They believe there is such a thing as sugar. Why not? They've got good testimony. And they believe it's sweeter than anything they've ever tasted. So they believe in sugar and they believe it's sweet. So they have in their mind the rational fact that there is sugar and that sugar is sweet. And they believe that. But what if one day somebody from a caravan from the Far East brings sugar and these people who believe in sugar actually taste it? What happens then? They're electrified. They're amazed. What's the difference? Are they getting new information? Did they not believe it was sweet? And now they know. No, they knew it was sweet before. They know it's sweet later. But they know it's sweet after actually experiencing the sweetness in a new way. See, it's one thing to know something with the mind. It's another thing to know something through the senses. They knew it was sweet, but now they have experienced the sweetness. And that is what spiritual experience is about. And that's what the Holy Spirit does. It is one thing to believe God is powerful. It's another thing to be shaken by his power. It's one thing to believe God is good. It's another thing to taste his goodness. There's all these places where the psalmist says, Oh, taste and see that the Lord is good. Who is the psalmist talking to? He's talking to people who, he's talking to Israelites who believe God is good. But he says, that's not good enough. I want you not just to believe God is good. I want you to taste it. I want the abstraction of God's goodness to become a living reality to your heart. I want you to sense it. I want you to taste it. I want you to, I want it to be real to you. If you want another example, and probably the best example, in Romans 8, 15, or 16, it says, The Spirit of God bears witness with our spirit that we're his children. Interesting? See, on the one hand, we already believe, let's say, maybe you're a Christian and you believe you're a child of God. You believe that God loves you. You believe God has adopted you. And that's the belief. But sometimes, we're told, the spirit bears witness with your spirit. What that means is, the spirit comes on top. And something you know inferentially, you now know intuitively. Something you know rationally, you now know immediately. Something you knew with the mind, you now sense on the heart. And the best example of this, I know, is there's an old 17th century Puritan, British, Puritan writer, minister Thomas Goodwin, who wrote this magisterial book on the Holy Spirit. And when he looks at that passage in Romans 8, he says, the best way to describe it is this. He said, I one day was walking along, and in front of me was also walking in the same direction, a father and a son. His son was maybe 8, 9, or 10 years old. And the father and the son were talking. And then all of a sudden, he said, I saw the father sweep the son up into his arms. And kiss him and say, I love you. And he heard the son say, I love you too, father. And then put him down and kept on walking. And Thomas Goodwin thought about it. He said, well, what was the difference before and after? Did the son afterwards now know that the father loved him? And before that kiss, he didn't know? Of course he knew. He knew the father objectively. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. He knew the father. I don't know. that the father loved him, and before that kiss, he didn't know? Of course he knew. He knew the father. Objectively, he was no more a son after the kiss than before. Legally, he was no more a son. Biologically, he was no more a son. And even rationally, he knew his father loved him, and after that, he knew his father loved him. But it was in the father's arms that he was experiencing his sonship. He was experiencing the father's love. It's an incredible difference. He sensed with his whole being what he knew rationally, as it were. And that is the job of the Holy Spirit. The Bible says God does not just want to be known about. God doesn't just want you to know about him. He wants you to know him. You can know about a person rationally, but you can only know him by meeting him. And the only way to meet him or her is to see or at least hear or touch. And what the Holy Spirit does is it takes abstractions and turns abstraction, abstract truth, into a sense on the heart. So that the power and love of God becomes as real to your heart as sweetness is to your taste, as beauty is to your eyes or your ears. And that's spiritual experience. Now, this isn't supposed to be a sermon. It's a two-part sermon, one on spiritual experience and one on how it affects money and possessions. But we can't stop just yet. I need to say something about this. It's such a big subject. And I want you to consider, as a pastor, as your pastor, I'd like you to have a balance here that is a little unusual. Churches have a tendency to be all about Christian experience or afraid of it. Some churches are just all about it. It's what everything is about, passion, experience, power. And there's other churches that are so afraid of that, it's all about the mind. It's all about doctrine and all about practice, and they're afraid of it. But I find that people, listen, I find that people who are trying to find faith in God either want too much experience or actually too little. They either want their mind to take them all away to faith, or they just want some incredible experience. And I'd like to counsel balance. And let me just say something to those trying to find faith in God, balance, balance, and those who have faith in God and want to grow in God. Finding God and growing in God. Balance on this thing of experience. First of all, for finding God. Kenneth Clark, who was, for some of you, if you're younger, you may not have really heard of him. He was the director of the National Gallery. He was an amazing art historian and critic. He was British. He was a real public intellectual. And he produced, or I think he was the producer of a great series called Civilization, BBC, PBS here. And he was quite intellectual. He was not a religious man. He was very secular. In his book, the other half, his autobiography, he tells this very interesting story. It's amazing to hear the man say this. He said, In a villa in France, I experienced a curious episode. He said, I had a religious experience. Now, here's a totally non-religious man. He said, It took place in the church of St. Lorenzo, but it did not seem to be connected with the beauty of the architecture. I can only say that for a few minutes, by the way, that's a long time, I can only say that for a few minutes, my whole being was radiated with a heavenly joy more intense than anything I'd ever experienced before. And wonderful as it was, it caused an awkward problem in terms of action. My life was far from blameless. I would have to reform. My family would think I was going mad, you know, getting religious. And moreover, I was completely unworthy of such a flood of grace, so therefore, on moral terms, maybe it was a delusion. So gradually, the effect wore off, and I made no effort to retain it. I was too deeply embedded in the world to change course. But I had felt the finger of God, I am quite sure. And though the memory has faded, it helps me now understand the joys of the saints. Now, here's what he did. Isn't it interesting? I would say that probably, ordinarily, you get more and more convinced that there is a God, and at some point, you experience him. But see, what happened to King Clark is it was the other way around. He experienced the reality, and then he knew two things. One is, he said, oh my goodness, if I'm going to go on with this, I might have to change my life, and I don't want to do that. I don't want anybody to think I'm a religious fanatic. What about all the people who don't think there is a God? They're going to think I'm an idiot. But the other thing that was intriguing there was, he said, but I'm so morally unworthy of this that maybe it's an illusion. He didn't have a theology. He didn't have a theology. He didn't have a theology. idiot. But the other thing that was intriguing there was he said, but I'm so morally unworthy of this that maybe it's an illusion. He didn't have a theology that could account for why God could come into the life of somebody who was morally unworthy. In other words, he could have gone from the experiential into the theological and the rational and on he would have gone, but he didn't want to do it. Because the experiential, and even he knew it, needs to be balanced with the rational. But the rational needs to be balanced with the experiential. In other words, you're never going to have enough reasons to believe in God unless you actually begin to sense his reality. Almost always it's a combination. So seek balance if you're finding God. And also seek balance if you're trying to grow in God. John Newton, the great hymn writer, he wrote Amazing Grace, but he was also a great pastor and he wrote a lot of letters. Again, he was an 18th century British pastor. And John Newton wrote a series of letters that have been very meaningful to me in which he said it's important for Christians to realize balance in the life, in the Christian life about experience. He said if you're going to grow as a Christian, you need some times in which you have really strong experience of God and other times in which you're completely dry and devoid of it. Now this really freaks Christians out. Because somehow we feel like, oh my goodness, if Christian, if I'm walking with God right, I should always be sensing his presence. So on the one hand, you do have to have a sense of God in your life. You do need to ask the Holy Spirit to give you this, to sometimes shake you. You do need to have a sense of his reality in your life. You're never going to overcome your fears. You're never going to become. You need his holiness to be a reality to your heart if it's going to humble you out of your pride. You need his love to be a reality to your heart if you're going to be affirmed out of your insecurity. But there are times in which you actually, it would be bad for you to have a sense of God in your life. Because the different, Kathy and I always like this passage from one novel that we both like, and where it is in the narrative doesn't matter, it's the quote. It says, quote, she guessed that this tall man, both stern and gentle, might think her merely wayward, like a child that has not the firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end. Like a child that has not the firmness of mind to go on with a dull task to the end. The difference between a childish person and a mature person is often seen in how you handle dull tasks. Childish people, people that haven't really grown up become mature. They can't stand boredom. They can't stand doing things that need to be done. They're dull and they're boring. Adults, mature people, stick with them and get them done. Childish people don't, see? And if you're ever going to grow up spiritually, there's going to be times in which God is actually going to let you be dry so that you do what you ought to do. There's an awful lot of loving God and loving your neighbor that's dull. There's a lot of times, sometimes prayer is dull, Bible reading is dull, participating in church is dull, helping messed up people is incredibly dull and you should do it. There's nothing more boring than simply serving the needs of a very difficult person who's very troubled and you need to help them. It's dull. And sometimes you only grow spiritually if you do something for God just because it is due him. And not because you're getting anything out of it at all, including spiritual experience. And therefore you need dry times and you need, you know, high times. And therefore whether you're growing in God or finding God, balance. It's the Holy Spirit's job to give you spiritual experience. It's your job to seek it, to obey God if you don't have it, and to relish and revel in it when it comes. But that's not all this passage teaches. And to be part of our series and to be true to the text, we have to see that one of the most striking things about this is that when the Holy Spirit falls and the people are filled with the power of God and the sense of his reality, this is the second time it's happened because it also happened in Acts 2. It affects how you spend your money. Look, see, it says they were filled with the Holy Spirit. And then verse 32 and 33, all the believers were in one in heart and mind. No one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, but they shared everything they had. Now, what is so striking is this is exactly the same pattern that happened two chapters before. In Acts chapter 2, the more famous version of this experience, the Pentecost, you know, tongues of fire, the Holy Spirit comes down, and this is what happened. As soon as the Holy Spirit and the presence of God came down in Acts 2, it says in Acts 2 to 44, all the believers were together and had everything in common, selling their possessions and goods they gave to anyone as he had need. And they grew in favor with all the people. Now, this can't be a coincidence. When the Holy Spirit comes down on people and God's presence is real to them, bang, they get radically generous with their money. Amen. Amen. commentators will tell you what's intriguing about this passage is that the sharing of goods and the sharing of wealth is happening across social classes. Because first of all, people who had homes and people who had land and they could sell them and liquidate them and put the proceeds at the apostles' feet, those were well-off people. But needy people, it's a very important word, needy people is a word that means destitute. Destitute people who had needs were getting money from the people who had money. So the well-off and the needy were together in one place. Now Ben Witherington, who's a New Testament scholar, says that if you read this in the Greek, you'll see Luke deliberately uses words that the Greco-Roman philosophers used to use with regard to friendship. It says they're one in heart and mind. That's the philosophical language of friendship. But Aristotle is absolutely adamant you can only have this kind of intimate friendship among social equals. He's adamant about that. And the Greeks believed, the Greek philosophers believed that yes, you could have this kind of intimacy and this kind of sharing, but it couldn't be across the class barriers or the racial barriers. It couldn't be. And that's exactly what you have here. And that's what's so stunning. This was both outrageous to that society and attractive. Here's the outrageous part. Lucian of Samosada, who was a Greek philosopher that hated Christianity and didn't like it, and here's one of his criticisms of it. He says, their founder, that's Jesus, persuaded them that they should be like brothers to one another. Therefore, they despise their own privacy and rank and view all their possessions as common property. See how outraged he is? They despise privacy. They despise rank. This is socially offensive to them that these believers were across the social division sharing their wealth, sharing their money in radical ways. It was incredible. It offended them, and yet it also attracted the society around them. Because Julian, the last non-Christian Roman emperor, who really didn't want to see Christianity spread and was very frustrated with it, wrote a friend and said, Christian success lies in their charity to all. They take care not only of their own poor, but ours as well. Now, when the Spirit of God came down, class barriers that in that culture were like concrete slabs broke apart. And people started giving of themselves and giving of their possessions and giving of their money in ways that was both offensive and shocking and outrageous and yet incredibly attractive. And that's why it says in verse 33, you notice what it says? Because of this incredible sharing of wealth and this bringing together of people across the social class divisions, it says in verse 33, and with great power, the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Their preaching had credibility because of the reality that the society around the Christian church could see. Now, what was it that broke the barriers? Some of us sitting here, whether you're Christians or not, say, well, that's very nice, but, you know, we don't sense quite, in America, you know, in a kind of, we don't sense in our own situation these class barriers, so it's a little hard for us to understand what incredibly, what incredible power must have been present in this community to destroy those class barriers, that in that society were absolutely rigid. What was it? Well, it tells us much grace was upon them all. See, the grace means salvation apart from works. Here's the religion say, if you live as you ought, God will bless you. But the gospel of Jesus Christ, the gospel of grace is that you can receive God's acceptance as a free gift and then you will live as you ought. The gospel of Christianity is exactly the opposite of what the religions tell you. And it's this gospel of grace that you can be accepted by God, you can be justified by God, apart from your performance, was the thing that broke the barriers. You know why? Because the well-off became spiritually poor and the poor became spiritually rich. Church, stick with me on this, please. First of all, the well-off became spiritually poor. You go to the Sermon on the Mount. The first thing that Jesus says is, blessed are the poor in spirit. My blessing only comes to those who are poor in spirit. What's poor in spirit mean? Every Christian has to be poor in spirit, see? To be poor in spirit is to say, I have a debt before God. I'm a sinner. I'm not living as I ought. And I can't possibly be poor in spirit. the infinite, costly grace of God who came into this world as Jesus and died on the cross for my sins. I'm only saved because of his infinite grace. At infinite cost to himself, I live by the generosity of God. And therefore, I'm saved by the generosity of God. Now, anyone who is a Christian is spiritually poor. And therefore, if you're well off, your pride is destroyed by the gospel. If you are spiritually poor, though you're well off materially, and you see a materially poor person, you cannot look down your nose at them. It's impossible. You can't say, pull yourselves up by your bootstrap. Jesus didn't do that to you. He intervened, and you're saved by his generosity. And so, what happens is the materially rich becomes spiritually poor, but the poor becomes spiritually rich. How does that happen? Miroslav Volf is a professor of theology at Yale University. And years ago, he was walking through the streets of Baltimore with an inner-city pastor. Named Mark Gornick, who's a friend of mine who now, by the way, lives in New York. And Mark was showing him all kinds of people in that poor inner-city community of Baltimore. Their lives were coming together. Families were coming together. Communities were coming together. They were really pulling together. And Miroslav Volf was amazed at the hope and the progress in social justice that was happening there. And at one point, Mark Gornick said something that shocked him. And listen, this is Miroslav Volf's essay. He says, Pastor Mark Gornick of New Song made the point almost in passing. As he was explaining the blight of the inner cities, he suggested that the doctrine of justification by grace alone contained untapped resources for healing the inner city. This shocked Volf, and he says, For many a theologian, justification by grace is an idle doctrine. Some have abandoned it. They deem it generally useless or at least unhelpful when it comes to healing even lesser social pathologies than the cycle of poverty, violence, and hopelessness. How could the dead streets receive life from a seemingly dead doctrine? But upon reflection, imagine you have no job, no money, you live cut off from the rest of society in a world ruled by poverty and violence, your sin is the wrong, quote-unquote, wrong color, and you have no hope that any of this will ever change. And around you is a society governed by the iron law of achievement. Its gilded goods are flaunted before your eyes on TV screens, and in a thousand ways society tells you every day you are worthless because you have no achievement. You're a failure, and you know that you will continue to be a failure because there is no way to achieve tomorrow what you have not managed to achieve today. Your dignity is shattered, and your soul is enveloped in the darkness of despair. But the gospel, the gospel, the gospel tells you that you are not defined by outside forces. It tells you you count even more that you are loved unconditionally and infinitely, irrespective of anything you've achieved or failed to achieve. Now imagine this gospel not simply proclaimed to individuals, but embodied in a community. That's what's happening here. This is justification by grace, proclaimed in practice, says Miroslav Volv, a dead doctrine? Hardly. Now, I don't care how eloquent I wax in a sermon. If any of you would hear me preach and think, oh, that's a very good sermon, but if you knew that I browbeat my wife and screamed at my wife every single night, making her cry, by the way, I don't. But if I preached eloquently in word, but you knew that those were my deeds, you wouldn't care what I said. You would not listen. It would have no credibility. This passage tells us that the gospel of grace that was preached had credibility because it was embodied in a community that nobody could quite account for. And unless the deeds of Christians in a city like New York back up the words of the poor preachers, nobody's going to listen. Now, what is the key? Why were these people able to share their goods this way? Because, look, the Holy Spirit falls, and then they start to give their money away, but there's something in the middle. Do you see what that was? Boldness. The Holy Spirit fell, they were filled with boldness, and then they gave their money away. You know why? Because I think for most people that I know who are believers are not radically generous. They don't give their money away in shocking proportions. You know why? Is it stinginess? Are you all Scrooges? Do you like to just get out your wall or your purse at night and just count your money? No. I don't think it's stinginess. It's fearfulness. We're afraid. We're afraid. We need that money. We need the investments. We need the savings. And this passage is saying, if God has come down into your life, and to the degree he's come down into your life, and you know he loves you, and this is the Lord of the universe who loves you, then that fear is going to start going away, and you will be generous. And you'll be increasingly generous. And if you say, oh, I know God loves me, but you're not radically generous, then you don't know God loves you. You might know with a head, but you haven't sensed it deeply with your whole being. And I'm not here to say to you, oh, you better give more money to charity and ministry. I'm here to say to you, you better experience more of the love of God until you want to be generous. And here's how it happens to me, most likely. Most of the time, when does the Holy, listen, most of the time in which the Holy Spirit, by his power, I sense being swept up into my Father's arms and kissed, is when I look at, when I'm meditating on, when I'm praying about, when I'm singing about, the fact that Jesus Christ on the cross said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Jesus lost his Father's love. He stood in my place and took what I deserved. He lost his Father's love so I could have my Father's love. He was dropped by the Father so I could be swept up in the arms of the Father. And when I think about that, I know he loves me. When I see that, I think about that, I become, you know, the Holy Spirit works in my heart and it makes me more generous. And that's the only way we're ever going to achieve this kind of witness to the gospel in a city like New York. So do I want you to give more to charity and ministry? Yes. But first of all, I want you to seek the reality of God through the power of the Holy Spirit until you want to be generous. Let's pray. Our Father, we, the balances here are too many for us to achieve. The rational and the experiential, the volitional and the affectional and the emotional. Yeah, we need to do things just because we ought to do them, but we also need to have our hearts engaged. We need to proclaim who Jesus Christ is, but we need to embody it in love in the city. We need to not just do all of one or all of the other. We need to do it all and we need your help. And so help us. Make us more and more like your son who came not to be served, but to serve and give his life a ransom for many. It's in his name that we pray. Amen.
