TITLE: Money and the Steward-Leader
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Steward Leadership (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/money-and-the-steward-leader/

============================================================

The theme this year is Christian leadership is stewardship. What a leader is, is a servant of God who is given resources to cultivate. You've got human resources, you've got spiritual resources, you've got intellectual resources, the word of God is a resource. The job of a steward is to cultivate and to multiply the resources. So we've talked about this. Obviously, when you think of stewardship, however, first, at least in the English language, stewardship means stewardship of money. And to be a leader, we do have to be models in giving. In fact, I'll go so far as to say that in some ways, you know, people are going to watch their Christian leaders for how you spend your money. They're going to watch. You have to model a biblical attitude toward money. In some ways, it's not that easy to look at a Christian leader and tell what their sex life is like. Occasionally it is, but not usually. There's no laughter there, but anyway. But actually, when it comes to money, it actually, it's not too hard to tell sometimes by the way a person dresses or the way in which they act or where they go, whether they spend their money in a rather self-indulgent way or not. It's pretty important for Christians to be models to, Christian leaders to be models to others about how they spend their money. So, two pages, this two pages is, in fact, as I've read through it, I realize that in some ways it's not as self-explanatory. There is, as of tomorrow, there is a very long handout. There's a very long document on the webpage for you as leaders. It's a kind of full, from Genesis to Revelation, study of wealth and possessions. It's like 30 pages long. It was based on a series of studies I did several years ago at the old MCM, and I've pulled it together and put it together, and I hope it'll be a good resource for you. It's kind of like everything I know the Bible says about the subject. This is just a summary, of course, and what I want to do is on the first page, I want to give you a summary of what the Bible teaches about how much we ought to give away of our money, and on the second page, in a little bit more detail, I want to look at the motivation for it, because to me the motivation is much more important than the amount, because the amount, in some ways, is, it's, you can't be dogmatic about the amount, but you can be dogmatic about the motivation. Here's what I mean by the amount. On the first page, take a look. How much do we give away? I'd like you to consider four principles for helping you understand how much of your money you should be giving away rather than keeping and spending on yourself. The first guideline is a tithe, and honestly, in the Old Testament, we know that the Old Testament believers were required to give away 10% of their income, 10%. Don't ask me if it's net or gross. I don't know. It's 10%, okay? You work it out. It's certainly, actually, if you look at the Old Testament, it would have been on the gross, because what you gave to the government, what you gave, there were other sorts of taxes and things that were taken out, but the point is, in the Old Testament, 10% of your income was given away. In the New Testament, however, it's not nearly as clear exactly what that proportion is. In fact, there's really no place in the New Testament that even mentions the tithe except one place. There's this very interesting spot where Jesus is denouncing the Pharisees. It's Matthew 23, verse 23, and he says to them, Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, which is a way of saying you tithe everything, every little thing, even the plants out of your garden. You tithe everything. And he says, but you neglect the weightier matters of justice and mercy. You should practice the former and not leave the latter undone. And what he's saying is, evidently, he says, you tithe and that's good. You should practice it. But he says, your problem is you only tithe. In a very mechanical way, you tithe and you say, that's okay. Instead of looking around and seeing what are the actual needs of the community. In other words, you're not really giving in response to the needs of the community. You're giving in response to an abstraction. And therefore, I think it's fair, and I put it down here, to interpret this as saying that Jesus is castigating the Pharisees for not being willing to go beyond the tithe when there are needs around you. And what this basically means is, giving would be a minimum rule of thumb. You should be giving at least a tithe, because after all, would you say that New Testament Christians have less or more privileges than Old Testament Christians? Less or more obligations and indebtedness to the grace of God than Old Testament Christians? It would be more, it would be more, it would be more. So how in the world could you have lower standards when it comes to giving than Old Testament Christians? We couldn't. Jesus is actually castigating the Pharisees for being unwilling to go beyond the tithe when necessary, when there's opportunity. And therefore, basically, we say to Christians, according to the Bible, reading the whole Bible, front to back, you know, Old to New Testament, the tithe is a basic minimum rule of thumb, but you really shouldn't stop there. And here's the reasons why. Number two, the principles of surplus, sacrifice, and simplicity. Let me start with sacrifice. The Bible continually says your giving ought to be sacrificial. I'll give you some examples. Beyond their abilities. 2 Corinthians 8, 3. What does it mean to go beyond your abilities? It means to sacrifice. It means you're giving to others, your giving to ministry, your giving cuts into how you live. You're not able to give and still do the same things, live the same way, buy the same clothes, travel to the same spots, even eat the same foods. In other words, when you're giving sacrificially, it affects the way in which you live. And that's the reason why, here's one sentence I want to read to you. That's the reason why, if we have tithes, and it doesn't cut into the way you're actually living, you need to give more. But, if you have not tithed, and yet your giving does cut into your daily life, your consciences can be at rest. See how important the sacrifice? On the one hand, you say, here's the tithe, the minimum rule of thumb. But one of the reasons I think the New Testament does not kind of clobber you with the tithe the way the Old Testament does, is for this very reason. I know there's plenty of people, there are people, who can't actually tithe and still meet their obligations. They're making so little that they can't, you know, you're not supposed to, you owe no one anything. You're supposed to pay your rent. You're supposed to pay, and even if your rent is really about as little as it can possibly be here, you may not be able to tithe and really meet your obligations. But are you sacrificing? That is, is your giving to others really actually cutting in to how you live your life? So if you're tithing and you're not sacrificing, you need to tithe, you need to give more. And if you're not tithing, but you are sacrificing, your conscience can be at rest until you make more money and you're able to go beyond. See? That's the second thing. I won't go, let's, I'm trying to rush through this, you can read the rest of it. Number three, the principle of tithing, the principle of sacrifice, now thirdly, the principle of community. The reason I mention this, again, don't look down there, look up here actually, because I'm not going to try, I don't have time to run through it all. There's two reasons why community is so important to giving. First of all, you may have heard me say this before, the Bible talks a lot about adultery. And guess what? You pretty much know if you are committing adultery. Right? I mean, if you're committing adultery, generally you say, you don't say, oh my gosh, you're not my wife. No, you know, you know you're committing adultery. But greed is condemned in the Bible far more often than adultery is. And yet almost nobody ever thinks they're greedy. Almost nobody. Because it's a frog in the kettle thing. The more money you make, the more you hang out with people who make more than you do and live better than you do, and so nobody ever feels rich. There's always somebody, you know, you're a billionaire, well, they're the trillionaire, you know, and I can't do the things that he does or she does. And therefore, nobody ever feels that they're greedy. And that's the reason why there is a need in Christian community for us to actually talk about how we're spending our money. Not widely. I mean, it'd be very easy for, I'm not saying that you just need to let everybody know, you know, what you make and what you're spending your money on. But if you don't have anybody around you that you have some accountability to, say, here's how much I make, here's what I'm spending, what do you think? Are there no mature Christians that you can talk to about that? You know, a lot of us, especially in New York, are quite willing to be accountable about our sex lives but not there, not money. Without community, you're never going to make it. You're never, nobody will ever, ever be guilty of greed and yet everybody, there's lots of people guilty of greed. But nobody knows who they are. They don't know it because they're not willing to talk about it. The other thing, though, is we have got to be, Christians have got to create communities that are so practically generous to each other that when people start to have financial problems that the community community in communities and we know that our community will come around us, we won't be secure enough to give in biblical proportions. We'll feel like it's up to us to get through life and therefore I better save everything I possibly can and keep everything I possibly can. If we're in a very generous community, we'll be able to be more and more generous. One last thing. There's a practical tension. Number four, the practical tension is simply this. The Bible says, by the way, the handout doesn't explain that terribly well. You need to actually get the longer document. The fact is, in the Bible, there is a real celebration of material good. The Bible loves matter. It loves food. It loves the body. It loves this material world. And therefore, enjoying the material world and having the material world is a good. The Bible also talks about the dangers of greed and the importance of simplicity of life and the importance of giving as much away as you possibly can. There will always be a tension between those principles. You will never, ever, ever be totally sure you're giving away enough. Or maybe, you see, it would be possible for you, and I have seen people who actually, they're masochistic when it comes to spending money. They feel like, as a Christian, I can't enjoy anything. I can't spend money on that. That's just wrong. There will always be a kind of tension between these two principles, and we need to be talking to each other all the time. Page two. Why should we be giving this kind of money away? You realize, in a place like New York, this is really more radical than what the Bible says about sex. You know, somebody some years ago said, the early church was exactly the opposite of the pagan culture around it. The pagan culture around it was promiscuous with sex, had sex all over the place, and was incredibly stingy about money, kept your money to yourself. The Christians were incredibly stingy about sex, you know, only with your spouse, but unbelievably promiscuous with their money, just throwing it around all over the place, you know, giving it to people all over the place. Exactly the opposite of the pagan world around, you know what, if we really live the life the way we ought to live, if we're a community of the king, we'll look just as weird in a place like New York, because New York is exactly the same, and this is just as weird. Here are five motivations, and I'm going to be brief. Number one, the reason we ought to be giving away is because Jesus Christ is not just here to save your soul, to take you to heaven, but he has a resurrected body, and he's here to renew the world, and therefore the material world is important. The final kingdom is to be one of justice for all, and therefore one of the reasons for Christians to proclaim the gospel is not just simply to evangelize one another, but also to give our money, especially to people with material needs. We have to help the poor, or we're not really telling the world what the coming kingdom looks like. And when you give your money, not just to ministry, not just to me, not just to help me preach the gospel, but also to people who are working with the poor, that's part of the tithe. Unless we are doing that as well, we're not witnessing to the future nature of the kingdom of God. Number one. Number two, we should keep in mind that people who are motivated strictly by a sense of justice or strictly by a sense of compassion tend to lose the sense of how God's grace is the root of our giving and motivation. The typical conservative in this country is totally motivated by mercy. That is, the conservative mindset thinks we need to help the pitiful poor out of the goodness of our hearts. This misses the fact that the people who've got money, us, have what we have to a great degree because of unjust distribution of opportunities at birth. My children, just by being born to me, have a far, far, far, far, far better chance of being successful and having an economically, you know, comfortable life than kids that are born to a single parent and mother, you know, in an incredibly poor neighborhood. The kids are just born there. The kids are just, they don't have anything to do with it. The kids who are born in that situation are, you know, are way behind from the word go. And therefore, one of the reasons why we have to give away is justice. It's not just mercy. It's unjust for us to hold on to so much that we have because of the inequitable distribution of opportunities that's there in the world. On the other hand, the liberal view is totally motivated by concern for justice. Poverty is seen strictly in terms of structural inequities. While the conservative compassion-only motivation leads to paternalism and patronizing of the poor, the liberal justice-only motivation leads to a great deal of anger and rancor. Both views, ironically, are self-righteous. One tends to blame the poor for everything. The other tends to blame the rich for everything. One overemphasizes in the other. justice and mercy. That's in Matthew 23, 23. A balanced motivation arises from a heart touched by grace, which comes down to number four. Check four and then we're done. Read the rest of it, of course, but number four. The gospel, by its very nature, has to produce a willingness to share your money and a heart for the poorest. When James says that true faith will show itself in works, the works he has in mind are service to the poor or the members of the community with fewer resources than you. The new gospel identity, if you're wealthy, it humbles the wealthy and privileged and affirms the poor and downtrodden. That should mean that even the wealthy lose their patronizing attitudes and the poor lose their defensiveness, which shows itself in either timidity or belligerence. That's how the poor needs to be changed. See, the people without money, the gospel has to soften them. The people with money, the gospel has to soften them. And that's why James is by no means unique in his assertion when he says that a sensitive social conscience and a life poured out in deeds of mercy to the needy is the inevitable outcome of true faith. So the gospel makes the non-poor finally see they're no better than the poor. It brings down the barrier of pride and self-righteousness. This is why Jesus so repeatedly says that love and respect for the poor is an inevitable and necessary sign that you've understood the gospel and experienced its grace. And the reason I want to press this here just as I conclude is I know that when I give away money to the degree I need to give it away, I don't like the fact that I can't do a lot of things that other people of my rank, class, age, you know, I'm a 56-year-old white male. An awful lot of other people who are my age, you know, my level, are making a lot of money. And in some very, very, very subtle ways, you know, I don't want to make that much, but surely you don't like, you don't like the fact that if I really give like that, then there's something I can't do that almost anybody else my age and stage can do. I want to be able to stay in a hotel like that. I want to be able to go there if I want to go there. It's subtle, but the gospel says why. The gospel humbles you out of that. The gospel says, is that really your identity? Is that really what you need? Is that where your joy is? And the gospel should make it possible to give away your money quite radically. Okay, there we go. Let's do what we've been doing the last couple of months. And that is, if you've got a question that, a personal question that arose from the discussion, either from the discussion or the talk, and you want to ask it to me, go to one of the mics. Actually, there's Justin in the middle with a mic. Don't be afraid of him. In being good stewards of our money and metting out justice and mercy in the community, is it a sin not to give the people who are begging on the street or on the subway money? Is it a sin not to give the people? Yes. Because Jesus said, you know, you didn't clothe me when I was naked. You didn't feed me when I was hungry. And they're obviously sometimes not clothed and hungry. Yeah. Now, this is a judgment call on my part. This isn't a declaration. Just because they're visible to you doesn't mean that that's the most strategic use of your money. And therefore, generally speaking, when it comes to helping the poor, you should act rather than react. And so when a person is right there and sort of pushes his or her need in front of you and says, give to me, you really don't know what, you don't, for example, that person may have no accountability at all. What we used to say in, and I know that the Aconate does this, what we used to say, even I learned this back in Hopewell, Virginia, if somebody came and said, I need money, I would say, look, here's some money, but if you really want us to really help you with your financial problem, you need to let us into your life. Because you might have habits, you might have, there might be ways in which you're living, in which this money actually is only making, it's only enabling you to stay in behavior that's hurting you and hurting other people. In other words, and one perfect example is the person might just immediately turn, around and use it for drugs. And honestly, I think it's fair to say, and social workers at least up to five years ago that I talked to said, that probably the average person that will approach you in the subway or on the street for money will use it for drugs or alcohol. And actually, in 1991, the New York Times, New York Times magazine did an investigative article where the reporter found 40 people that had, you know, 40 people who were begging on the street. And this reporter went and did actually investigations in the background of every single one of them and was to his show. was using the money for drugs and alcohol and was not part of any kind of uh systematic program of getting better and moving on and so that's there is when i read that article i have to say it might have poisoned me uh it made me say this is not where i want to put my money i want to put my money in a way that really helps poor people and doesn't make them worse and so i stopped giving to beggars so but that's that's a judgment call it's not like tim keller the pastor says it is a sin to give no it is not a sin uh at all so and actually sometimes i do it anyway because i can't help it in spite of my head i just can't help it so okay somebody else oh sorry go ahead our question actually dovetails nicely with that uh organizations also can use their money for proverbial drugs and alcohol so um sometimes we struggle with to whom to give our money if it's a huge organization that might spend you know half of your money on executive salaries and then they go out and buy mercedes-benzes uh it's the individual who uses the money for drugs or alcohol so i know i personally spend a lot of time vetting organizations to determine if my money is going to support agendas i disagree with sure sure um or if it's being wasted so how do we approach that to decide you know we've decided what our sacrifice is but to whom do we give it well you know for there's two answers the question one is you can just go to the trouble of doing it yourself what you're doing which is good and so you're careful to to vet the organization but you can also collectively some of you can say five or six of you getting together who have an interest in uh using your income to to help the common good in a particular way you might do a better job of saying well let's find let's let's research the six or seven organizations that do that and figure out which one is better and we do it together we do a better job you know in some way hope for new york for example does do do a pretty good amount of investigation for which ministries they are going to be giving money to and and and and uh funneling volunteers to and so if you see an organization that hope for new york is behind uh though sometimes hope for new york has given and been involved and because they're not happy with the way in which an organization is moving they may they may drop them as a as a partner ministry so they're constantly doing the vetting themselves so that's one way to look and see what hope for new york has done or else create your own group because you're interested in education or you're interested in you know uh minister you're interested in church planting or you're interested in um um aids in africa and so do your investigation as a group you'll do a better job somebody else hi tim could you address the tension between giving sacrificially and responsible financial planning for retirement yeah um by the way those of you went to westminster seminary maybe maybe i shouldn't am i am i being taped so those of you who went to westminster seminary you know who john murray is right john murray was one of the founding professors of westminster seminary and he uh did not believe in insurance or retirement and felt it was a lack of faith um and um believed that the christian community should just take care of their own and i'm pretty sure the amish for example don't have pension plans don't you know and that sort of thing but they are they truly are living in community and actually when he uh i my understanding i've been told this from multiple sources that at the end of his life because of his illnesses it was catastrophic for the people around him and it really wasn't a good idea and actually insurance is no different than rent in some ways you know you're you're you're paying you're paying for someone else to give you something that they belong to you something that belongs to them so anyway um i would say that and also as you get older when you're younger you you're not very good on notice i'm i'm bundling together health care with retirement and i think those two things are actually both pretty important because uh if i have a if i have a catastrophic uh uh illness or a problem right now i do expect the christian community to come around me but long term it to to actually have to care for someone uh for years and years and years who's getting older and whose health is breaking down because they didn't properly have a good retirement it can it can destroy the kids it can destroy the family it can you destroy the people around them and therefore the balance is i would say uh get yourself good retirement because then the people around you who love you can be putting their money rather than you into ministry and other people so i would lean towards any retirement's pretty doggone important for the sake of the whole christian community so okay somebody else go ahead just stand up you you the question. You're limiting your giving, but you see a lot of people in the Christian community who aren't at all. By the way, you mean Christian friends, by the way? Okay. Forgive them. I'm not kidding. I'm not kidding. I mean, what I would want to do is, if I saw that, I would want to try generically to get my small group or my church talking more about this. So that, in other words, if you see your Christian friends doing this and you say, you know what? Rather than me going to them and talking about something which is actually pretty subjective. That's the problem. When you see somebody committing adultery, you say, you're committing adultery. And they're going to say, yeah, you're right. But if you see somebody being materialistic, saying you're materialistic, they'll say, well, that all depends on how you look at it. And therefore, confronting somebody about materialism almost never works. Because they can always say, well, yeah, of course I bought shoes like that, but they last a lot longer and it's cheaper than buying the kind of shoes you buy. You know? It gets very, very subjective. So, what you should be trying to do is you should be trying to turn the heat up on the whole subject in your church or in your small group or in your classes and do whatever you possibly can to say, we should be talking every bit as much about materialism as about sensuality. Every bit as much about money as about sex, if not more, because the Bible talks a lot more about it. So, what you ought to do is try to turn the heat up in the whole church rather than put the heat on them. And when I mean forgive, I do mean that. You do have to be very careful because if it just fries you to see them doing it, then that might be self-pity on your part. And you really do have to forgive people from the heart for just being unwise and foolish. Okay? Yes, go ahead. Okay, we agreed that giving more than tithing was great. We were actually having more of a debate on the reverse, the idea that if you are struggling, it's okay not to tithe. And the sense is, one, that might be a grace position, but what about living out in faith and saying, okay, even if I am struggling, I'm going to tithe because I have faith in God? And also, at what point does that become a slippery slope and you think, well, you know, I'm struggling right now? I wouldn't do that. I mean, I've had people say that and say, if I tithe this year and God doesn't come through with some kind of infusion of cash, I won't be able to pay my bills. But I'm going to step out in faith and tithe anyway. I don't think, I think that's also called tempting God. That's saying, you, you, yeah, Walt Hendrickson, he used to write books for the Navigator, said, he said, he says, let me give you a, let me do a thought experiment with you. You're in an airplane and you're at 30,000 feet and you say, why shouldn't I just jump out of this airplane? Don't I have a God who can save me? Don't I have a God who can keep me from dying? Don't I have a God big enough to bring me to earth, you know, safely? Why not? So you jump out of the airplane and about 5,000 feet down, you suddenly realize, of course God can do it, but there's no place where he promises that he will. There is no place where he promises that he will. If you, of course he could do it, but if you jump out of an airplane. And I, there's no place that says, if you tithe, I promise that I'll give you enough money to make your bills. Where is that? I mean, I really, I do think that's a kind of super spirituality that I do see in a lot of people's lives. And I don't see it as faith. I do see it as maybe presumption. So sorry to be so strong, you know, maybe it keeps you so far away. If you were a little closer, I might be a little, you know. So I, so I'm not, no, I don't think it's a good idea, actually. That's why I try to say, if you're sacrificing, and you're not, if you're not tithing, but you're sacrificing, let your conscience rest for the time being. But that doesn't mean you're not trying to push past the tithe. You should, because that's, that's the general rule of thumb. But it's not, it's not a, it's not a, an absolute principle in the New Testament that you've got to do no matter what. There's, for example, you can't commit adultery, it doesn't matter how bad you feel, you just can't do it. But you, it doesn't, there's no way that says you've got to tithe whether or not you can meet your bills or not. Okay, somebody else, sorry. Hi, my question is more about the, the catalytic presentation of, or I guess these meetings are fairly catalytic events. And how do we take some of the concepts, like the concept of stewardship and not make it just a two-week sort of increase in giving and then sort of forget about it after, as soon as, you know, Christmas comes? Well, that's a great question. Actually, I don't think, um... example, and I'll talk about this in about three minutes, seven years ago, or eight years ago, and last year, we did a vision campaign. We did two vision campaigns, and each time you do a vision campaign, you bombard people with two things. One is, here's the vision of the church, what we're trying to do, and here's what the Bible says about stewardship. And each time, there's an enormous increase in the amount of giving, and it's great. It's a response to the Word of God, and it's usually absolutely enormous, and slowly, slowly, it tends to kind of come down. It's like, you know, we're in a fallen world, and people just forget. It just, it's not, doesn't stay real. If you come back on it every month, I believe it would just go into the toilet, because it would be something that you just hear all the time. It's like, you know, I had an elder in my church in Virginia that lived literally six, his living room wall was literally six feet away from a train track, and the train would come by, you know, constantly. And if you were in the house, and you'd never been there before, it was absolutely incredible. It was like, what's that? You know, it really felt like it was coming right through the living room. It was amazing. I mean, he'd lived there for years and years. It's, and he said, what's what? And I think as important as this stuff is, if you, if you hammer people on stewardship constantly, it would just, it would just go in one ear and out the other. On the other hand, if you don't bring it up with some regularity, and with a great deal of passion, I think, again, people just forget it. They want to forget it. I mean, they want it at a deeper level. So, I would say it's a couple times a year. I mean, once, once, one season in the church, at whole, annually, and probably the, the small groups ought to at least have one season a year addition. Some other time where you really look at it for a couple of weeks. So, at least a couple times a year, you have to do it. I don't know any other way. It's, it's very tough. It's the same way with everything. It's the same way with the Holy Spirit. It's the same way with talking to people about anything. How do you, you know, it wears off. But I think that's, that's how we've been doing it a couple times a year. Yes, go ahead. Can you briefly touch on the biblical principle of the importance of being out of debt, and maybe how that relates to things like mortgages and credit cards and student loans and things? Okay. This is going to have to be the last one, because I've got to make, that's a great question. Romans chapter 12 says, owe no one anything. This is the reason why, by the way, somebody like John Murray did believe a mortgage was wrong, because you owe somebody. The real problem with that is, is why rent? See, when you rent, you are living in, in a piece of property that belongs to somebody else, and you're paying them for the use of it. And you're paying them all the time, so you owe. So, you know, it, you, it, therefore, a mortgage is basically renting money, right? A mortgage is renting money. And so, therefore, if, if renting a room or renting a house isn't wrong, then renting money can't be wrong. Nevertheless, then you say, well, then how do you, what is indebtedness in that case? And indebtedness actually, I think, means not, in a way, once you say, well, the mortgage is due every month, if you're able to pay that mortgage every month, or you're able to pay your rent every month, you owe no one anything. You really don't owe anybody. But when you find that bills are coming due, that you can't pay the bills when they come due, you're into debt. That's true of your credit card, it's true of your mortgage, it's true of anything. If you can't pay a bill when it comes due, if you have to defer it, then you're in debt, and you need to say, I need to make some changes in my life. That's what I believe. So, again, this is pastoral advice, it's not like, here's the verse, here's the chapter, therefore, somebody says, oh my gosh, I can't pay my credit card bill this month, I have to wait three weeks before I pay it, and therefore Tim Keller says, I'm in sin. I didn't say that. But I'm saying, you know, when the Bible says, owe no one anything, you do have to adapt a little bit. There was a time and place in which the very idea of renting, you know, someone else's, the idea of renting or mortgage was, nobody did it. It's a capitalistic innovation. On the other hand, there's always been tenant farmers as far back as we know, and I'm pretty sure that they weren't considered in sin just to be a tenant farmer. So, that's it.
