TITLE: Mortification Through Joy
SCRIPTURE: Romans 8:1-13
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit
SERIES: In Christ Jesus: How the Spirit Transforms Us
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/mortification-through-joy/

============================================================

The scripture reading tonight is found on page 9 of the bulletin, and it's Romans 8, 1 through 13. There is therefore now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. For the law of the Spirit of life has set you free in Christ Jesus from the law of sin and death. For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do. By sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemns sin in the flesh in order that the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the things of the Spirit. To set the mind on the flesh is death, but to set the mind on the Spirit is life and peace. For the mind that is set on the flesh is hostile to God, for it does not submit to God's law. Indeed, it cannot. Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. You, however, are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. If, in fact, the Spirit of God dwells in you, anyone who does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. But if Christ is in you, although the body is dead because of sin, the Spirit is life because of righteousness. If the Spirit of him who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you. So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh. For if you live according to the flesh, you will die. But if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live. This is God's Word. I think I've said every week that when I first embraced the Christian faith, there was a number of things in my life that profoundly needed changing, but nothing seemed to work until some writers, some Christian writers, took me to Romans 6, 7, and 8. And when I began to understand the teaching of Romans 6, 7, and 8, my life began to change. And so in this brief series, I'm taking you to Romans 6, 7, and 8. And the question is, how does Christ, how does faith in Christ actually lead to real change in one's life? Today we get to Romans 8, and we see that in Jesus we get three things quite relevant for this subject. Three things we get. We get a new freedom to know yourself. Let me put it in the second person. We get a new freedom. You get a new freedom to know yourself. You get a new method to change yourself. And you get a new power to be yourself. You get a new freedom to know, method to change, power to be yourself. Point one. New freedom to know yourself. Romans 7, which we looked at last week, right up to verse 1, that is Romans 8, verse 1, right up to verse 22, 23, 24 of the end of chapter 7, is saying this, that in every one of us there is a dark mass, even the best of us, even the St. Paul's, there's a dark mass of self-absorption, self-concentration, self-centeredness. And it's far worse than any of us want to admit. And it makes us capable of terrible sin and evil. And then immediately after saying that, as Paul is saying this is true of you, it's true of me, it's true of all of us, the moment he says that, he turns then to verse 1 of chapter 8, and he says, simultaneously, there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. And no condemnation, the word condemnation is the Greek word kata krino, which means to have a judgment against. To be condemned or to be guilty means there's something against you, that you're liable for something, and you're in a state of estrangement until you pay your debt, let's say, to society. But this is saying that though we not only are capable of wrongdoing, but we're doing wrong at the same moment with regard to God, nothing we have ever done brings us into condemnation. With regard to God, there is no liability. And this word no, there is now, therefore now, no condemnation. That word no is too strong a word to convey with any one particular English word because it's not a word that means there's now for the moment no condemnation. This word no means there's no more. Condemnation for Christians no longer exists. It's been destroyed, never again. That's what it's saying. So Romans 7 is just saying we are capable of tremendous evil and immediately says at the same time, simultaneously, if you're in Christ, none of that can ever bring you into condemnation. There's a place in Luke chapter 11 where Jesus is speaking to his disciples and he's actually teaching them about prayer and he says this, Luke 11, he says to his disciples, if you then, though you are evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more your heavenly father. You who are evil. Now, think about this. He's talking to the people he loves, that he delights in, that he's going to die for, that he's unconditionally committed to, but he's also saying, well, can you hear Jesus saying this to you? I love you. I will never forsake you. I'm unconditionally committed to you. I delight in you, but you're evil, you know. Have you heard that? Because if you have, you have something that no, from what I can tell, no system of thought, no philosophy, no religion, East, West, individualistic, collectivistic, liberal, conservative can give you. You know, there's a liberal, a liberal mindset that never calls anyone sinful or evil, including yourself, because you see all problems are really functions of psychological or sociological dynamics. And when you really do something far more cruel or cowardly or worse than anything you ever thought you were capable of, you've got no category for it. You'll go into denial. But there's a conservative mindset. And there's a conservative mindset who does use the term sinful and evil for people over there. And whose very identity is based on the idea that I'm not one of them. I'm one of the virtuous people. I'm not like those relativists, those anarchists. I'm one of the virtuous people. And when you find yourself, and you will, doing things worse, more cruel, more cowardly than anything you've ever done, you won't have a category for it. You won't know how to deal with it. You will go into denial. But the gospel of Jesus, Jesus' attitude, Jesus' statement, if you're in Christ, you are simultaneously evil and absolutely loved, gives us a freedom. When you say, well, that's crazy. That's contradictory. Oh, yeah. Yeah, it's crazy. Admittedly, it's really weird. But let me show you how great it is. Because first of all, it gives you an unmatched, unique, sociological freedom. What I mean by that is, you don't have to divide. You can't, if you understand this, divide the world anymore into the good guys, the bad guys. You know, some people say there's the good people, then there's the liberals. Some say, oh, there's the good people, then there's the fundamentalists. Everybody's saying there's a good or bad. But if you're a Christian, if you have any understanding of this, you know, you know, that the difference between you and a prostitute, you and a murderer, you and a Nazi, the only difference between you and them is that the seeds in your heart that make you capable of being or doing that just never got watered. So they never sprouted. And therefore, you have the freedom, in Christ we have the freedom, to find common humanity with people, anybody. We sense our common, fragile humanity and we don't write people off and we don't call the people, those people, the other with capital O. But it's also, even more importantly, the gospel gives you psychological freedom to handle things that you are going to do and then you won't have to deny or spin them or repress them and make it impossible for you to know who you are. Because I don't believe there's any other, only with that support, of saying, look, you're capable of terrible things and I'm absolutely unconditionally committed to you, says Jesus. Only if you've got that kind of support will you really be able to be honest. Oh, you say, this idea of calling yourself a sinner, that's emotionally unhealthy, you say. Oh, no. Oh, no. It's emotionally unhealthy not to be able to call yourself a sinner. Can I give you an example? One true account that has really affected Kathy and my understanding of this is that years ago when we were in Virginia, in our area, these aren't people we knew personally, in our area, a terrible thing happened in the late 70s to a young married couple. They had three children. They were strapped into an automobile. The automobile ended up going in without any drivers in it. The automobile went into a lake or a pond and all three children were killed. They were all drowned. Horrible tragedy. But at the funeral, the husband and wife, to everyone's surprise, really testified to their faith in God and they seemed so incredibly spiritually strong that everyone, for miles around, were just talking about what incredibly faithful, good Christian people they are. What faith in God. And they did. They picked themselves up and they had more children and they built a new family and they, of course, were pillars in the church and the husband was an officer in the church. He was a pillar in the church. Twenty years later, we were in another church and we heard a minister tell a story about a man and even though he rightly so did not use the man's name, it was very, very clear, it was very obvious to us, this is the same guy, the father. trouble losing all three children etc and he was a pillar of this community and a pillar of his church but they had come to the pastor many years later in absolute agony because he had discovered he had found that he was very strongly sexually attracted to a woman in the church that wasn't his wife and he had very strong feelings and a very strong attraction and he was struggling and he was in agony and he uh and he was uh he experienced horrible guilt he the pillar of the church an officer in the church how could he feel this way how could he do this how could he want this and the pastor said the story was that he got a lot of counseling he got good counseling got professional counseling he got spiritual counseling but in the end he killed himself now is that just a sad story oh yes of course it's a sad story but listen to me here's a man who could handle the worst suffering that the world could give to him but couldn't handle the possibility that he was a sinner and are you going to tell me it's emotionally unhealthy to be able to call yourself a sinner for him it was the absolute opposite of emotional dishealth unhealth to be able to say i am capable of terrible things but i'm unconditionally loved is the is the epitome of mental health and it's the gospel that gives us that the gospel gives you freedom to admit who you are when the information comes to see where you do need to change the freedom to know yourself point one point two the second thing we learned here is the gospel gives you a new method for change a method up in verse three there's another reiteration of one of the themes of romans 7 it says for god has done what the law weakened by the flesh could not do and remember we talked about this last week one of the points that paul makes in romans 7 is that we've got all this self-centeredness and this self-absorption and this self uh uh this self-concentration we've got this mass in us that's making our own lives miserable with this self-concentration and it makes our the lives miserable people around us what are we going to do about it and what we usually do is we apply willpower and we see the moral law and we say we're going to live up to the moral law and paul is pointing out here he's summarizing what he said in romans 7 that that doesn't help you because you know self-centeredness and self-righteousness can can take a moral form as well as an immoral form you can be a pharisee as well as a criminal and still make the world a mess of a place so what are we supposed to do in order to change ourself the answer is verse 13 here it is for if you live according to the flesh you will die but if by the spirit you put to death the deeds of the body you will live if by the spirit you put to death the deeds of the body you will live now in romans 6 and romans 7 and i'm afraid to to prove this exegetically you'd have to go back to the sermons i can't read recapitulate here but in romans 6 and 7 we learn that when paul talks about the flesh he's not talking about the physical body when paul talks about the deeds of the body or the deeds of the flesh he's talking about the whole life okay being controlled by a self-salvation project that what paul means by living in the flesh means to be your own savior to be your own lord to try to instead of letting god be your savior and lord and that everything in your life everything that your body does everything your your whole life does everything in your life all your actions and attitudes and everything is controlled by an effort to be your own savior and lord it's a self-salvation project that's what it means to live according to the flesh and live in the flesh and what he's saying in verse 13 is fascinating he says if you live according to the flesh you will die but if you root out and destroy your particular ways of trying to save yourself if you root out and destroy your particular ways of doing self-salvation you will live if you just go with the flow you will die if you according to self-salvation project you will die but if you root out and identify and destroy your particular ways of doing self-salvation then and only then will you live well you say how does that work what is this new method at the heart of the new method verse 5 and 6 says is recognizing and changing what you mind recognize and changing what you put your mind on look at verse 4 and 5 it's just another statement of verse 13 he says for those who live according to the flesh see set their minds on the things of the flesh but those who live according to the spirit set their minds on the things of the spirit to set the mind on the flesh is death but to set the mind on the spirit is life wow and peace now if you you must keep this in mind if understand render the kenyard like and haircut my father now. different things yes in english in our way of thinking mind means the reason and the cognition and heart means the emotions but not in the bible mind and the heart are the core of the being and therefore when paul says you set your mind on the flesh he's not just saying you have bad thoughts and he's not even talking only about thoughts here's what he's saying he's asking you to look at yourself and recognize what preoccupies you what engrosses you the most what is your heart most engrossed in where are your dreams where where do they reside what has captured your imagination what are what what most preoccupies and engrosses the very core of your thinking and your dreaming and your fantasizing and your heart and your mind because paul says whatever that is is always your way of justifying yourself your way of proving yourself your way of of developing your own sense of value and worth and therefore that's your way of being your own savior and lord you say would you please flesh that out yes i've just recently realized i mean i just found to my fascination that when the movie chariots of fire in 1981 was uh made a true story of two british men harold abrams and eric little who won gold medals for britain in the 1924 paris olympics i didn't realize that when that film came out in 1981 jenny little eric little's sister was still alive eric little went on to be a missionary in china and died in a detention camp uh in uh in china during world war ii but jenny who's also depicted in the movie uh lived through to the place where she had an interview after the movie came out and one of the things that she said was one thing that bothered her a little bit about the movie was there's only one scene in which is a glimpse of this and if you know the movie you know which one it is but she says the thing the movie didn't show is that every time whenever eric her brother who was a world-class runner sprinter 100 yard dash and so on whenever eric ran he always ran with his face straight up to the sky and his mouth wide open looking like a crazy man see he always ran with his face smack up to the sky see facing directly with his mouth open he looked crazy he looked eccentric but he was worshiping because harold abrams and eric little were both setting their mind on the same thing they wanted to run they wanted to win and they wanted to run and win a race but for totally different reasons because when harold abrams is asked why are you running he describes the 100 yard dash and he says when that gun goes off i've got 10 seconds he says quote unquote to justify my existence and what he's saying is only if i can be this if i can win this race if i can be an accomplished athlete then i know i matter then i can face the world because i've accomplished this thing but of course eric little in the movie says to jenny jenny god made me fast and when i run i feel his pleasure now listen here's one guy and he's running to praise his savior and here's the other guy who's running to become his own savior they said so here's one guy who is running for the sheer joy of it it's icing on the cake if he wins great if he doesn't win great because he's already justified his life is justified here's the other guy who's running in grinding anxiety churning and grinding down anxiety and fear because he's seeking to be justified he said so and by the way as you know in the movie when even after he wins he finds it unsatisfying because idols never deliver now are you beginning to understand to set the mind on the flesh is not just having bad thoughts it's essentially to put your mind and your heart on something besides jesus christ as functional savior and to see how that actually works let me just give you another kind of example i remember some years ago many years ago counseling two young men at the same time both of them had just lost their jobs because their bosses had been pretty stupid and wrong and unfair so because of an unfair action the part of their bosses they both lost their job and they both had a blot on their career record but guy a pretty much got over it forgave the boss moved on and soon was doing so well that he more than compensated for that little blot it would make essentially was a non a non-issue you very bitter, stayed incredibly cynical, and it was affecting his career. It was affecting his job. It was affecting his whole future career path. I remember sitting down with that second guy, and a lot of people had been trying to help him, and some people tried to work directly on his emotions. And the way you work directly on the emotions is you say, oh, you know, your sympathy, and you talk about how hard it's been and how awful it's been, and you're trying to help the person, and the problem is the more sympathy that people showed him, the more he felt justified in how angry he was, and the more his self-pity grew and grew, and he got worse. Other people tried to work right on his will. They said, come on, buck up, don't let the bastards get you down, just forgive it, get past it, didn't help either. Because the gospel, however, is different. For the gospel doesn't work directly on the emotions and say, oh, you know, God loves you in some general way. Though he does. And the gospel doesn't work directly on the will and say, now you have to do the right thing. Though, of course, you do have to do the right thing. But the gospel says, what is functioning in the place of Jesus Christ as your real, functional salvation and savior? What are you looking to to justify yourself? And see, what happened was the one guy cared about his career, and the other guy cared about his career. But this second guy was looking at his career the way Harold Abrams was looking at it running. And he had a sense of condemnation. And it was through his career that he could prove himself, that he mattered, that he could accomplish something. And when something went wrong with it, when something went wrong with the career, he felt absolutely condemned. And he was furious that he was paralyzed because the very foundations of his identity were falling apart. And it wasn't until we were able to do analysis like that, it wasn't until he began to understand he had set his mind on the flesh, that this was his approach to self-salvation, that he began to say, wait a minute, wait a minute. It's not just I have to forgive the guy. Yes. The reason I can't forgive the guy, it's not just that I have to get back on the horse and work hard. But the reason I have to, the real problem I have underneath is something besides Jesus Christ is functioning as my savior. And there always is something underneath your inordinate, not-of-control problems, desires, patterns, attitudes, emotions, that's always down there. And until you find it, you can't have life and peace. Until you find it, you're going to find things falling apart in your life. That's called death. So first of all, you have the support in the gospel to be honest about what needs to be changed. Then you've got a method in the gospel to identify what you set your mind on so you can understand, you know, where you need to change. But then the third question is, wait, wait. How does that poor guy now really turn the corner? Here's what was going on. The guy was a professing Christian. Oh, yeah, he was. But, and he said, look, I technically, I believe that there's no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. And technically, I believe that I'm loved. But here's the simple fact. I should be able to say, the king of the universe loves me. Who cares what my boss thinks? But I can't. Because what my boss thinks is more real to me than what the king of the universe says. That's just, it's just, it's, you know, what the, what the boss says is on video. But what the king of the universe says is sort of on audio. I know with my head, but I don't know with my heart. And that's the third thing. Where do you get the power to really make this change? And the answer is, it's actually down in verse 13, but it's also up in verse 5 and 6. Verse 13 says, you have to put to death the deeds of the body. You have to destroy and root out your fleshly way of living, your self-salvation projects, by the spirit, by the spirit. And up in verse 5 it says, you have to take your mind off of the things of the flesh. You have to, you have, you have to destroy the self-salvation projects. How? By minding the things of the spirit. Now what does that mean? Minding the things of the spirit. See, this is where we move away from a pure technique. Now we're not completely in control here, everybody. You can't just pick up the Holy Spirit like a, like a scissors or like a screwdriver and start to use the Holy Spirit. But here's what it's saying. What is, what does it mean to mind the things of the spirit? Don't forget, minding is more than thinking, remember? To mind the things of the spirit means your whole heart, mind, and being are enthralled, captivated by something. See, they're all brought together. They're engrossed in, they're preoccupied in. They're captured by something. Your imagination is captured by something. What? In John chapter 14, 15, and 16, Jesus says, when the Holy Spirit comes, he will take the things that I'm telling you. He will take my teachings and he will manifest them to you. Now this is it. You may have the teachings. They may be on a piece of paper. You may say, it's okay, but the Holy Spirit's job is to make them real to you. It's the Holy Spirit's job. until you weep and the penny begins to drop. And what he says about you is more real than what your boss says about you or what anybody says about you. There's a great place where John Donne in one of his sonnets says, and listen carefully, it's really, really amazing language. He's speaking to Jesus and he says, take me to you, imprison me, for I, except you enthrall me, never shall be free, nor ever chaste, except you ravish me. I'll never be chaste. I'll never have self-control. What he's really trying to say here is a love of this person or that person will be far more real than the love of you for my soul. And the only way I'm ever going to have self-control, the only way I'm going to be able to forgive my boss, the only way I'm going to be able to not worry about money, the only way I'm going to be able to handle the rejection I'm getting in life, the only way I can walk through life at large, see, without it all pulling me down, is I need the ministry of the Holy Spirit to make what Jesus Christ has done for me so real that I weep with the beauty of it and the penny drops and I'm off. That replaces those other things in the core of my being, which I'm trying to push there to the center of my being. That's what does it. That's the change. You say, well, how does that happen? Well, God gives us an idea here. Paul gives an idea in verse three. It says, for God has done what the law weakened by the flesh could not do. Look, by sending his son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin. Now, the little word for sin, boy, I know that looks so innocuous on the page, but it's a, all experts and commentators and scholars understand that that is a, that's a technical term all through the Old Testament, the Septuagint, for sin offering. And here's what it says. It's not enough just to say, oh, you need to just know God loves you in general. You've got to fix your mind on what? You've got to let the Holy Spirit show you what? How Jesus Christ was condemned in your place. How Jesus Christ sacrificially gave himself and was condemned in your place. And what you're doing, you first study that, you learn that, that's the heart of the gospel. And then you spend the rest of your life letting the Holy Spirit amass radioactive material to work on the tumors of your heart. See, why do I say tumors? Sin is a tumor. You know, cancer, what is cancer? Cancer is just cell growth gone bad, so it's going to kill you. And what is sin? It's self-centeredness, self-absorption, self-concentration. It's going to kill you unless you kill it first. And what is the radioactive isotope that will shrink and kill those tumors before they kill you? It's what Jesus Christ did on the cross, illuminated by the Holy Spirit. Now, there's going to be texts. They're so diverse. Every person who has grown in grace and has bit by bit been changed, has put to death the self-salvation of the body, the self-salvation of the soul, and slowly more and more lived large, lived free, lived loved. Anyone who's been through that, you've got a kind of a secret thread of texts and movies and passages and biblical texts and sermons and things like that, that over the years, the Holy Spirit grabs hold of because of who you are and where you are at the time and turns it into a radioactive material which you can get out the rest of your life and use to shrink those tumors when you know that they're starting to grow back. You know, Kathy and I have got a, you know, for example, Duncan, at the end of Last of the Mohicans, the British officer who dies in the fire, arms outstretched, crucified to save the life of Korah. Does that get to you? Maybe not to you. But it's part of the radioactive materials that the Holy Spirit's given us. 1 Corinthians 1, God made the foolish things of the world. He used the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. He uses the weak things of the world to shame the strong. He used even the lowly and despised things, even the things that are not to bring to nothing the things that are. He said, oh, that's kind of moving to me. Yeah, but for us, this is one of the radioactive parts. This is some of the material that the Holy Spirit is using to destroy the self-salvation. You can find it anywhere. At the end of The Iron Giant, the great cartoon, The Iron Giant, he takes a nuke to save the people and then gets resurrected to some incredible music. See? I can't, Kathy and I can't watch that without weeping about Jesus. And you might say, you know, gee. You might say, you know, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, gee, See, I can't, Kathy and I can't watch that without weeping about Jesus. And you might say, you know, tea. But there's, let me really show you how it works. At the end of A Tale of Two Cities, Sidney Carton resembles Charles Darnay. Charles Darnay is in the Bastille, I guess, and he's been sentenced to death. He's condemned, and he's going to be guillotined, right? Okay. Sidney Carton breaks in stealthily to the jail, knocks Charles Darnay out, and some of his companions take the unconscious man and steal him out of the jail. And Sidney Carton takes his place, takes his clothes, and waits to die in his place. And the next day, there's a young girl who's, a young woman who's also been condemned to die, and she comes up thinking he's Charles Darnay, begins to talk, but then realizes it's not, sees his face and realizes it's not, and her eyes get really big. And she says, are you dying for him? And he says, yes. See, that begins to shrink my tumors. The old King James Bible, in verse 13, said, you must mortify the deeds of the flesh. You must mortify your false saviors, and you will live. And, of course, today that word mortification just means embarrassed, so we don't use the word anymore. In the old days, it meant to put something in the mortuary. But you know what? When I hear Sidney Carton say, yes, I'm dying for him, it shrinks my tumors. It mortifies my stupid egocentric heart that's always worried about what I'm getting here and what I'm getting there, and is somebody helping, is somebody noticing me, am I getting, it mortifies with joy. The joy of what Jesus Christ has done for me, it mortifies my ego into silence, and so it's not bothering me as much, and it's not bothering you as much. Are you dying for him? And he says, yes, for him and his wife. And then she takes hold of his hand and says, stranger, it's going to be hard for me to die, but if I could hold the hand of someone so brave and so courageous and loving as you, I think I can face it. And he says, all right. She was smitten by the wonder of his substitutionary sacrifice for somebody else. How much more when the Holy Spirit shows you what Jesus Christ has done for you, will you be able to put to death the things that are putting you to death? Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us a method, a power, and a freedom to really change. And we ask that you would help us now to get some more spiritually radioactive material for the things in our hearts that are harming us and the people around us. We're going to the Lord's table, and we pray that you would be real to us by the power of the Spirit to change us into your own image. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
