TITLE: My God is a Rock: Listening to the African-American Spirituals (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Race
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/my-god-is-a-rock-listening-to-the-african-american-spirituals-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Let me start off with this talk the way I actually mentioned. I started in the very beginning when some of you weren't here at the very, very beginning. And therefore I need to get to this right away. One of the things I came up against when I was reading, and I did quite a bit of reading for this, for obvious reasons. We want to ask ourselves what, if we don't just listen to African American spirituals as entertainment, if we really take it seriously, if we really listen to the message, if we say what can we learn, then that raises a real question. Who can interpret this for us? Now James Cone in his book, The Spirituals and the Blues, I came across something in page three. I read that whole book, but in page three I came up against this. He says, I am convinced that it is not possible to render an authentic interpretation of black music without having shared and participated in the experience that created it. Black music must be lived before it can be understood. Now that's true. I even have a sense of that in this way. I'm a Christian, and I live in New York City. Now if you live in New York City and you're a Christian, if you believe Jesus is the Son of God, if you believe that there is eternity, if you believe there is transcendent moral order, if there's a God, you believe Jesus broke into history and lived and died, that makes you a minority here. I'm a minority spiritually. And one of the things Christians have always noticed in New York City is that secular people haven't the slightest idea what Christians really believe. Secular people are often spouting off and very unhappy saying Christians believe this, I don't like this or that. But whenever they describe how Christians believe, they don't know. And I came to realize it's because a minority always understands a majority better than a majority understands a minority. Always. Why? Well, you see, for us as Christians to work and live in a secular world, we, in order to get along, we have to understand secular thinking. But because the secular people are the ones that dominate New York City, they don't have to understand Christian thinking to get along. So we are Christians in our thinking, and we also have to understand secular people, but secular people don't have to understand us at all. And it suddenly hit me when I was reading James Cone. Oh my word, this must mean that black people understand white people far, far, far better than white people understand black people. It has to be. It's automatic. Because black people have had to get along in a white world, and they've had to learn both ways. But white people don't have to learn that way, and as a result, we're really quite ignorant. So what am I doing here? And you see, Cone says this. I'm convinced that it's not possible to render an authentic interpretation. Well, I'm not here to give you an authentic interpretation. What I'm here as is not an interpreter, but as a listener. I believe that the broader American community has got to listen to the message of African American spirituality. And I'm only here to say, with the help of the Racial Unity Ministry of Redeemer, with the help of stuff, and I read every bit of it, wherever you are. Dennis Day and Andrea Clark and Jeff White gave me some stuff. I read everything. Because I read what Cone said, and what Cone says is, well, if you don't understand the experience, you at least need to do your very best to try to understand as much as you can. I'm here to try to be a model, somebody who listens. And I'd like to show you what I heard. I'm not trying to interpret it so much as I'm going to tell you what I heard. I read a book by a man named Carl Ellis, who was a pastor, black pastor, in Chattanooga, and he had a fascinating little insight. And I read the book years ago, but I never saw it. He said, one of the things you can't miss when you listen to African American spirituals is that the identification of the African American people, especially in slavery, but the identification of the African American people with the slaves of Egypt who are led across the Red Sea, who are led to the promised land, a deep, deep identification with the idea that God is on the side of the oppressed and he will liberate the slaves. And Carl Ellis says, but if you read the text, you'll see that, yes, God does lead the slaves out of Egypt, but he doesn't lead them into the promised land just to have a happy life. He leads them into the promised land to be a light to the nations. He leads them out so that they can share what he has done for them with everybody. And I think, and then, so Carl Ellis turns around and says, there's really no other people group in America that has suffered like African Americans and they have been led out of slavery. And they are right in identifying with oppressed people and what God says about his love for oppressed people. But it means that they've got something for all of us to hear. to be a light to the nations. If that's true, that means there's certain things that we, as the broader society, need to hear that God would be saying to us through this music. Because even though African American spirituality, you can read it in books, its main depository at this point, its main depository still, is in art and especially in music. Now, what did I learn? All I did was I read and I listened and you have listened tonight. What do we learn? What can we learn as a broader society from this group of people who, as Carl Ellis has said, have been let out of captivity but to speak to us? Well, there's three things. I'd like to say something that would, I hope, help us all. Here's what we can learn from the experience behind the spirituals, the form of the spirituals, and the message of the spirituals. We need to learn, when you listen to this, you're right away struck with these three things. The experience out of which the spirituals came, the actual form of the music and of the spirituals, and then the message that repeatedly comes through. Okay? Experience, form, message. Here's what we learn about the experience. And this is the hard part, everybody. For everybody, I think, even for African Americans, it's going to be kind of hard. It's very clear. There's a lot of joy. When you listen to God is my rock in particular, was that joyous or was that sad? Was that a joyous song or was that a sad song? Yes. Yes. Of course you're right, joyous song. Of course you're right, sad song. Didn't you notice when African American spirituals are joyful, and they're constantly joyful, there is a depth to it. It's not frothy joy. It's not superficial. There's a depth to it. It's kind of sad joy, but it's real joy. It's really joy. But where does this come from? It comes from slavery. And you know, the American society is never going to deal with the wound of slavery, which was not just a wound. Slavery did not just wound African Americans. It wounded everybody here. We're never going to deal with a wound unless we're willing sometimes, rather constantly, to look at the reality of that experience out of which these things came. Now, what does it mean? What happened? Now, what I'm about to tell you, I'm sure, if you're African American, this is not news to you. But you know what? It's kind of news to the rest of us. There's two ways to look at it. You can look at it historically. From about the early 1500s to about the mid-1800s, about 300 years, 14 million Africans were kidnapped and taken to the Americas as slaves. I mean, I should say, 14 million got here. And you know, there's not much consensus on this, but at least everybody agrees that somewhere between two out of four Africans died for everyone that got here. That means, roughly speaking, there were 50 million Africans in those 300 years that were uprooted and pulled out and essentially were wiped out of the continent. Yes, it's very right and it's very true that slavery was essentially a universal thing everywhere, all over the world for centuries. But really, and I think it's fair to say, it never got institutionalized like it got institutionalized in the British-American slave trade. Even in the very beginning, I read a book by Edmund Morgan, which is not a, you know, nobody gave me this book. I just knew it from many years ago. I reread it, called American Slavery, American Freedom. He's a professor of history at Yale. And he says some pretty startling things. He says, essentially, there was never slavery like this slavery. Slavery was always, it was usually, almost always, it was not permanent and it was never race-based. But what happened by 1660, in the Americas, A, slavery was absolutely race-based, dark skin, you were a slave. Two, see, that was, it was nice and easy to identify. If you're dark-skinned, you're a slave. If you're light-skinned, you're not. That never had happened before. Secondly, it was perpetual. You didn't work your way out. Most slavery really was in sort of indentured servanthood. And if you look in the Bible, you see references to slaves. But when you see in the Bible, it's kind of, listen, in the Bible, I'll get back to this. In the Bible, what you see is there was an institution in which an employer owned your labor. That means you couldn't go anywhere. You had, you owed, you owed, and therefore you had to work for this particular employer. The employer could own your labor, so you weren't in the free market. But the employer, whenever you see any, any reference to servanthood and so forth in the Bible, the employer never owned your person. The Bible said kidnapping was absolutely a sin. You could be, you should be executed for kidnapping. The Bible said the family had to continually and always be maintained. But here's a tremendous piece of prayer. Slavery meant being snatched from your homeland and sailing to an unloaned land in a stinking ship. Slavery meant being regarded as property like horses, cows, and household goods. Slavery meant no family ties were recognized. Recall Josiah Henson, my brothers and sisters were bit off first, one by one, while my mother, paralyzed by grief, held me by the hand. When Moses Grundy's wife was sold, he was permitted only to stand at a distance and speak with her before she was taken away. My heart was so full, he remembered, that I could say very little. Slavery meant working 15 to 20 hours a day and being beaten for showing fatigue. Slavery meant being driven back into the field three weeks after delivering a baby. slavery meant having the cost of replacing you calculated against the value of your labor during a peak season so that often your owner would decide to work you to death. Slavery meant being whipped for crying over a fellow slave that had been killed while trying to escape. There's really never been slavery institutionalized like this. In the early 1700s, when efforts were made to share Christianity with the slaves, a lot of the slave owners said, absolutely not. But when Christianity started to spread, and one of the signs that Christianity is not a socially constructed cultural thing, but it's a power of its own, one of the signs of that is the slave owners only allowed black people to become Christians when they thought it would make them docile, it would make them compliant, and it did not. Because Christianity is a power, the gospel, as Paul says, is a power of God unto salvation. It is a power. It did not. It gave them hope, it made them strong, it gave them a yearning for freedom. You know, however, in the very beginning, just to show you how institutionalized this was, when the slave owners decided, hey, this would be good for them, they built, they actually concocted some slave catechisms. Now, do you know what a catechism is? A lot of you don't even know, I'm sure. They're kind of out of date now, but a catechism was a way of instructing a child in a religion, and it had a question and answer form. And it was, you memorized it, then you recited it back. Now, I've done this with my own children. I had an old catechism, a very old and very good catechism, called the children's catechism, and it goes like this. Question, who made you? Answer, God. Question, why did God make you? Answer, for his own glory. Question, why ought you to glorify God? Answer, because he loves me and takes care of me. However, they wrote a catechism for slave children. The slave children didn't hear that one. This is what they heard. Question, what did God make you for? Answer, to make a crop. Question, what is the meaning thou shalt not commit adultery? Answer, it means to serve our heavenly father and our earthly master, obey the overseer, and not steal anything. And James Cone says, you don't have to have a seminary education to know. That's not Christianity. And yet, it was professing Christians that did this. Now, this is the experience out of which the spirits will come. What does this teach us enough? Here's what it teaches us. Now, what I'm going to do, there's all kinds of things this teaches us, and surely somebody will hope I get to some of the things that I don't get to. But I would like to be, I would like to give us, again, I'm looking for the most basic, most basic lessons that this teaches us. I'm just going to give us two under this heading, because I want to move on. Number one, first of all, this teaches us that African Americans knew something that by and large, European Americans had lost, almost lost complete sight of it. They were so unbelievably spiritually blind. And that is, this teaches, this experience teaches us that the Bible, what the Bible says about the depths of human evil, the depths of potential of evil in the human heart is right. Now, bear with me for about two minutes when I show you what I'm saying. My old friend, Jonathan Edwards, who I love so much, he's a congregational minister in Massachusetts, and in the 1740s, he wrote a sermon, Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God. And he believed what you might call the old Orthodox religion. The Orthodox religion is that people are bad because they're sinful, and they need salvation. They're so bad, they need to be born again. They need a miraculous birth. They need to have their sins washed away. Now, around 1800, all the way through to about World War II, throughout most of Europe and also most of America, that religion, that idea that the human problem is, salvation, that went by the boards. Smart white people everywhere said, oh my goodness, how primitive. We don't believe that. They believed that the real problem was we're basically good and we need education. We need social engineering. And Jonathan Edwards was just laughed at. Now one thing that just hit me when I was preparing for this, in 1958, and I don't know if any of you know this, but over the last 20 years something has really happened, 30 years, even 40 years. In 1958, at the bicentennial of Jonathan Edwards' death in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, one of the great theologians of the early part of the 20th century, Richard Niebuhr, H. Richard Niebuhr, gave a sermon, gave a talk, and this is what he said. It's extremely interesting. He says, we have changed our mind about the truth of many things that Edwards said. No, rather our minds have been changed by what has happened. We have seen the evil in human hearts as he saw it, not because we desired to see it, but because it was thrust on us. Now what he's saying is that the old optimistic liberalism is dying. Why? We thought we didn't need salvation. We thought we weren't that evil. We thought we could just, no, it's dying. Why? And you know what they, World War II and the Holocaust. Look at these wonderful, cultured, educated people, the Nazis. Look what they did to the Jews. Six million Jews. And now here's the thing. Now do you know where I'm going? I've got to get there. Let's go right now. White people thought we're pretty good until we saw the Holocaust. And suddenly we say, gee, maybe we're evil. Maybe we're sinful. Now the one group of people in this country who never got rid of the idea of sin, who always had the old-fashioned Orthodox religion, who always said, you know, the one body of people in this country who's always been the most solid to say, you must be born again. You need to have your sins washed away by the blood of Jesus. Who is that? African-Americans. Why? Well, are we going to be so paternalistic as to say, well, you know, that's their culture. No. How is it possible that we didn't believe in human evil till we saw the Nazis kill six million Jews? Meanwhile, while we were decimating 40 million Africans, it didn't occur to us. Now, that shows the absolute depth of sin because that shows how sin can blind a whole group of people and also what you're capable of. So African-Americans always knew the only way we're going to deal with the human heart is salvation because there is tremendous evil in the heart, even of people that look on the outside so nice. You know, in John chapter two, verse 24, 24, it reminds me of the African-American culture. John chapter two, verse 24, sometimes white people say, you know, black people just don't seem to trust us. In John chapter two, verse 24, this is the quote. Many people saw Jesus Christ, but Jesus would not entrust himself to them for he knew what was in the heart of man. Did you see that? That's in the Bible. You can look it up. John chapter two, verse 24. You know what it says? Jesus didn't trust people. Oh my gosh, go home and tell everybody. Jesus didn't trust people. That's in the Bible. Why? He knew it was in their heart. And when white people from about 1800 to about, in the middle of slavery, from 1800 to 1950, all the intelligentsia of Europe and America were saying, we're not that evil. We've gotten rid of that old idea of sin. We laugh at Jonathan Edwards. We laugh at sinners in the hands of an angry guy. We laugh at all that sort of thing. The old time religion lived on amongst people who knew better. Now there's a great danger here, and I got to say something quickly about this. The great thing about the gospel that you see in African-American spirituality is that evil's in everybody. The great danger, and I think I really appreciate this, the great danger of being oppressed or being an oppressor is everybody can lose. Because if you're an oppressor, it dehumanizes you. It blinds you. But if you are an oppressed person, it's so easy to feel self-righteous, right? It's so easy to say, I'm not like you. I'm a good person. But the gospel says, no, no, no, no. It's in all of us. It's in all of us. You see, without the gospel, we cannot understand human history. We can't understand the depths of human evil. And without the gospel of grace, it says we're all sinners and we all need grace. Without the gospel, when we receive this oppression, we'll become like the oppressors unless the gospel keeps us humble. of human evil, and there's one more thing. We learn about the difference between Christianity and Christianity. You see, now those of you African Americans know this, that there are plenty of African Americans who are so turned off by Christianity because it was the religion of the oppressors that they've left Christianity. And one of the things that's pretty tough when you look at the history of slavery is, does this tell us that Christianity is true or does it tell us it's false? See, here you have all these people that knew all the orthodox doctrine and had all these beliefs and went to church and seemed to understand everything. And yet in the Bible, it clearly says kidnapping is wrong. It clearly says you're not supposed to split families up. It clearly, I mean, it clearly says all these things. And yet people look right at the Bible and they look right at their slaves and they, and you know, it didn't seem to compute. Which goes to, what does that say? What that says is Christianity probably isn't true. If it's such a great power, why didn't it, why didn't it show those people? Now, actually, that's a long story. Maybe somebody can bring that up in the question and answer time. And there are some Christians that seem to understand, generally the Christians that formed countercultures, the Amish, the Church of the Brethren, the Quakers, you know, the Christians that sort of were not completely bought in to the money and the wealth and the power and the status of the dominant culture, they knew what the Bible said. They were white and they understood and they were abolitionists. But so, well, does that mean, ah, yes, Christianity isn't true. But on the other hand, as I just said, Christianity is not something tame. It's not something that's dead. Because the slaves, the slave masters tried to use Christianity to tame the slaves and all it did was give them hope. Listen to the music. They realized there is a God and it's the white man's God, actually, who will judge them. You see, that gives them hope. Or look, here's the gospel and the gospel says, what does the gospel say? James Cone says, there's a difference between master religion and humble servant religion. And African Americans understood the real one, the real Christianity, is a religion of grace. Master religion, now here's what James Cone says. It's pretty interesting. He quotes, he says, the faith of black people was grounded in the authenticity of God's word as revealed through the scriptures, especially in God's word of promise. They trusted that their liberation depended on God's action. From this perspective, there is nothing immature or demeaning about black folks having the humility and the faith of children when they approach the throne of the almighty. He's referring to the fact that some people say, listen to the spirituals, how humble. And they just are so dependent on God. Here's what he says. There's nothing wrong with that. It is only the proud and the mighty who think they are the sole masters of their destiny and of everybody else. That's the faith of white masters and overlords. And their pride keeps them from understanding why others do not want to be ruled by them. Here's what Cone is saying. And this is what I'm trying to say. There is a kind of Christianity that is based on pride, strength, and that says, I'm a good person. I have this status. I'm successful. I live a good life. God will surely bless me. And there's a kind of Christianity that says, we are all sinners. And it's only by the mercy of God and the blood of Jesus Christ that we're going to be saved. James Cone says, is there servant religion, humble, loving, dependent, servant religion? And then there's the master's religion, which is the real Christianity. What is so wonderful is the slaves, when they heard the gospel and the gospel said, every human being, rich and poor, high and low, equally lost. And therefore, every single person, when they're saved by the blood of Jesus Christ, high or poor, is equally, stands before God, loved, accepted with dignity. And therefore, they knew through the gospel that they had dignity. And they knew through the gospel that it was no less a dignity than the masters. And therefore, you see, the gospel, the slave voters tried to use the gospel to tame them, and all it did was turn them into strong people, which goes to show that the gospel is not a social construct, but a power in itself. Therefore, I have to say, I want to be very frank. If you look at the history of slavery in this country, there is lots and lots and lots of evidence that would lead a thoughtful person to say, forget Christianity, forget it. But I would also like to urge that if you look a little closer, and especially not in the history books, but in the music, you'll say, this is a living thing, the real Christianity. Okay, now, secondly, and thirdly, it's going to be a little more brief. First of all, that is the experience. What did we learn from the experience? Secondly, the form. Now, I love this part. Some of the stuff you gave me, if you listen to African-American spirituality, spirituals, you'll see that they're different. It's different. How's it different? First of all, you'll hear lots of improvisation. If George came back up here to sing Amazing Grace, where are you, George? George, it wouldn't be the same. If somebody was down there trying to write down every note, not that you could, but if you tried to write down every note, you'd say, George, you didn't do it that way before. Improvisation. Lots of improvisation. In your classical music, every note. You better hit it, you know? You're doing it, you're doing those runs, you better hit every note. They're there. In African-American spirituals, lots of improvisation. Secondly, lots of double meanings. One of the things that I would never have known, this is a great example of what Cone says, and that is a white guy is not going to really understand a lot of this stuff. James Cone, for example, points out, listen to this, O Mary, don't you weep, don't you moan. O Mary, don't you weep, don't you moan. Pharaoh's army got drowneded. O Mary, don't you weep. Well, now, when the black slaves were singing about how, hey, don't be upset, God got Pharaoh. Pharaoh got drowned. Well, I read that and I said, that's pretty nice. That's interesting. Okay, of course, that happened. That's Exodus 15, Exodus 14. But you see, what James Cone points out is, who's Pharaoh? The oppressors, the masters. And so what they're doing is they're saying, look, there is a God in heaven, and he drowns Pharaohs. And so what you see is, you know, a lot of times when you listen to African-American spirituals, it sounds very docile and kind of sweet and very spiritual, but what have you got in there? All sorts of double meanings. They had to be careful. They had to be careful. They couldn't very often put it on the surface, but underneath, underneath. See, that's where in their private life and in their communal life, they kept their freedom and they kept their selfhood. Thirdly, antiphonal, lots of response, extremely communal. Lots of response, call and response. Fourthly, biblical narrative, tremendous amount of stories, not concepts like our white hymns, you know, theological concepts go by, a story, a story, narrative, character, plot. And then finally, it's very rhythmic and filled with repetition. Now, Carl Ellis has a great place where he says, here's jazz and here's classical. Because you see, jazz, rhythm and blues, blues, all this stuff grows out of African-American spirituality, the improvisation. And Carl Ellis says, you're never going to understand God unless you understand that he's both transcendent and imminent. He's both infinite and personal. He's both high and lofty and transcendent and absolute, and you can't change that. On the other hand, our God and only the Christian God became incarnate. Now, what is incarnation? Do you know what incarnation is? The great God became a real particular human being. You know what that is? That's improvisation. Oh, it sure is. You know why? Because God adapted. See, black people learn to adapt in a way that white people have not. They learn to adapt without losing themselves. If you ever listen to the improvisation, you listen to the jazz. Let me just, let me read you this. Stanley Crouch says this about jazz, which of course grows out of African-American music. Jazz is a collective form that uses improvisation. You sound best when you help make the other people around you sound good. Improvisation is a combination of personal expression and subordination to the need of the group. You see, when you do jazz, when you do improvisation, it's not all relativistic. You are listening to each other, and you have to. And here's what he goes on to say. He says, in jazz, here's a guy playing, and another guy comes in at a certain angle, and the first guy has to figure out how it fits in with what he's been doing. If you do that, you sound better. If he responds to you on the most sensitive level, he sounds better. Your individuality is a kind of democratic sensitivity. The more sensitive you are to the other people in the band, the more your identity achieves itself. One of the things that jazz represents is a way of countering that adolescent stupid obligation to be rude to other people in order to assert your identity. What is jazz? What is improvisation? It's the ability to assert your identity without trampling on the identity of the other person. You come on in, this person is doing a riff, this person is doing all this stuff, and what you have to do is not just ignore them. You've got to make him sound good if you're going to make you sound good. Now, Carl Ellis comes out and says, this is the reason why there's classical theology and there's jazz theology. And white people understand one and black people understand another, and we have to be together. Because they both tell us an experience of God that white people haven't had. We haven't had to learn that kind of adaptation. God adapted. He didn't send a committee. He didn't send a book. He sent a human being. He adapted. and he didn't compromise who he was at all. And yet he completely changed and came to us. That's jazz. That's improvisation. That's spiritual. That's rhythm. That's blues. And C.S. Lewis has that great place where he says, there's a great place where Lewis says, he had a bunch of friends. It was him and Ronald and Charles. And he said, when Charles died, I suddenly realized that I didn't just lose Charles, but I lost the part of Charles that only Ronald, the part of Ronald that only Charles brings out. So I can't tell the kind of jokes that Charles used to tell. And therefore, I'll never get the kind of laughs out of Ronald that Charles used to get. And therefore, I don't get the laughs. And he went on and he said, do you realize because of our differences, we all need each other to get more and more out of each other. And therefore, black Christians and white Christians have got to listen to each other. And they've got to, and in some ways, if anybody knows adaptation, black people do. But African Americans need to show white people how to improvise. Thirdly, the form tells us so much. The experience tells us so much. But finally, finally, let's not miss the message. And there's two basic messages. My God is a rock. Now, what is that? That's taken from Moses. That's taken from the Old Testament. That's taken from the rock. But it means two things. African American spirituality says God is a rock means that there is an absolute God, a just God. If you are here today and you don't know, you don't believe in God, you're a secular person. You believe that everything's relative and everybody has to sort of decide for themselves what's right or wrong. How in the world? Do you think Martin Luther King was a hero? Do you even think Malcolm X, who is not a Christian, but was a Muslim, was a hero? Well, I wanted you to know something. The reason that they were able to get up and say racism is wrong is not because they were relativists. My goodness, don't you understand? If there is no God and if everybody has to decide what's right or wrong for them, then tolerance is relative. If everything's relative, then tolerance is relative. And I can hate you and I can punch you in the nose and what are you going to say about it? But you see, Martin Luther King got up and said, he did not say to white Christians, racism is wrong because everybody's got to be free to follow their dream. He got up and said racism is wrong because the God of the universe, the rock, the unchanging just God, says it's wrong and you're not listening to him. Martin Luther King did not tell white Christians to get less religious, to get kind of secular, to leave the church and become liberal and liberated. He told them to listen to their own theology, to their own Bible, to their own God. God is not whoever you make him to be. If you can make God whoever you want him to be, then there's nothing wrong with racism at all. I can be a racist I want. But God is a rock and therefore racism is wrong because God made every human being, he made every race, they're all in his image. But secondly, James Cone says that God is a rock in a different way. James Cone, one more thing he says, is that when the slaves first heard the stories about Jesus' crucifixion, about his being beaten, they suddenly said, oh my gosh, a Savior who was beaten, a Savior who was struck. One of the old spirituals goes like this, Oh, they whupped him up the hill, up the hill, up the hill, and he never said a mumbling word, he just hung his head and cried. Oh, they crowned him with a thorny crown, thorny crown, thorny crown, and he never said a mumbling word, he just hung his head and cried. Oh, they pierced him in the side, in the side, in the side, and they never said a mumbling word, and he just hung down his head and cried. Let me tell you who Jesus Christ is. In the Old Testament, in the book of Exodus, chapter 17, when the people of God rebel, and Moses knows that God has a right to destroy them, God comes to Moses and says, take your rod, and take the elders and go to the rock. Well, now, the rod was an instrument of judgment, and therefore, it looks like God's going to have a trial. And when you have the elders, you know, that's like the witnesses. So, the witnesses came, and Moses came with the rod, and the people came, and God says, I will stand before you on the rock. It's the only place in all of the Scripture where it says that. Every other place, it says, you stand before God. Everybody stands before God. Only once, only once, they say, I will stand before you on the rock. What does that mean? And then, when he gets there, he speaks to Moses. He says, now hit the rock. Smack the rock. and out comes the water that the people were thirsting for. What is God saying? God stood, Jesus Christ stood, in the place where we should have been, and with his stripes we are healed. See, God took upon, Jesus Christ actually came to earth and he became a slave and he was beaten. African-American people look at him and they say, oh my word, here's one that took on the sins and the suffering of the world. In some ways, the slaves are going to understand that in a way that even African-Americans today probably can't. The more we suffer, the more we realize only Christianity gives us a suffering God and therefore only Christianity shows us a God who takes suffering seriously. The old line goes this way. Other gods rode, you stumbled to your throne. To your wounds, to our wounds, God's wounds speak. And you're the only God who has wounds, you and you alone. Now that's a Christian language. The Christian God is the only God who has wounds because the Christian God is the only God who became a human being, jazz, improv, and took the beating that we deserve. Surely there were slaves that said, hey, white people deserve this beating. And then they saw a man who came and took it all for all of us. Dear friends, what can we learn? There's a power in the gospel. Kathy and I recently talked to a man that just shocked us. We met a man. Boy, did he look, he looks, he looks so Palm Beach, so Park Avenue, so Hamptons. You know, he's got the little silk, this little silk thing coming out of here and, you know, every hair in place. And from what I can tell, very, very well off. And he's a Christian. We said, tell us how you became a Christian. He said, 15 years ago, my Afro-Caribbean maid led me to Christ. I said, where do you go to church? He says, we go to her church. We go to her black Seventh-day Adventist church. Is there any other white people? He says, no. He says, I was the biggest bigot until I went. And she has taught me so much, and they have taught me so much. And I said, I went away. Kathy and I went away, and we said, what other power on earth could make a man like that humble himself like that? The answer is the gospel, gospel music, the jazz of the Lord. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask that tonight we might actually listen to this music and listen to the themes of the music. We pray, Lord, that in spite of all the travesty that many people have made of the gospel in the history of slavery and the history of race relations in this country, we thank you for the clear message that still comes forth. That is, the gospel is the power of God into salvation for all who believe. The Jew, the Greek, the white, the black, the Asian, the Hispanic, we thank you that you're a God like that. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
