TITLE: New Beginning (Palm Sunday)
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 15:1-11
TOPICS: Lent Doctrine Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Lent – Nature of Sin
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/new-beginning-palm-sunday/

============================================================

We've spent a number of weeks looking at Genesis 3, and as I want to show you, there's a corresponding chapter in the New Testament to what Genesis 3 was telling us about in the Old Testament. Let me just read the first 11 verses of 1 Corinthians 15. Now, brothers, I want to remind you of the gospel I preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand. By this gospel, you are saved. If you hold firmly to the word I preached to you, otherwise you have believed in vain. For what I received, I passed on to you as of first importance, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Peter and then to the Twelve, and after that he appeared to more than 500 of the brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep. Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles, and last of all, he appeared to me also as to one abnormally born, for I am the least of the apostles, and do not even deserve to be called an apostle because I persecuted the church of God. But by the grace of God, I am what I am, and his grace to me was not without effect. No, I worked harder than all of them, yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me. Whether then it was I or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you believed. And this is God's word. Now, Mark Twain, and I quote, said this, and I quote, man is the only creature who blushes, and also the only one who needs to. It's actually an extremely profound point. And frankly, if you sat down and said, why is that true? Why is there no other creature that blushes, nor any other creature that would even need to? Why is there no other creature that experiences shame? I couldn't even imagine shame in any other creature except us. Why? Now, if you answered that question properly, you would have the meaning of life, you would have the center of the Bible, and that's what we've been trying to do. We've been trying to ask ourselves that question and answer it. And for the last few weeks, we've looked at Genesis chapter 3, because Genesis chapter 3 is the classic text in the Old Testament that tells us why the world got into a condition of misery and brokenness. And if you were with us through any of that time, you remember that the text tells us that we experience the dynamics of death in our lives because we wanted to be our own masters. What are the dynamics of death? They're in all of our hearts here today. We experience anger because we don't trust God to care for us or to do things in our best interest. Anger because we don't trust God. We experience insecurity because we worship the wrong things. We take things that are not God and we treat them as gods. We let them function as gods in our life. We worship them, so we experience insecurity. And lastly, we experience shame because we have a sense of unacceptability and a sense of nakedness. Anger, insecurity, shame. No other creature experiences these things, nor do they need to. Why? Genesis 3 says because we decide to be our own masters and we've fallen out. You know, George Whitefield, the great Anglican evangelist of 200 years ago, used to say when he was preaching, he used to say, do you want to know why when you get near the wild animals, they screech at you and they growl at you and they run away? Because they know you have a quarrel with their master. They don't blush. They're not ashamed. They're being perfectly what they were meant to be. We're not. Now, we spent all this time looking at what's wrong with us, and many of you enjoyed it. Now, the question is, is there in the New Testament a corresponding chapter to Genesis 3? Is there in the New Testament something as reciprocal, something that answers Genesis 3? And of course, in the words of Paul, of course there is. more abound. And we have it in 1 Corinthians 15. And we're going to be looking at that during this Palm Sunday Easter and the season after Easter. We're going to be looking at 1 Corinthians 15 for a number of weeks as we looked at Genesis 3. In Genesis 3, we're told that through the first Adam came death. In 1 Corinthians 15, Paul talks about a second Adam, through whom comes life and resurrection. The first Adam brought death, the second Adam brings life and resurrection. But oh, the second Adam has a lot more difficult job than the first one. You stop and think for a moment. How much more difficult is it to build a house on ground that is clear, rather than to try to build a house on ground which has already got an impregnable fortress on it? It's a much more difficult and much more complicated situation, isn't it? If you're going to try to build a house in a place where there's already some impregnable fortress, you not only have to do construction, you have to do deconstruction. And that's the reason why the second Adam had to be a far more complex and great individual than the first Adam. The first Adam was only human. The second Adam was God-human. Jesus was the God-man. The first Adam had a very simple job. God said to Adam and Eve, obey and live. The second Adam had a much more complicated job. God came to the second Adam and said, obey and I'll crush you to bits. The first Adam was told, obey and live, and he didn't. The second Adam was told, obey and die, and he did. Why? Why did he have to die? He had to deconstruct death. You see, it's far more difficult, and I'm saying this with reverence and respect, but I think it's fair to say on the basis of the Scripture that God had a far more complicated and difficult task the second time around than the first time around. The first time, how did he give life? Life. Just like that. He said, let there be life, and there was life. But how did he give us new life? How could he come in after we've already made a wreck of the world and already made a wreck of our lives? How could he give us resurrection life? The divine power. How could it come into our life? Why didn't God just say, let there be new life? One second. Because, and again, I say this with great reverence, the problem of giving to us creatures new life, when we have abused our freedom of will that he gave us as men and women in his image, rational, personal beings, not robots, not animals, after we've abused that freedom of will, after we've fallen into this kind of situation that we've talked about, the anger, the insecurity, the shame, and all the denial of it, God had a much more difficult job. He could not just say, let there be life. He had to deconstruct death before he could construct a new life. And that's why his son had to come and die. Now, that's what we're going to look at for a number of weeks. And what we're going to do is we're going to start by looking at this passage today and just take one principle each week that explains to us how this new life comes in. Anybody in this room, anyone, wants to know how to deal with the dynamics of death we've been talking about for the last few weeks. They want to know how to deal with anger, how to deal with insecurity, and how to deal with shame. Some of you, you're wearing it on your sleeve. Anybody can see you're trying to deal with it. Some of the rest of us are a lot more polished about it, a lot more together looking on the outside, but you are too. So we all want this life. There's nobody in this room who doesn't. Regardless of what you believe, if you could get that kind of resurrection power, if you could get power over those things, you would do anything for them. Well, this text, this chapter, tells us how to get them. And every week, it gives us a new principle. And that's what we're going to look at. Now, today, the first principle is that this resurrection life, that this power comes through the reception of truth. Now, I want you to know something carefully here. Paul is talking about the basics. As a matter of fact, we're only going to look at these first couple of verses. And he says in the beginning, in verse 3, he says, For what I received, I... of a Greek word that Paul uses that really means the basics. Paul says, I want to pass on to you the basics. Now I kind of hate to talk about the basics. You know why? Ministers want to look profound. They want to look insightful. They want to say things that everybody said, I never, ever, ever, ever thought of that. That's where we get our self-esteem, thinking about things that you haven't thought of and telling you about it in a way that makes you say, I never thought of that. But you know, I'll tell you something, watching, it's very important because of what we're doing here today. Watching NCAA basketball always reminds me every year, that no matter how sophisticated and complex a team gets, how talented it is, see how sophisticated the game plans are, a team that forgets the basics can be beaten by a far less talented team that doesn't. Pass twice before you shoot. And you know, we're, I think by even moving in here, what we're really saying is, it's up to God, of course, to do this, but we might be coming a much more complex organism as a church. We're growing. We're becoming more complex. But how important it's going to be for us never to forget the basics. And Paul says, I received and I passed on to you the basics. You know why he's bringing it up? First Corinthians is a letter to a very troubled church. If you read the whole book, you'll feel so much better about your own church. And this is the way a lot of us actually cope with our problems and our flaws, is we find somebody else who's more flawed and we just stare at them for a while. And we say, ah, at least I'm not like that person. As the Pharisee said, I thank thee, Lord, that I'm not like him. And you know, that's very comforting for a while. And it'd be very easy for us to look at first the church of Corinth and see all the problems. They were arguing. They had party spirit. They were arguing over the place of the miraculous. They were arguing over gender roles. They were arguing over sexuality, church discipline, all sorts of things. How does Paul deal with it? This is the end of the letter. How does he deal with it? He says, I'm going to get out the basics. He says, I'm going to bring out the basics. You never can get beyond the basics in basketball. And you can never get beyond the basics, actually in any field. And you certainly can't get past the basics or beyond the basics in Christianity. What I'd just like to show you is I'd like to expound a most important principle. But I would suggest to you all, whether you are a skeptic about Christianity, whether you're not sure what you believe about Christianity, whether you're a new believer in Christianity, or whether you've been a Christian for 25 years or so, or more, I suggest that your basic problem today is likely this. You've forgotten the basics. I'll come back to this question at the end, but let me pose it to you now. No matter what your problem is today, ask yourself, if you're a Christian, ask yourself this, is the reason that I am distressed today because I'm forgetting the gospel, that I'm forgetting the basic thing that originally brought me into the kingdom? Is the reason that I'm upset, is the reason that I'm angry, is the reason I'm ashamed, the reason I'm anxious today, isn't it because I've forgotten the basics? I suggest to you the answer to that question will always be yes. Let's look. This principle, resurrection life comes through the reception of truth. Let me show you what that means. This truth is, I'm going to say three things about it today from this text. This truth, first of all, is gospel. This truth is the gospel. Now, Paul mentions it several times. He says, brothers, I want to remind you of the gospel I preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand. By this gospel, you're saved. I received it and I passed it on to you. Now, let's start off with this word gospel. The truth that you have to receive in order to experience all this resurrection power and freedom from the dynamics that we've been talking about is the gospel. Well, the word gospel, as many of you may know, is the Greek word evangelion from the word angelos, which means messenger. You know, the word angel comes from the Greek word angelos, which means a messenger. And when the messenger brought good news, it was called EO. good messenger, or the good eoangelion, which is the good message. It all comes from this fact. When the Greeks would fight a great battle, and everyone back in the city-states of Greece were waiting nervously to find out what would happen, the Greeks would always send a messenger on foot. Many times the Greeks would send out their armies to the northern parts of Greece, where great armies were trying to come down to conquer it. And there was at least a couple of great battles in the northern parts of Greece in which the Greek city-states sent their men, they sent their soldiers, and they fought against Persia that was seeking to come through with a great army and dominate and conquer. What happened, whenever they would fight a battle, all the people back in the cities were scared to death. They were tremendously anxious. They wanted to hear what was going to happen. Would they be conquered? Would they be dominated? Would they become slaves? And what would happen is the Greek army, after it had won the great battle, it would send a messenger. The messenger would run on foot down to Athens and would say, we triumph. That was evangelion. That was the news that there has been a victory that has saved you from slavery. Now, you know, after the battle of Marathon, the messenger ran to Athens and said, we triumph and drop dead. And the many of us who preach the good news of Christ know exactly how he felt. The fact is that he came with a message, and that message is, there has been a victory. It's been fought on your behalf, and it's saving you from slavery. That's the good news. The Bible, Paul, has chosen this very, very important and very, in a sense, a technical word. The evangelion, the gospel is always good news that someone has fought a battle on your behalf, has triumphed, and now you are free from slavery. That's what it means. And when God, when Paul came and took the basic Christian message and called it gospel, he was saying something about it. Now, before I move on, let me just use it as a test. Have you taken your stand on the gospel? Do you even know what it is? Do you know the basic Christian message? Listen, use this as a test. If you walk in to a church and you hear a sermon on a political agenda that will really help our country, is that good news? I mean, that might be all well and good, but is that good news? Let me give it to you. Let me give you another situation. If you go into a church and you hear a message preached on how you should live your life in accordance with the Sermon on the Mount, is that good news? Don't misunderstand me, but listen. If you want to be cut down to size, if you want to feel really, really bad someday, I mean, I don't know why you might want that, but if you did, you could do no better job of it. There'd be no more effective way to do it than to go and read the Sermon on the Mount and try to live according to it. It can't be done. Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount expounds the Ten Commandments and he says, well, you know the Ten Commandments, the one that says thou shalt not kill, you know what it really means? It means you must love people so much that you would never even resent them. No resentment, no grudges, no bitterness. And then he says, here, look at this commandment, thou shalt not steal. You know what that means? It means you should live a life of such contentment that you're never grumpy, that you're never envious. And you read it. Read it. And soon you'll be down in the dirt, licking the dust off the floor, if you take it seriously. Is that good news? The golden rule, do unto others exactly as you would have them do unto you. Is that good news? It's lovely. It's, it's, it's, it's beautiful. It's noble. But is it good news? When you hear it, do you immediately feel liberated? Do you immediately feel someone has done something for me and my burdens are off? The word good news is a very, very, very important technical meaning. It means someone comes and tells you a battle has been fought for you and you're free. even the Sermon on the Mount is not the good news. Even Jesus' wonderful teaching is not good news. I'm not trying to say that Christians should lie or that they should hate people or that they should be envious of people. No, of course not. But it's not the basics. I'm telling you that many of you have been in churches for a long time, maybe even in this church for a long time, and you might be missing the basics, the foundation, the first thing. You may be standing on the wrong thing. First things first. Basics first. But if you think what the essence of the good news, the essence of the Christian message is to be a good person, is to live according to the golden rule, is to live according to the Sermon on the Mount, you're wrong. Listen, I could not put it more clearly than this. If right this minute you are not conscious of the fact that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the most wonderful, thrilling, exciting news that you've ever heard in your life, if you don't feel that way about it, you have never heard it. You don't understand it. If right now you're not conscious of the fact that the gospel of Jesus Christ... Now, I know I haven't told you what it is yet, but I'm trying to show you, first of all, whatever it is, it's got to have this effect on you. Do you see? It's got to have this effect on you. You know, the messenger comes running in and he says to the people in Athens, they're all sitting out in the marketplace, you are about to be put into chains. Most of the men would have had your tongues cut out, many of you would have been killed, your women and children would have been made slaves, but we've triumphed. The Persians have been turned back. Now, anybody who understands that message is not going to be casual. You know, a man walking through the Athenian market said, oh, I wasn't worried. No, of course not. Whatever the gospel is, when you hear it, you're absolutely thrilled. Your burdens fall off. You feel liberated. I know, look, I know that hasn't happened to many of you. I know it hasn't. Because it changes everything. You see, the gospel is something on which you take your stand. I'm standing up here. That means I'm on a platform. Unfortunately, that means everything I'm doing is on a different level. If I pick my nose, I'm on a different level. If I bite my fingernails, I'm on a different level. I'm up here. Because I've come up here and I've taken my stand on this platform, everything about me is now happening at a different level. To take your stand on the gospel means your entire life is changed by this news. Have you experienced the good news? Have you taken your stand on it? Everybody in this room has got something you're standing on. You're standing on some approach to right and wrong. Some religious approach. Is it good news? Some of you, what you're standing on is the idea that, well, here are the standards. I'm going to live up to them. No. No. Unless you are conscious this minute that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the most thrilling and wonderful thing that you've ever heard in your life, you haven't heard it. You haven't gotten it. That's the reason that Paul can actually say one of the most striking things. He says, by this gospel you are saved if you hold firmly to the word I preached to you. Otherwise, you believed in vain. You know what that word in vain means? It means emptily. What it actually means is you haven't believed. He says, if you hear the gospel and if you ever forget it, you never believed it. Think about that. He says, if you, if I give you this gospel and you forget it, you lose interest in it, you fall away from it, you've never had it, you never could have gotten it, you never could have understood it. Resurrection life comes through the reception of truth and the first test to make sure that you've really gotten this truth is this truth is good news. The second thing we learn from the text is that this body of truth liberates through submission. It says, in verse 2, by this gospel you are saved if you hold firmly to the word I gave you. Now notice something here. At this point, I know I'm, up to now, I've been saying things that if you're a modern man or woman, you can really get into. You can say, great, I want good news. I want liberation. Maybe some of you are saying here, I love this idea that whatever the essential message of Christianity is, it can't be a crushing thing. It can't make me feel burdened. It's got to be make me feel more guilty. It's got to be something that lifts guilt off. It can't make me crushed into the dust. It's got to be something that lifts me to the heavens. You like that part? Okay, now try this one on. Paul says, the gospel is a body of truth that I received and that I'm passing on to you. Now notice that's an objective body of truth. Paul is not saying, I did a lot of study. I'm a very, very bright and insightful man, and I have arrived at this liberating principle. Oh no, he doesn't say I arrived at the truth. What he says is, the truth arrived at me. It came to me, and I passed it along. I didn't come up with it. I didn't discover it. I didn't create it. So you see what we have here is there is a body of truth, a specific body of objective truth, and only when you hold on to it, only when you take it and you receive it, are you saved. See, the word saved is liberated. That's what it means, to be delivered. And so what Paul is saying is, only if you submit to a set of truth will you experience this liberation. That doesn't go too well today. That doesn't go down very well today. And the reason for it is, because we feel that in order to really be free, to be saved, whenever you see the word saved, think of the word free in this passage, and you'll have a better understanding of it, that you need to be free from all constraints. If you go to, if you ask the average person on the street, if you even go to the dictionary, and you say, what does it mean to be free, they always define freedom in negative terms. They're always saying, to be free means to be free from guilt, to be free from control, to be free from constraint. But you know, that doesn't tell me what freedom is. You can't define something only through negatives. I mean, what if you try to define the field of medicine? Starting like this, it's not plumbing. It's not farming. It's not gardening. Okay? It's not exactly physics. It's not, I mean, how, you know, you would go a long time and you would never get to anything. The Bible insists that freedom is not just a negative thing, it's a positive thing. The Bible insists that freedom, here's the definition, freedom is being yourself. Oh no, I know for a minute that sounds mighty, mighty modern, but it's not. For a minute, listen, think about, think about God. God is perfectly free, but he is not free to do whatsoever. Why? The Bible says there's a number of things that God can't do. What can't he do? He can't lie. He can't tempt. He can't be tempted. He can't contradict himself. He can't break a promise. Well, you say, then he's not free. You don't understand. The modern notion of freedom is to be free to do whatsoever. The biblical notion of freedom is to be free to be what you're designed to be, what you essentially are. When we say God is completely free, he experiences no shame. He experiences no anger, in the sense that we do, the bitterness. He experiences no insecurity. He is perfectly free. Why? Because he is totally consistent with himself. He knows what he is and he's true to what he is. Now, John Stott, the great Anglican writer, has put it in a perfect way. He says, that's the way it is with everything else. Think of a fish, he says. I gave you that quote today. Think of a fish. He says, if a fish had a sinful heart. Now, it doesn't. Remember, fishes don't blush, and they don't need to. But if a fish had a sinful heart, it would say, I am not free as long as I have to stay in this water. And I have decided in the name of authentic freedom, the freedom to do whatsoever, that I am going to spend some time on the carpet. I am going to spend some time on the couch. And John Stott says, if the fish exercises freedom to do whatsoever, it will lose its freedom to do anything at all. Why? Because it is violating its nature. It is trampling on its own fishness. And the facts are that the fish is free when it's doing what it wants to do. Now, the fact is, the reason the fish never, ever, ever blush, nor need to, is because they don't want to be anything other than what they were designed to be. They're perfectly happy. They're perfectly free. They're totally consistent with itself, with themselves. And... us. The gospel is this. There is a set of truth that tells you what you're built for. You're built to serve Him. You're built to know Him. And to the degree that you serve and know Him, you are getting in touch with your true nature. And you are getting to become yourself. And because you're becoming yourself, you're experiencing a freedom. You know, a coffee pot is built not to make concrete, but to make coffee. If you put concrete in there instead of coffee grounds, the coffee pot experiences alienation. Why? Because why does the coffee pot experience alienation? Why does it experience insecurity and anger and shame? As much as a coffee pot can. Because it's in violation of its coffee potness. A sailboat needs to go this way with the wind. Otherwise, it's not free to just fly. Because it's violating its nature. If I jog on the surface of Venus without an oxygen pack, my lungs experience alienation. Because they're not built to process the Venusian atmosphere. And that's common sense. But you see, my lungs, the sailboat, the coffee pot, and the fish will only experience alienation if stupid human beings insist that freedom is freedom to do whatsoever. Let me just show you, just before I move on to the last point, how silly this is. I know that I'm flying against what the modern intelligentsia tell you today. I know I'm writing, I know I'm on a collision course with them. Because what the modern thinking philosophical person says today is all identity is socially constructed. All identity is constructed. There is no essential you that you've got to get in tune with. Oh, you know, unfortunately they have to agree that physically there are limits, but they want to say that morally and psychologically and spiritually you can be anything you want to be. Real freedom is free whatsoever. Free to do whatsoever. It doesn't work. I was reading an interesting and terrifying, partly because it was so normal. I read an interview with Francois Sagan, you know, the French novelist. And after her 50th birthday, she was interviewed. And the interviewer said to her, are you happy? And she says, oh, I have no regrets. And they said, well, have you experienced the freedom in life that you want? And then she said this. She says, well, you know, she qualified it for a moment. And she said, well, when I'm in love, of course, I'm not free. But fortunately, you're never in love all the time. Apart from that, apart from that, she said, of course I'm free. Do you hear that? On the one hand, she has got what the Bible calls an essential nature that she doesn't want to agree to. The Bible says we were built for covenants. What's a covenant? If you love somebody, you have to submit to their needs. If you love somebody, you automatically lose your independence. You've got to say to that other person, what do you need? What do you want? And then you adapt to it. And of course, the Bible says that we're built for love. We're built for covenantal relationships. And of course, that's the reason she keeps falling in love. But intellectually, she knows by her own definition, and it's by the definition of the modern world, freedom and love are mutually exclusive. The more in love I am, the less free I am. Don't you see? What kind of freedom is that? Here she is locked in a tension that everybody's locked in. Until you're willing to admit what Jesus says. You will obey the truth, and the truth will set you free. She doesn't want to submit to anything. She says, if I submit to someone, I'm not free. So every so often I have to fall in love. I don't know why. Why do I have to fall in love? Why do I want love when actually it means I lose my freedom? But fortunately, it doesn't happen too often. You want that kind of freedom? I tell you something. I say to everybody here, just try that. Just try it. Take the modern view. The modern view says, you're only free if you're free to do whatsoever you feel. You know why it won't work? Your feelings don't even, they don't line up. Your feelings down deep in your soul. with each other. They're on head-on collisions, just like with Sagan. I want love. I want independence. You know, so what's freedom? Freedom is to do whatever I want, but what I want contradicts itself. I want to be thin. I want to eat pastries. How dare you even say, it's logically stupid to say, freedom is to do whatever you want. Listen, friends, freedom is to identify the desires that will liberate you if you give in to them, and identify the desires that will lead to bondage if you give in to them, and ditch the ones that aren't in accord with what God says is your true nature. There's no way to be free to do whatsoever you feel. Your feelings are just a bag of contradictions, a basket full. They're all down there fighting and writhing against each other. The second thing we're saying here today, the Christian message is that there is a body of truth, it's good news, and it liberates as you submit to it. Now, lastly, the last point, and this is a very important point. Some of you, if you're thinking, are saying, now, wait a minute, your first and second points seem to be intention. In the first point, you were saying good news could never be the Sermon on the Mount. Good news could never mean live a good life because that just crushes. But then in the second point, you just said that the way we're liberated is through submission. Yes, but here's how I resolve it. The third point is this. The first point is this life-giving truth is good news. Secondly, this life-giving truth brings liberty and liberation through submission. But thirdly, this life-giving truth, and here's what it is, it's what Christ has done, not what he says. It's not his teaching. It's not his example. It's what he does, what he has done, what he did. Notice, Paul says in verse 4, he says, for what I received, I passed on to you as of first importance that Christ died for our sins according to the Scripture. Almost immediately, when Paul says, let me tell you what the basics is. Here's what the basics is. He doesn't say the Sermon on the Mount. He doesn't say you must submit to the Sermon on the Mount. You must submit to the Ten Commandments. He doesn't say that. He doesn't say you must submit to the Golden Rule. What does he say? You must submit to the fact of his death and resurrection. What is the good news? Somebody has done something for you. Please let this sink in. And if what I'm, listen, if what I'm saying is not melting the heart and thrilling you at this point, it's because I'm a human being. I'm not as articulate as I need to be. I urge you to think, though, about this so that in spite of the imperfection of my presentation, you'll hear the gospel. When the messenger comes to Athens, he doesn't say, good news, good news. They're on their way and you're going to have to fight for yourselves. Good news. Put on your armor. It's going to be a heck of a battle. Good news. Get out your arrows. They'll be right there, but you'll probably be able to kill a number of them before they cut at you. Good news. You have to fight for yourself. Never. The good news, the essence of the good news is somebody has thrown his body into the fray for you. Somebody else's blood was shed so that now you are saved. You know, by using the word gospel, Paul has already, in a sense, prejudiced us. I mean, if you knew what the word gospel was, if you knew what the background was, you would know immediately that the good news that you submit to is not what Jesus has said. It's not his moral example. It's not his moral code. That just crushes. If you look at Jesus Christ dying on the cross for other people, loving the ones that are spitting at him, being patient with people who are mocking him. When you watch him do that, that just crushes me. It'll crush you too, because you could never do that. Is to be a Christian to watch him dying for other people and say, now go off and do likewise? Being a Christian is watching him not die for people. Being a Christian is watching him die for you. Being a Christian is not watching him be patient with people who spit on him. Being a Christian is watching him being patient with you who have spit on him, who have trampled on him, who have not done the things that you should do, considering he's given you everything. He's given you everything. for you. Christ threw his body into the fray. Christ's blood was shed. Someone's fought for you. Someone has given their life for you, but triumphed. That's what it's all about. You know, it's the oldest plot line in the book, someone giving their life for somebody else. There's so many places. It's the essence of the movie. It's the essence of the book. It's the essence of the play. Kathy and I just saw The Last of the Mohicans on video after having watched it in the movie. It's an old, you know, American novel, and there it is again at the end. What's the climax of the great novel? What's the climax of it? Well, you know, Duncan, the British officer, kind of a lout, loves Cora. Ah, but Cora loves the hero, Hawkeye. And so Cora and Hawkeye reject Duncan, but at the end, they're all prisoners in the camp, in the Indian camp. And the Indian chief, who doesn't understand English, so Duncan is doing the translating here, the Indian chief says, Cora will burn in the fire. So Hawkeye turns to Duncan and says, you've got to tell the chief, me for her. I want to die for her. He turns and says to the, Hawkeye says to the chief, me for her, me for her. So the chief turns to Duncan to figure out what is being said, and Duncan says, in the language the chief understands, me for her. Duncan puts himself in the place. They grab Duncan. They take him to the fire. You know, Hawkeye says, no, no, no, you don't understand. It was me. But Duncan has given his life to save the lovers who rejected him. And there he is strung up, his arms stretched out, he's crucified in the fire. And everybody in the movie theater goes, ah, why? It's the, it gets to something awfully deep. It's the oldest plot line in the book. You know how old it is? It's old as this. Jesus was crucified. And we have the only religion, Christian friends, we have the only religion that at the heart of it is the substitution of God. The essence of sin is that we have substituted ourself for God. The essence of redemption is that he has substituted himself for us. The essence of sin is we have taken only what God deserves. You know, when we took control of our life. And the essence of redemption is he has put himself in our place and taken what we deserve. Every other religion, what is the essence? The essence is, here is how to live. Is that good news? And the essence of the Christian faith is, here's what's been done for you. Rejoice. You know, one of the great problems with do-goodism and moralism, which masquerades as Christianity, is it has nothing to say to failures. There's a man that I knew, I used to talk to him about the gospel long ago. And for a number of years, he wouldn't come over. And finally, he became a Christian. And you know why? For years, he didn't understand the gospel, even though I tried to explain it. That's why I'm so nervous to even try to talk to people about the gospel. You might say, well, you know, you're an expert at it. I can't tell you how many times I failed at it. This man had a mother who was incredibly religious, wonderfully moral, exquisitely beautiful and good and nice to everybody. She had no flaws. She almost seemed perfect. And he described her to me as a snowflake. She said he was like a snowflake, beautiful, symmetrical, ornate, refined, and freezing. Nobody could relate to her. Why? Because she had set these incredibly high standards and she'd pretty much reached them. And his father was an alcoholic who had never been able to live up to his mother's standards, had never been able to live up to the moralism and the do-goodism and the religion of that family. And my friend used to say to me, the reason I'm never going to become a Christian is, as far as I can see, that's all that religion does to you. Either it turns you into a cold-hearted, beautiful, moral, freezing person who's got nothing to say to failures, or you're dashed with the knowledge of how little you have really done and you're dashed with the knowledge of your own imperfection. And then one day, it wasn't me, I used to try to explain this to him, but one day he was going to a church in which the gospel came through. And he read the last verse of a hymn. And that verse goes this way. Lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in him, in him alone, gloriously complete. And he suddenly got it. And he suddenly realized, oh, I get it. things to say to failures and to be approachable and humble and have moral principle because Jesus died for you so the Father can adopt you into his family. And then, of course, you live an obedient moral life out of gratitude for what he's already done for you. And even when you fall down, he covers it with his love because Jesus has died for you. He has fulfilled all the requirements for you. He's paid the debt for you. And he got it. If you find yourself going back and forth, some of you were raised in do-good, moralistic kinds of backgrounds, and you saw the only thing that would happen, so you left it all together. Come to him. Receive the gospel. Let me conclude this way. The gospel is received. It's a Greek aorist tense, which is a particular tense that means it's a one-time action. The gospel is to be received. There's a line to be crossed. It's not just a process. You may take a long time to decide to do it, but there's a spot at which you receive the gospel and you say, I'm going to stand on it. I'm not going to stand on anything else. Have you done that? What are you standing on right now? Have you got something that you're standing on that will enable you to face death? That's coming. Have you got something that you're standing on that will enable you to face anything? What you're standing on is a good news. What you believe about God, when you even think about it, does it just lift the burdens off? This will receive it. And Christian friends, let me just ask you, if you've got problems today, do what Paul did. You go back to the basics. You know, I was, last three days, I have absolutely been anxious and really very, very unhappy with the prospect of moving here because I'm a perfectionist. And I know that you just can't think of everything. And I know at the end of this day, I'm going to write down 25 things that I thought were just terrible about it. We've got to change. And really very, very unhappy with the prospect of moving here because I'm a perfectionist. And I know that you just can't think of everything. And I know at the end of this day, I'm going to write down 25 things that I thought were just terrible about it. We've got to change.
