TITLE: New York, New York (2001 Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Cities
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/new-york-new-york-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now, you know, this is almost every other theme we've done here. I always said, I wish I was a sociologist, or I wish I was a psychologist, I wish I was a historian, I wish I was a philosopher. I don't know what you do. Who speaks about this? I think I may actually have the qualifications. I'm a resident. And when I was in Pennsylvania, when I was in Boston, when I was in Virginia, when I was in Philadelphia, I was only doing one thing. One thing. When I was in Pennsylvania, I was growing up. When I was in Boston, I was being a student. When I was in Virginia, I was being a minister. When I was in Philadelphia, I was being a professor. Then I got to New York, and I discovered you can't just do one thing in New York. You're always doing two things. You're doing your work, and you're living in New York. And you say, well, of course you're living in New York. You're living in Philadelphia. No, no, no, no, no, no, no. If you say that, you're clearly not a resident. New York, living in New York is always an issue all by itself. I mean, you don't, I remember this. You never go around saying, only in Pennsylvania. You just never do that. You don't go around, you're saying, only in Virginia. You don't do that. Virginia is a great place. Pennsylvania is a great place. There's things about Boston that was great. But you don't walk around saying, only in Boston. No, you don't. And yet, every day, you're saying, only in New York. Because just living in New York is an issue all by itself. You can't just do one thing in New York. But here's what that means. I said this in the beginning. Some of you weren't there at the beginning. But whether you expect it or not, whether you want it or not, New York City profoundly changes you. Before I moved here, a woman who lived here for a number of years looked at me. She's an older woman. She's been here for 40 years. And she looked at me and she says, one thing, if you want to live here, you've got to keep in mind. New York is unmanageable. It says it will, it will, you can't do New York. It will do you. Just a question of whether or not it does you well or not. In other words, it will affect you. It will profoundly change you. And the reason for that is because New York is the quintessential city. If you can understand what makes New York have that power. And if you can understand how to live well in New York, it would teach us a lot about what cities, you know, what are the power cities? What role do they have in our society? How do you live well in them if you live in them? What I'd like to do is just explore with you briefly. And basically, after having just read through the material, just listened to the songs and read through the lyrics, it's all in there, basically. It's all in there, basically. I want to look with you at why, why the city is so powerful and then how you can live well in it. I'm talking mainly about New York, but it's true of any city. How, why the city is so powerful and then finally how you can live well in it. Why the city is so powerful? Well, because all cities, but especially New York City, more than any other place, is a place of utter extremes. Everything is the worst. Everything is the best. Everything is better than you've ever imagined. Everything is worse than you've ever imagined. It's a place of more wonderfulness and a place of more terribleness at the same time. If it was just terrible, it wouldn't change you. And if it was just wonderful, I don't think it would change you. But it's the wonderfulness and the terribleness together profoundly changes you. When you leave New York, you will either be made or broken. It makes you or breaks you. Or, at the very least, it makes you a considerably better person than you were or a considerably worse person than you are. Did you know that? Of course you know that. Why is it so powerful? Then how? Why? Well, let's take a look at these two aspects. First of all, the wonderfulness of it. New York City, all cities, but especially New York City, has this ability to make you great. Has this ability to draw out the greatness in you in a way nothing else does. Now, there's a couple reasons why. One of them is just sheer opportunity. You know, Shirley Jones, she was a movie star actress, 50s, 60s, 70s. She was a Broadway star, Oklahoma. She was a movie star, you know, music man in movies, Oklahoma Carousel. She won an Oscar, I don't think, for any of those, for something else. So she was a star. She was born and raised in a little town in western Pennsylvania called Smithton, Pennsylvania. And it's on the banks of the Yokogany River. And if you know where the Yokogany River is, you're from western Pennsylvania. But she was an aspiring actress, and she was a good singer. And her dad, one day, gave her $150, drove her to New York City, dropped her off, and said, This is your chance. gone, call me and I'll come get you. And that'll be it. That's all we got. And she said, just not too long before it was over, she got the starring role in Oklahoma, and she became great. Now, what if he had just driven her to Pittsburgh? Or what if she had just stayed in Smithton? So, you know, opportunity, incredible opportunity. She would have never become a star, she would have never become great. Or, I remember one of the very first people I ever spoke to in New York, I was coming, I think, I was just visiting New York before I had moved here, and I spoke to my Pakistani cab driver, this is 1988, and I said, tell me a little bit about yourself. And he says, well, I'm one of eight children, and the other seven are back in Pakistan, and here's what they're doing. They get up, and they take a cow to one part of the field, and they sit there for two hours and watch it graze, and they move it to another part of this field, but I've come to New York. And I said, okay, and what are you doing in New York? Well, he says, I work two shifts. This is 1988. I work two shifts, 18 hours a day, and I'm making about $80,000 a year. I'm living in Hoboken, and in a very, very little, dingy room, and my personal expenses are about $15,000 a year. And he said, I've almost got a $500,000 saved. And then, as soon as I get that saved, I'm going to buy some small business, I'm going to send for my family, we're going to work around the clock for 10 years, and we're going to sell it, and we'll be rich. I'll be 45. And he says, there's an awful lot I hate about New York City, but there's no place else in the world you could do this. So opportunity, you see, can make you great, but there's something else, something else going on. It's not just the range of opportunities, the range of things to be done here. It's not just that. There is something about the very dynamics of New York City, the density and diversity. You see, this would be true of any urban area, but particularly New York, because there's no place more dense and diverse than New York. The density and diversity of cityness is something that you absolutely have to do, have to have to really unlock your own potential. Now, I shudder to do this, but in some ways, I'm a good example, and here's why. When I came to New York City, I was almost 40 years old. I was a 40-year-old preacher. Now, a lot of people come to New York City to excel. You know, you come as an artist because you're hoping to do better and do well and learn. You come as a student, you know, you want to excel and do better and learn. I mean, you come into business. But a 40-year-old preacher doesn't come to New York City thinking, oh, this is going to make me a better preacher. You know, you're 40 years old. You figure, I'm pretty much what I'm going to be. And who comes to New York to learn how to preach? I mean, for crying out loud, you know? So, I moved to New York, and yet, here's what happened. Without even thinking about it, without even wanting it to happen, without expecting it to happen, two things had a profound, profound impact. I'm using this as an illustration because I had no idea about this. You know, it completely hit me blindside. There's two things about the city that utterly, profoundly changes you and makes you reach down and find stuff in yourself you never found before. First of all, people are, there's so many people unlike me and unlike you in New York. When you come to New York, you find people vastly different than you are. You come from more homogeneous places, but here in New York, constantly, you're meeting all kinds of people that are incredibly different, totally different, utterly unlike you. So, you see, in other places, I would preach, and people either nod. More homogeneous places, I would preach that people would nod or say amen. And in New York, they would look at me and say, why do you believe that? And I would say, I don't know, because nobody's ever questioned me about that. And I was, well, I better find out why I believe that. And so what happens is, because of the utter, all the people who are utterly unlike you, it pushes you to depths of creativity, depths of evaluation, depths of thinking of things you never would have thought of otherwise, about yourself and about everything you've done. But that's not all you get in this big city. You don't just get tons of people who are unlike you. You get tons of people who are incredibly like you and considerably better than you. You see, you know, I'm a professor, so I go other places, and I would be preaching, and I would quote Derrida. Well, the average person, most places, sits there and says, I know if I was smart, I'd know who that is, so I'm going to sit here and nod. But here I quote Derrida, and there's somebody out there doing a Ph.D. in Derrida at Columbia University, and he writes me or emails me and said, you have no idea what that quote meant. You took it totally out of context. You're just speaking through your head. Have you really read this man? And suddenly I sit there and I say, well, you know, every other place I've ever been, I was the most well-read person around, but not here. And he said, that's the reason why, you know, you get off the train, you know, you're the best saxophone player in Hot Coffee, Ohio, and you get off the train, I'm going to... hear people in the subway playing the saxophone, ten times better than you. And they look very haggard, underfed, and you say, oh my word, what am I doing? And you say, I'm going to have to practice in ways I never have done. Now, because you come to a city, I mean, that was great, wasn't it? Wasn't that funny? Did we all enjoy that? This is a profound point. Human beings could not, cannot come to their greatest potential without cities. Cities is the place where that happens. Cities, because of all the people who are incredibly unlike you, and people who are incredibly unlike you, you come into that density and diversity. And to the degree you're, you know, you're exposed to it, to that degree you find yourself reaching down and finding things in yourself you never would have reached down for, or found, or expected to find otherwise. But that's not all. That's the wonderfulness of a place like New York. That's one of the reasons why it's so powerful. But there's a terribleness about it, too. A huge terribleness about it. Because you see, look, well, let me read you something from E.B. White. E.B. White, 1948, wrote a very famous essay called Here is New York. And don't forget, he wrote this quite a while ago, 1948. But it's still a classic. And in it, this is how it actually begins. He says in his essay, he says, on any person, New York will bestow the gift of loneliness and the gift of privacy. This accounts for the presence within the city of a considerable section of the populace. For the residents of Manhattan are, to a large extent, those who have pulled up stakes from somewhere else and come to town seeking some greater or lesser grail. The capacity to make such dubious gifts is a mysterious quality of New York. It can destroy an individual, or it can fulfill him, depending a good deal on luck. No one, then, should come to New York to live unless he is willing to be lucky. Now, actually, the first time I read that, I said, what is that? But the more I've thought about that, this is pretty profound. First of all, notice how casually he says something. He says, New York will destroy you or fulfill you. It can destroy you. And it even says, therefore, don't even come to New York unless you realize you could be destroyed unless you're lucky. Shirley Jones was good. Of course she was good. And if she hadn't come to New York, she would never have been a star. New York made her what she was. New York is what makes us. It brings the greatness out in us. But we also know, do we not, that there were a whole lot of other young girls in 1952 when she came here who were probably every bit as talented as her as she was, you know, maybe more talented than her. They weren't lucky. And as a result, their hearts were broken or maybe worse. Because you see, the songs talked about it. He's on the one hand, there's the songs that we're talking about. If you go to New York, remember that song about let's take a boat to New York. Everything will be healed there. Everything will be great there. And it can be. Or, on the other hand, those are those other songs about the loneliness and the isolation. And that's absolutely true as well. The simple fact of the matter is that the isolation of New York, the inability to maintain community, it bestows on you unwillingly, according to E.B. White, the gift of privacy and of loneliness, which can destroy you or you can use. You can use to make yourself great, you know. But some people, it doesn't work that way. Because even when you tried your craziest, he says, just because of the way things turn out, what he calls luck. Just because of the way things turn out. Just the way because, just the way things happen to happen. No matter how hard you've worked, you can be, your heart can be broken and more than your heart. Because when you come to New York, you come to New York with your heart on your sleeve. You come to New York not just to become great. You come to New York because you're trying to prove to yourself that you're someone, somebody. The Tower of Babel, the very first skyscraper, the very first account we have of a city being built in Genesis 11, talks about the fact that the people built that to make a name for themselves. So you come to New York and you're hoping to find an identity. Not just to get your potential. You're hoping to find your identity. And you know what it's like to audition every single day. Some of you do. Every single day. And you're doing the thing that you hope is what makes you significant. Every day somebody's looking at it and saying, we'll call you. And of course, those of us who don't do auditioning still face that. We face the fearfulness. We face the competition. We face the turmoil of it. Maybe it's an exaggeration to say what E.B. White said about New York will either break you, destroy you, or make you. But at the very least, has the power to either make you a considerably better person, a considerably happier person, a considerably stronger person, or a considerably more broken person, a considerably weaker person, a person with less integrity than ever. New York can bring you to grief. Grief. All cities can bring you to grief. And that's the problem with cities. You can't live without them, but how do we live in them? And that brings me to my second point. How can we live in them well? If this is the power of cities, how can we live in cities well? Now, only one of the songs kind of gives you a nuanced, chastened view. See, some of these songs were just ridiculously naively celebratory, even painfully so. You know, the songs that talk about in New York, everything's going to be great. It's scary to hear that when you realize how New York can break you. And there's other ones that are just bitter. And we all know that's not fair. But Autumn in New York has some interesting things to say. See, look at the mixture. Look at the balance. Look at the chastening. On this gray and melancholy day, I'll move to Manhattan Hotel. I'll dispose of my rose-colored chattels and prepare for my share of adventures and battles. See, there's a balance. Adventure, yet battles. Here on the 27th floor, looking down on the city, I hate and adore. Autumn in New York, why does it seem so inviting? Now, see, an acknowledgment of the brokenness, an acknowledgment of the desolation, acknowledgment of the loneliness, acknowledgment of the danger. And yet, it's Autumn in New York that brings the promise of new love. Autumn in New York, mingled with pain. Dreamers with empty hands may sigh for exotic lands. It's Autumn in New York, but it's Autumn in New York and it's good to live again. Now, here's what he's saying. I acknowledge the brokenness and yet New York gives me a sense of promise. New York seems to point to something beyond itself. Here's how you can understand why cities are so important and how to live well in them. St. Augustine, believe it or not, is the key. St. Augustine wrote one of the, oh, if you're going to come up with ten books, the ten most important books, you know, for Western civilization, you have to bring up his book, City of God. He almost single-handedly created the Western understanding of history. You know, he destroyed the old cyclical view of history that was the basis for civilization before that. But among other things, obviously in a book like that he said quite a few things, but among other things, he explains the power of cities, and this is what he said. He says, behind every earthly city, beyond every earthly city, there is a perfect city, a city that makes you but doesn't break you, a city that draws out your potentialities but doesn't disappoint you, doesn't leave you naked in the dark emotionally, a city, a perfect city, a city that is to come. He says the reason for the power of earthly cities is because they fitfully reflect that perfect city, that city which is to come, that heavenly city, the city of God. That's what he says. He says the reason why the cities of earth are so powerful is because to some degree they reflect the city of God because we were built for that city. We were built for a place where the diversity and where the density only brings out the best in us and doesn't bring out the worst in us. But on the other hand, these cities only fitfully reflect that city. Earthly cities are also broken. Why? Because people come in to become great, but they come in to become great for themselves, not for the glory and the joy of the one who made them. And therefore, every earthly city fitfully reflects that perfect, that heavenly city. But now here's the good news, and this is what Justin would say. And here's what I would like to say to you. The good news is that you are more likely to find the heavenly city in the earthly city. You're more likely. Do you know the early Christian missionaries, contra to what most people say today, went to cities? The earliest Christian missionaries, the earliest ones in the very beginning, the people who knew Jesus, they went to cities. Now, a lot of people say, that's ridiculous, because the average person says, we all know that in the country, religion flourishes, but in the city, religion dies. In the city, faith dies. In the city, people laugh at belief in God. It's seen as primitive and unsophisticated. In the country, it flourishes. In the city, it dies. That's not what those early missionaries decided. They went to cities, and they ignored the countryside. Do you know by the year 300 AD, 50% of the populations of the Roman Empire cities were Christian and fast becoming 100% Christian? The countryside was completely pagan. The word pagan comes from the word for farmer or man of the country. The countryside was pagan. The the cities. Why? Because they knew something. They knew that you can get to the city of God faster through the earthly city because the earthly city makes you ask the big questions. That the people with more, with less tumultuous, happier, more, you know, kind of lives, you know, very little risk but very little gain, very little challenge but very little, you know, very little achievement, away from the cities, people that want that kind of life, they don't ask the big questions. They're kind of conservative, you know. They don't want to ask who am I and what's life all about. But in the city you can't avoid that. The city is really spiritual hotbeds. And the missionaries knew that. And here's the other thing they knew. They knew that whether the city is making you or breaking you, it's pointing you to the heavenly city. It's pointing you toward God. Did you know that? Oh, yeah. You know, Cynthia Heimel, years ago I got this fascinating column out of the Village Voice, I think like 1989, the first year I was here. And she wrote about all the young aspiring actors and actresses that she knew used to be in New York City. She remembers when, she remembers when Sylvester Stallone was worked at a movie theater as a bouncer on Second Avenue. Remembers that very well. She remembers when Julia Roberts was a, worked behind the cosmetic counter at Macy's. And she says, you know, when they were unsuccessful they were very nice people. And then she says, however, something happened. They're all so unhappy. They're all going to all their psychiatrists. They're all divorcing every other week. And they're unhappy. They actually had very stable lives. What happened? And here's what she said. She says, the giant thing they were striving for, that fame thing that was going to make everything okay, that was going to make their lives bearable, that was going to provide them with personal fulfillment and ha-ha happiness, had actually happened to them. And the next day they woke up and they were still them. The disillusionment turned them howling and insufferable. And then she says, and she's only half right about this, she says, I guess when God wants to play a really rotten joke on you, he grants you your deepest wish and then giggles merrily as you suddenly realize you want to kill yourself. And here's why she's half right. What she's saying is the success of the city will drive you finally to see that your heart is built for something spiritually enormous. Because what if you actually do make it? What if you actually are Julia Roberts or Sylvester Stallone or people like that? What if you come to the city and you make it? You're lucky. You're good and lucky. The success will point you toward the city of God. Because what it'll say is, look at all the money we've thrown into your heart. Look at all the fame. Look at all the looks. Look at all the power. Look at all the info. Look at all the stuff. 20 million truckloads of fame and fortune we've driven into your heart and you're still empty. You still aren't fulfilled. You know, there's very few people that really experience that. But when you experience that, you suddenly realize there's something wrong with me spiritually. I must need something enormous down there of all this fame. So you see, the city can make you successful in a way no other place can and show you your need for God. But when you're falling apart, when the city has knocked you down and shown you that you really are a needy person, you came here confident and it's knocked you down again and again. You came here to make a name for yourself and now you don't even know who you are. That'll push you toward the city of God as well. You see, Frank Sinatra and the Tower of Babel have something in common. You know what? The people went to Babel in Genesis 11 saying, if I can make it there, then I'll know I have a name. I'll know who I am. Frank Sinatra said, New York, if you can go there, then you'll know you're somebody special. If you can make it there, you can make it anywhere. Then you'll know who you are. Well, they're both right and yet as you're trying to do that, you're going to sometimes find if you're successful, it wasn't enough and if you're unsuccessful, you don't know who you are and cities will do that to you. And here's the ultimate way to move from the earthly city to the city of God. There was another young man years ago who went to the big city. Do you know that? He was 33. And he went to the big city. Why? Because he said it was going to fulfill his career. But he didn't go to gain power. He went to lose it. He didn't go to get accepted. He went to get rejected. He kept telling his disciples, we're going to the big city. And everybody said, wow, we're finally going to the city. They all knew to go to Jerusalem, to go to the city. Then, finally, finally, the disciples said, we're really going to see some action. Because you can only get great in the city. And Jesus Christ did go to the city to become great, but not the way they expected. He didn't go to gain power. He went to lose it. He didn't go to get accepted. He went to get rejected. went to the big city, but was thrown out of the city. In fact, we're told this. We're actually explained. It's all explained in the book of Hebrews. Now, Jesus also suffered outside the city gate to make the people holy through his own blood. And we here do not have any enduring city, but we're looking for the city which is to come. Why did he die? Well, the traditional Christian answer is he died to pay the penalty for our sins so that we could know by faith, because of what he did, that we are citizens of the city of God. Citizens. See? Revelation 22. And the throne of God and the Lamb will be in the city, and his servants will serve him, and they will see his face, and his name will be upon their foreheads. And there will be no more night in that city, for they will reign forever and ever. This is how you can live well in New York City. This is how you can live well. Know that Jesus Christ was thrown out of the city and destroyed so that you could become citizens of the city that is to come, thereby giving you the emotional security and the confidence and the inner peace that you need to be salt and light in the city that is. You're never going to really become great in New York City if you come here looking for an identity. You've got to have your identity in the city of God, and then you'll be able to handle the ups and the downs, and you'll actually truly be able to reach your potential in the earthly city. Jesus lost the city so that you could become citizens of the city which is to come, and therefore be salt and light, happily living in the city which is. So, how can we live well? Whether right now the city is making you or the city is breaking you, the city, because it was built by God, is pointing you to the city of God. And the way to get to the city of God is through the one who was thrown out of the city. That young man who came to the city? But he came to lose it for you. Now, that's the Christian gospel, and I did it all in terms of the city. Just, you need to keep this in mind. I want you to live in the city if you can. I want you to stay here if you can. But you need to know your citizens in that city if you're going to be good citizens of this city. That's what St. Augustine says. And you can read about it in his book. Let me close in prayer, all right? Our Father, we thank you for giving us the amazing dynamic of the density and diversity of the city. We thank you for New York City. We really do. We don't thank you for the brokenness. We don't thank you for the things that happen here that hurt people. We don't thank you for the racism that's here. We don't thank you for the injustice that's here. We don't thank you for any of those things. We do thank you for the way in which the city profoundly changes us and points us to you. And we ask that you would make it possible for us to let the city, to listen to the city, pointing us and pushing us and prodding us and goading us, not just to excellence in general, but to the excellency of Jesus Christ. It's in his name we pray, amen.
