TITLE: New York Family Values (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Family and Relationships Forgiveness
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/new-york-family-values-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now, afterwards, as I told you before, of course, you know, there's a few more of you here than the last time I was out here, so let me say it again. This is an open forum, and we take a look at a theme three ways. First, artistic expression. Secondly, a lecture, which I'm about to do. And then thirdly, we have a question and answer time. Now, Steve, who was the choreographer and the director, and he was also the mysterious stranger in the dance, and I will both do the question and answer time afterwards, and I won't, and even though what we always do is we dismiss people, so if you can't stay for that, you don't have to, but I would think a lot of you would like to ask Steve some questions as well as me. Let me give you some thoughts on the subject of the night and the subject of the dance. As I said by way of introduction, in New York City, there are an awful lot of people who can identify the deepest unresolved suffering and misery and pain in their lives as unreconciled relationships with their own family. And I, over the years, because I've been here for 12 years, and I've thought about this, I've thought about how many times over these years here in New York I've heard people talk to me about this. I'm actually going to indulge and say, my guess, I can't prove this, and I don't know anybody could prove this statistically or in any scientific way. My guess is that there's more people in Manhattan and New York City, ah, thank you, thank you, Kevin, I needed that. There's more people here, perhaps, than most places like that. You saw the woman, the girl and the woman who was rejected by her family, right, and all the pain and suffering. Where do you think she went to live? She would have gone to New York. You laugh. Of course, I said it because I wanted you to laugh. But listen, when I first got here, one of the things that was amazing, and actually it still happens. I'm a minister, and because I'm a minister, I guess my name is in church directories and mailing lists and that sort of thing. And over the years, it started 12 years ago when I got here, and it really continues even to this day. You cannot believe the number of times I've gotten phone calls from complete strangers or letters from complete strangers. And here's what the letters or the phone calls say. I said, I'm from this or that city somewhere out in middle America. And we have a pretty good family, and we have a pretty happy family, and our family's grown up, and most of our children we have a good relationship with. And there's one that there's nothing but pain. There's one that there's all sorts of unresolved issues. There's one that there's so much ache in our lives because of our unresolved relationship with this one, and that person lives in New York. And could you drop in on him or her? I've gotten these over the years, you know, complete strangers. Oh, yeah, I'm in New York. There's 8 million other people. Do you know him? Do you know her? That kind of thing. But, you know, at first I just laughed, and then I began to realize, wait a minute, what's going on here? Why is this? And the answer is that New York is a place that actually, over the years, has attracted people who know something, and that's this. Family promises and family values promise more than they can deliver. Traditional family values goes like this. Live for your family. Build a family, and that's where you'll get your satisfaction. That's where you'll get your identity. Not in work, not in performance, not in achievement. Family. Be a father, be a mother, be a son, be a daughter, be a husband, be a wife. That's what life's all about. Build a family. Stay nearby. Stay close, and so forth. And that's traditional family values. But you know what? Family, and there's a lot of people who have discovered that family promises more than it can deliver. And there have always been people in families who find that either the family has just terribly let us down, our father, our mother, or both. Or we have terribly let them down in some ways because of their expectations. And as a result, there's just ache and there's pain in our relationships with our families. New York City has always been a magnet for people who have come to realize that family values promises more than it can deliver. Now, I'm speaking as a minister. I'm speaking as a Christian minister. And you might say, well, surely Christian ministers are supposed to talk about how important family is and why the family is important. We have to support the family and strengthen the family. Anyway, but I also know, partly because I live in New York, but also because, actually, because I believe the Bible, which also says this. I know the Bible is used by people who promote traditional family values, but I'm going to show it. agrees that traditional family values, that you should live for your family, that you should find your identity in being somebody's father or mother, find your identity in being somebody's husband or wife, somebody's son or daughter, that promises, I keep saying it wrong, that promises more than it can deliver. And New York City is filled with, and actually the whole country is filled with, in fact, the whole world is filled with a lot of people who know that, and who, because they have unresolved issues, unresolved, unreconciled relationships with their families, they are stuck. They, on the one hand, are afraid or they're unable to build new families, and they're unable to get any consolation out of their relationship with their old families. What are we going to do about that? What are you going to do about that? How many of you are in that boat? A lot. And how many of you know somebody who's in that boat? Everyone. So now, let me tell you, let me proceed with the talk to go like this. I don't assume you believe the Bible. I don't assume you believe the Christian faith here tonight. But I think one of the things that might actually help in two ways would be for you, for me, not to try to make a case for Christianity, not to try to make an argument for Christianity. I would like to use Christianity on this problem. I would like to use the Bible and biblical and Christian resources to diagnose this problem and show you a treatment. And I think it'll accomplish two things. One is you might actually find that it really helps you a great deal. You may find that it helps you diagnose your own problem and even see a way forward. And in the process, it might show you some of the value and the importance and the strengths of the Christian faith as well. Now, here's what I mean by diagnosis. First of all, the Bible tells us something very important when it depicts God as a father. Perhaps the classic place in all of the Hebrew scriptures is Psalm 103 that talks about God as a father. And there's a very famous spot. I'm going to read this to you. It's in Psalm 103 that goes like this. Most of you, maybe many of you certainly have heard this. As a father has compassion on his children, so the Lord has compassion on us. The Lord is compassionate and gracious, slow to anger, abounding in love. He will not harbor his anger forever. He will not repay us as our sins deserve. For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so great is his love for those who are his children. Okay? Now, what you have there, that is that just, you know, you've heard that perhaps, maybe you've read it before, you've heard it read. That is not just soothing spiritual inspirational talk. What you have here is the definition of the ideal, the true parent. You have a definition of the kind of parent that every human being needs. And it's an astounding, and I think it's a stunning and profound definition. On the one hand, this God, who is a father, okay, this God, first of all, gets angry. Gets angry. Now, a lot of people don't like this idea of a God who gets angry, but one of the ways you can absolutely make sure that a child feels like an orphan, that a child feels not loved, is if you have a parent who's emotionally detached. No matter what you do, you can't get your parent angry. There's a very interesting, one of my favorite quotes in a book by Becky Pippert called Hope Has Its Reasons, talks about anger. And she says this, she says, she quotes a, she quotes E.H. Gifford, and one of you told me who he is. He was a turn-of-the-century British Anglican Bible scholar. And he, and there's one place where E.H. Gifford says this, the more a father loves his son, the more he hates in his son, the liar and the traitor. And then Becky Pippert goes on and says, if God were not angry over how we were destroying ourselves, he wouldn't be good and he certainly wouldn't be loving because anger isn't the opposite of love. Hate is. And the ultimate form of hate is indifference. Now, the first thing we learn here is a parent needs to get angry. One of the things that over the years, I'll just be honest about this because it's very difficult since I'm a father and since I've raised three sons, more or less, it's difficult for me not to tell you that over the years, my wife has said to me, you don't get angry enough. The kids don't, won't believe you care. In fact, I don't believe you care. If you're so immersed in other things, if you're so immersed in ministry, if you're so immersed in church, if you're so immersed in reading and all that sort of thing, that when your children clearly, there's something going wrong in their lives and you don't get angry, you see them giving in to bad habits that are going to hurt them later on. You don't get angry. You don't care. don't think you really love them if you don't get angry and they'll know you don't love them if you don't get angry. But on the other hand, so it says, God gets angry. The perfect parent gets angry. But on the other hand, listen to this. It says, however, he is slow to anger, abounding in love, and he will not repay us as our sins deserve. For as high as the heavens are above the earth, so great is his love for those who are his children. Now, here's the other side of it. God gets angry. This perfect parent gets angry. But it is never, ever, ever, ever pay back anger with his children. It's never pay back anger. What do I mean by pay back anger? There's this. Where on the one hand, my wife has often said, you've got to help yourself be more engaged with your children and get more angry. One of the things we've had to work with with her is not getting so angry. And here's why. When your children do something wrong, it is very, very, very easy to give pay back anger. But pay back anger is simply this. You've humiliated me. You've dissed me. You've not shown me the respect. You have not obeyed. You are not becoming the children that I want you to become. You've created pain, and I'm going to give you pain. You've humiliated me. I'm going to humiliate you. You've caused me suffering. I'm going to lose you suffering. And that's pay back anger. And pay back anger is poison. Pay back anger is not like the anger that we were just talking about. Not like the anger that shows love. Not the anger that intercepts self-destructive behavior. It's not like the anger that passes over. It's not like a rainstorm that passes over a piece of land, and then the sun comes out, and it's greener for having the storm having passed over. It's more like the storm that parks over the land and just comes down and down and down and down so everything is swamped and everything is smothered and everything is drowned. Pay back anger does not make things better. Pay back anger poisons. And here's why. Pay back anger is selfish anger. You get too angry at your children, and you actually hurt them and humiliate them because you need them to respect you. You deeply need them to respect you. You deeply need them to obey you, and you deeply need them to become what you want them to be. In fact, in many cases, to become something that you're not. And for all kinds of very, very deep reasons, where you need your children for your own peace of mind. You need your children for your own self-esteem. You need your children to be this and that, and they don't give it to you. And they're inflicting pain on you, and so you inflict pain back. But the perfect parent, this God, listen, he's slow to anger, but he's abounding in love. In other words, his anger is under total control. It's slow, right? Why? Because he's slow to anger and abounding in love. His anger is completely controlled by his compassion. His anger is always angry for the child's sake. His anger is always angry because he sees self-destructive behavior coming. He's got to do something about it. It's never for his sake. He doesn't need. He doesn't need to have us this or that. He's perfectly secure in his self-esteem. And as a result, all you got is this. The therapist will tell you there's two ways to make a kid into an orphan. There's two ways to make a child feel like, I don't know who I am. I don't know if I'm loved. I don't know what my worth. There's two ways. It's abuse and neglect. Payback anger or no anger at all. What you need is deeply loving anger. You need counter-conditional, unconditional love. When I say counter-conditional, I mean not just unconditional love. You need counter-conditional love from your parent. You need love that's there counter to the way in which you are. Utterly for me. I need my parent to be utterly for me. So there's lots of anger, but it's disinterested. It's not selfish. It's for me, not for him or her. So I need counter-conditional love and yet love that intercepts self-destructive behavior and that is utterly consistent. That's what you need. Now, who is going to give that to you? There is not a human being on the face of the earth that can give that to you. I've been trying and I'm not saying that I even come close. I mean, my wife and I are below average parents. From what we can tell. We tried very hard, but below average. And I've seen people who are above average, but nobody gives this kind of love. Now, the diagnosis of the Bible is that human beings cannot give the parental love that human beings absolutely need. 27, verse 10, deeply realistic. It doesn't say if. Psalm 21, verse 1 says, when my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will bear me up. Not if. Not if I have unusually bad parents. Because you see, parents will forsake you. They die. And parents do forsake you. The Bible tells us that the kind of parental love that every human being desperately needs, human beings can't possibly give us. That's the diagnosis. You need loving anger. You need neither a payback abusive parent, nor do you need a neglectful detached parent. And all human parents are always off the center, one direction or the other, or back and forth, like some of us. We're divided where the mother's one and the father's the other. So what's the treatment? Now you see, here's what you have to ask. If evolution, is why we're here. If we're just the accidental result of the collocation of molecules, if evolution is why we're here, evolution is doing a terrible job because we are utterly unadapted to our environment. Parenting has evolved, right? And it can't do the job. I don't know. You know, if evolution, if that's really true, if we're here because of evolution, actually evolution's done a horrible job. We haven't adapted to our environment at all. But if, as the Bible says, we were created for God, then it makes perfect sense that parents cannot give us what only God can give us. What you absolutely have got to have is you've got to have a place where some, at some point, you look at your parents and say, I cannot get my deepest love needs met from you. You are not God to me. There is a place where I can get that love and it's not from you. The Bible says if you can't do that, if you've never done that, then this is what's going to happen. You're going to be whiplash back and forth. On the one hand, you're either going to be too dependent on your parents. You're going to try to be the nice, perfect little son or daughter that they always wanted you to be. You're not going to be able to have a self. You're not going to be able to have a marriage in which you really are creating a new marriage, a new unit, but you're always going to let what they were interfere. You're either going to be too dependent on them or you're going to be too mad at them. If you are always burned up at your parents, if you're always saying they never gave me the love I needed to have, if you're always in reaction to them, you are still what? You're still trying to get your love needs met from them. Oh, you say, no, I have. I've given up. But if you stay mad, that means you still think they should have given that to you and you still haven't accepted the biblical diagnosis. You've got the biblical treatment for the problems we're talking about is, number one, to accept the diagnosis. You've got to realize your parents could not possibly give you those love needs. Your deepest love needs cannot be met through your parents. If you believe it, if you believe they can be, you'll either be too emotionally dependent on them or too angry at them, and you'll not be able to get any kind of freedom until you admit that they can't possibly give it to you. Then what? Do we just turn to God and start praying? Is that it? No. Because as the dance piece showed us, there's a problem. Traditional family values in some ways, you know, I'm all for families. I'm a minister, okay? I'm all for fathers and mothers and sons and daughters loving one another. I'm all for loyalty to each other. I'm all for commitment. I'm all for covet. I'm all for all that. But there is something about, you might say, the philosophy of the ideology of the traditional family values that very often creates expectations that are impossible. Creates expectations, say, if I'm just a good father or mother, if I'm a good son and daughter, my love needs will be met. Things will go well. I'll be happy. I'll get everything I need. But what actually happens is because of those expectations being raised higher, when either we fail our parents, we fail their expectations, we fail their hopes, so they are deeply angry at us, or they let us down by being either too abusive or being too neglectful, or both. There's a barrier. It's called guilt. We've wronged them. They've wronged us. Guilt. And you can't just say, well, I'm going to start praying somehow. Guilt. I don't know if guilt's the table. I was trying to figure that out just like the rest of you. But there's a barrier that has to be dealt with. And besides that, for me to say to you or for you to say, okay, okay, I can't get my love needs met for God. How do I, well, then I just turn and I start to pray. How do you know God loves you? I mean, God is, you know, non-corporeal, and how am I going to feel him, and how am I going to know he loves me? How am I going to get my deepest love needs met from him? Well, here's the answer. The Bible says, it's not a love in general. It's not a loving God in general. But it's a God who gave his son in particular that can heal the deepest needs that you have for perfect parental love. See, on the cross, listen, whenever you read the New Testament, whenever you read the Greek scriptures, you'll never see Jesus Christ ever, ever, ever refer to God as anything but my Father. When you ask him, how do you pray, he says, our Father. When he goes before every place he prays, he says, Father, Abba, Father, my Father. I thank thee, Father, every single time, except once. On the cross, he looked to heaven and he said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Now, why would he do that? He never, ever, ever, ever, ever said God before. He's always ever said Father, and here's why. Deep down in your heart, you know you failed your parents. Deep down in your heart, they know they failed you. What's going to resolve that guilt? What's going to get rid of that barrier? Only the knowledge that God loves you so much that rather than take the guilt and punishment out of your hide, the Father and the Son voluntarily entered into a covenant so that Jesus Christ died on the cross, and what did he do then? He lost his sonship so we could have it. He was de-sonned. He was de-homed. He says, foxes have holes and birds have their nests, but the Son of Man has not got a place to lay his head. He lost his home so we could have home. He lost his father so we could have his father. He paid for the sins and for all the things that we've done to each other. You know, there's a great place where it actually says Jesus Christ will come to turn the hearts of the fathers to their children and the hearts of the children to their fathers. And the only way for that to happen is for you to see not just that God in general loves you and hope that somehow you'll get parenting love in general in your heart. It won't happen. You might get a little inspiration. You might pray and you might meditate and you might get a little sense of peace. But the only way that you are going to find that you get the parenting love that you've absolutely got to have is if you see what God did for you in Jesus and what Jesus Christ did for you. Now, and that's the only thing that will heal you. And that's both the diagnosis and the treatment. Now, do you have a better alternative? I don't know. You know, back when New York was, I don't know how to say it, a little rattier, the parks used to be filled with people. Now, I sure hope that they're being taken care of somewhere else. But the parks used to be filled with people who lived there. And because they filled, remember, a lot of people who lived there, lived there all the time. And as a result, you see, here's the problem. Parks aren't big enough. Parks really aren't places where you can live. Because if you do that, the parks can't bear the freight of your whole life. And they became foul. They stunk. They became difficult places. And, you know, I don't know where those folks are now, and I hope they're being taken good care of. They're not there, by and large, now. But when people lived in the parks all around, they became foul. And it's largely because the parks weren't made for that. The parks weren't made to be a home. The Bible says human families, as great as they can be, aren't really home. They're not really the home your heart needs. They're like a park. They're like a place you go, and there's a lot of great things that happen. But there's actually the only place you're really going to find home is what Psalm 90 says. Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place throughout all generations. Now, I would just like you to think about that tonight. I would like you to think about that. In other words, did you notice the only way that this family was brought into some kind of resolution was some guy walked in. I'm not sure who he is. He's called the stranger in your program notes. It was an intervention. Forgiveness is always an intervention. It's always from the outside. One of our favorite movies is Places in the Heart. Remember the Sally Fields movie? And that last scene is pretty shocking. It's in a church. Remember? Do you remember the place? I mean, it always gets me right here. Whenever Ed Harris, who'd been unfaithful to his wife, remember? Been unfaithful to his wife, is sitting alongside of his wife in the front pew. And the minister's reading a reading of 1 Corinthians 13 on love. And they're totally alienated. You know, he has wronged her terror. of a sudden he looks down and he sees her hand come over to his hand and squeeze it. Do you remember that? If you don't remember, go look at it. And of course, Ed Harris being a really good actor just gets you because he just looks straight ahead with tears in his eyes and he realizes I'm being forgiven. But that's not all. What ends up happening, that's a very famous scene. When they start to pass the communion tray, they start passing it along. And next thing you know, people start showing up in the pew that you say, what are they doing? Remember Danny Glover, African-American, run out of town by the Ku Klux Klan? Suddenly he's there. And you say, what's that? What's going on? And then the tray goes a little bit further and he gets back and you suddenly see Sally Field's husband who was killed at the beginning of the movie. And you say, what is he doing there? And right next to him is the African-American young boy who killed him by accident and was dragged to death. And you say, what was he doing there? That last scene is surrealistic and I'll tell you why. Forgiveness is never rational. Forgiveness is never logical. It's never the natural thing. It's never warranted. Don't you know? If someone wrongs you, we can't live without forgiveness. If someone wrongs you though, forgiveness is always a miracle. Forgiveness is never natural. It's never the logical thing to do. Never. There has to be an intervention. It has to be a miracle. It has to come from the outside. You're never going to resolve your family problems. If you just say, I'm going to forgive. I'm going to try. I'm going to just turn to God in some way. I'm not going to let my parents be the things that run my life. No. You got to have an intervention. There's got to be a stranger. Someone from the outside. Something outside the system. It's Jesus. That's the Christian answer to that. Who on the cross lost his father so we could have his father. Now what I'm going to do is close in prayer and then I'll tell you where we go next. Pray with me for a second. Our father, I thank you that you are a father. And I thank you that the Bible is so realistic about the limitations of family life. And I ask that you would help us to see how through the intervention of a stranger, our family can be put together as well. That stranger is Jesus. I, Father, I pray that tonight that we have a better idea of the profundity of what the gospel has to say to us as members of a family. And we pray that you'd help us to incorporate these things in our lives by your spirit. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
