TITLE: New York, New York (2009 Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Cities The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/new-york-new-york-an-open-forum-2/

============================================================

Wow, it's loud out here. Wow. I want to reflect with you about New York City. There's about living in cities. I really do want to be reflective. I think it's, as I said in the beginning, it's a very, it's, there's three things you need to know about cities in general if you're going to live well in a city. You need to realize that cities are different, that cities are both incredibly wonderful and awfully terrible at the same time, and that the city is the future. The city is our future. If you don't, you need to come to grips with those three things. I think if you're going to live well in the city and maybe even if you're going to live well. Okay? Whoa. What's a city? Every human society needs four orders. You need an economic order, a place where people buy and sell and work, do business. You need a cultural order, and by a cultural order I mean you need libraries and schools and scholarship and the arts and sports and faith communities and other kinds of cultural institutions. You need a residential order. In other words, you need a place where people can live safely, safe from disease, safe from the weather, a place where they can thrive. And then you need a political leader, legal order. You need courts, and you need legislatures, and you need town halls. You need seats of government. Okay? So you need economic, and you need economic, and cultural, and residential, and political, legal orders. If you think of each of those as an ingredient, like tomato sauce, cheese, pepperoni, and dough, then an urban neighborhood is a slice. It's a slice of pizza, a really good slice of pizza, which you can buy at any one of the 3,000 raised pizzas in New York, all of which say we're the original one, right? Slice of pizza. The suburbs is a place where all the dough is over here, just loads of dough, and then you can drive from where all the dough is to where all the tomato sauce is, and then you can drive from where all the tomato sauce is to where all of the oregano and the cheese and that sort of thing is. Now, what I'm saying is this. A city is, here's a definition, a city is a walkable, mixed-use human settlement. And because it's mixed-use and walkable, it is more dense and more diverse than any other human settlement. A city, therefore, is a mixed-use, walkable human settlement, which leads it to be more dense and diverse than anything or anywhere else. Let's go through those four real quick. You need to understand these, to understand what a city is. First of all, mixed-use. The difference between a suburb is you have single zones where you have all the, here's where all the businesses are and the shops. Here's where all the residences are, and here's where they, you know, where the people live. Here's where the cultural institutions are. Here's the stadiums. Here's the museums. They're all separate. And the only way to get to them is with a car, through pedestrian, unfriendly zones. Whereas if you're in an urban neighborhood, a true city means that wherever you're living, you can walk to shops, you can walk to places where people are working, you can walk to cultural institutions and art galleries, you can walk to the city government. They're all mixed together. Rather, the reason for the big difference is in 19, well, put it this way, a city, or put it this way, urbanization is a fluid rather than a stable process. It's an unpredictable rather than a rational and predictable process. Cities are fluid. Cities are constantly changing. Cities are somewhat chaotic. chaotic. And after 1945, because of the, you might say, actually the philosophy of modernity, which put big values on, you know, rationality, they looked at cities and they saw the density of the cities. They saw the chaoticness of the cities. And they said, this isn't good. This isn't good. We want rationality. And therefore, the suburb after 1945 became the great way of living. It was considered the best possible way to live. And not only were the suburbs created after 1945, by the way, even small towns are more like cities. Because in small towns you do, you know, you can, even though it's not very dense, small towns put the bank and they put the, they put the shops and they put the residences all together. The real, the real, the real new, a small town or the big city. It's the suburb. And after 1945, not only were suburbs beginning to grow, and this was considered now the new way for human beings to live, but even cities were starting to get remade in the image of suburbs. That's really, in a way, what Robert Moses tried to do here. You see, the suburbs is the only way you get places is through a car. And everything has to be, all the various sections have to be set off in single-use zones. And that's the reason why some of the more modern cities today, there's nobody that lives downtown around the stadiums. You have the stadiums and you have the big museums and those institutions, and there's tons of parking and people are expected to drive in, and nobody expected to live there. On the other hand, the older stadiums, like Wrigley Field or Fenway Park or Yankee Stadium, which are surrounded by residences, which is the old understanding of what a city was, and it was seen as a good thing, represents the older understanding of urban living. So it used to be that cities were considered good places to live because they were a mixed-use, walkable settlement. And over the last 80 or so years, by and large, especially in America, the idea has come up that that's really not the best way to live at all. However, the pro-city people were right. Just say that right out. If you have a walkable, mixed-use settlement, then you get a density and a diversity, which is vital and good. In fact, it's more human. Here's what I mean by that. When you go back into the ancient texts, especially the Bible, and you see people talking about cities that said the city of this and the city of that, if you actually ask the question, well, how great was the population in those cities, most ancient cities had 1,000 to 3,000 people. And when you hear that, you say, well, they really weren't cities at all. But yes, they were because ancient cities had walls around them. In fact, the Hebrew word for city means a fortified settlement. And the reason walls were important was the way in which you were safe. You kept yourself safe from marauders and from other armies and even from wild animals, even from the weather. So you created these walls. And inside the walls, there was great density of population. Most ancient cities were the size of about 5 to 10 acres. They had 240 residents per acre. And even Manhattan, which is the most densely populated part of America, only has 105 residents per acre. And therefore, even though the older cities didn't have the same size of populations, they were actually even more densely populated than Manhattan. And as a result, here's what happens. It means you always have street foot traffic on the street. And because the streets were always filled with people, people walking, people talking, people playing, cities were places where civilization happened in a human-scale way. Why do I say it like that? Let me put it like this. Jane Jacobs, who wrote the book The Death and Life of Great American Cities, was one of the people who was the first kind of a forerunner of the movement, which is now very strong, that recognizes that cities are good things. We shouldn't suburbanize cities. What cities have always had, which is mixed use, walkability, density, and diversity, is good for human life. And in her book, The Death and Life of the Great American Cities, she writes about how in the late 1950s, she was in 1959, she was at the north end of Boston. Now, you know where the north end of Boston is. And back then, in 1959, it was, and I think it is still to some degree, but it was very much a blue-collar neighborhood. And she said, this is what she says in her book, she says, she saw lots of small apartments and homes. She saw great food stores, some restaurants, but mainly food stores, because these were blue-collar people who ate with their families. They didn't eat out all the time. Also, there were lots of small businesses. There were upholstery-making businesses, metalworking businesses, carpentry, food processing, lots of shops and stores, good pubs and restaurants filled with people. And the streets were totally alive, alive with children playing, people shopping, strolling, talking. Everyone seemed to know everybody else. The street atmosphere was one of buoyancy, friendliness, and social health. She was amazed at how healthy the city looked. So she figured the city of Boston must have been pouring tons of money somehow into that neighborhood for it to be so vital. So she called up a friend of hers who was a Boston planner, she calls him. I don't know who he was. Maybe he was a city planner or not. But anyway, a Boston urban planner. And she said, you must be spending a lot of money down here in the North End because it looks so good, you know. And he says, money? Why, there's no money or any planning going into the North End. Not yet, but we will because it's a slum. And he says, you must be spending a lot of money. worst slum in the city. It has 275 dwelling units to the Nate Acre. I'm just embarrassed that there's any place in Boston like that. We've got to get those people off the streets. So she went on to say, well, why is the density so unhealthy? And he says, well, first of all, it's cut up by too many streets and they're not at right angles. Very disorderly. It's not a grid. You can't make decently large buildings in it, of course. She pointed out, but because it wasn't a grid, because the streets were at angles, it's like you saw where you were going and you saw more people. And it was very, it made, people were seeing each other. They weren't in cars driving around. They were seeing each other. They were meeting each other. And then he said, then she says, do you have any other figures besides density of population? What do you know about the neighborhood? And he looked and he says, hmm, well, funny thing. It has one of the lowest delinquency rates in the city. The tuberculosis death rate is the lowest and the disease rate is the lowest. And funny, lower than Brookline. And she says, maybe you shouldn't be wiping this thing out. Maybe you should be learning from it. And he says, well, I know how you feel. I often like to walk around down there and see all those wonderful street life and smell the food. You ought to come back in the summer. It's even more vital. But we're going to have to rebuild the whole thing eventually. And here's what she wrote. She says, here was a curious thing. My friend's instincts told me that the North End was a good place, a good place for human life. And yet his social statistics confirmed it. But everything he had learned as a physical planner about what was good for people told him that the North End had to be a bad place. So what Jacobs wrote, by the way, Jane Jacobs especially knows that one of the very best things for human living is what she called eyes on the street. If you have a street in which there's constant foot traffic all day and night, and not only do you have people on the street all the time, but you also have people who can look out of where they live and their eyes are on the street from where they live too. They can see the street. There's people on the street. There's people looking at the street. And if the streets are narrow enough that it's not that easy to have lots and lots of car traffic, there's an enormous vitality that happens. Why? First of all, they're incredibly safe. Unbelievably safe. The more people you have on the street, the more density, the safer it is. Nothing happens. Delinquency rate is down. All that kind of stuff. Secondly, it's more human scale. People know each other. They see each other. They know who they all are. You know who's in your neighborhood. You know all the grocers. You know all the shopkeepers. You know, people watch out for each other. You know, my wife was the – I remember my wife, Kathy, worked for a church in a very, very fairly poor area of Philadelphia many years ago, not too far from the intersection of Penn, Chew, and Worcester. And she does remember one thing, and that was she was about the only white person she knew anywhere in the vicinity. And yet what happened was – she said, So when I used to walk home, all the people who were outside, usually on their porches or on their stoops, they would see you and say, Hi, honey, how are you doing? We're keeping an eye on you. This is a good block, but watch out for that block over there. There are bad people on that block. And then she'd get to that block and say, Hi, honey, how are you doing? How are you doing, sweetie? It's great to see you. We're keeping an eye on you. You're safe here, but watch out for that other block. It was a community. And not only that, street traffic does not only create safety, it creates a local economy. Lots and lots of business. But most of all, it's more human. People aren't in machines driving around so you really can only see each other when you get mad. You know, only look when you say, Beep, beep. You know, what are you going so fast for, slow? So, and therefore, the mixed-use walkability of a city not only creates density, but lastly, and most importantly, in some ways, diversity. Because of the density of a city, immigrants can come here, and they can have their own daily newspapers in their own language. They can create their own institutions to help their own people kind of get acclimated to the new spot. Because of the density of cities, you'll always have diversity, and you will meet people here that you would never meet anywhere else, anywhere else. The diversity is amazing. Not only that, for example, poor people and elderly people can't drive. In suburbs, they're just cooked. You know, you need people at all rungs of the ladder in any economy. You need people to take, you know, certain jobs that are lower skilled, and you need people higher skilled and higher skilled. Suburbs don't provide people at all levels because suburbs aren't allowed to be diverse. So we don't really know what to do. You know, how do you get people who are, how do you get the unskilled jobs filled when all those people live in cities? They don't drive. Cities are wholesome. Cities are healthy. Cities are mixed-use, walkable places. They're nothing. They're, they're different. They're not good. They're not good. They don't drive. Cities are wholesome. Cities are healthy. Cities are mixed-use, walkable places. They're not automobile-friendly places. And as a result, they're more dense and diverse than any other kind of human settlement. And increasingly, what you see in the Bible, which is a pretty friendly attitude towards cities, as I'll get back to in a second, you also see in our general culture increasing numbers of people saying, you know, urban living is a good way to live. It's very human scale in many ways. It opens your mind. And that gets us to our next point. The next thing you have to understand if you're going to thrive well in cities is if you ask, is a city a good place or a bad place? The answer is absolutely. Or to paraphrase – and by the way, New York is the cityiest city, at least in North America. And therefore, to paraphrase a Woody Allen joke, New Yorkers are like everybody else, just much, much, much, much more so. And therefore, you need to understand that even biblically, you're going to see that in the Old Testament, the Bible basically looks at cities negatively. In the New Testament, it basically looks at cities positively. And the reason for that is because cities per se are not an evil institution or a good institution. One of the reasons why modern planners after World War II made some huge mistakes. They looked at density. They looked at North End and said, this is a slum. Why? Because of density. I've got some – by the way, you know who you are. I have some friends that some years ago were taking – brought some people from, you know, way out of town who were visiting, never been to New York. And they were walking along Sutton Place. And the guy – and somebody – and my friend said, you know, this is some of the most expensive property. Some of the wealthiest people in the world live right here. And the person says, but it's a slum. Why would they be living in a slum? Now, they couldn't have been looking at broken windows. There are no broken windows in Sutton Place. Well, what are they talking about? See, Americans, and middle class people in particular, hate density. We like privacy. And we think that density is bad for human beings. And that has – that's the – that's the thing that has come up. On the other hand, both biblically and culturally, increasingly, people are saying, wait a minute, maybe cities aren't bad places to live. Maybe cities are good places for human life to flourish. But if you're going to live well here, my second point is – it's an important point – is you have to see that cities themselves are neutral. They're powerful things, but they're neutral. They are like a magnifying glass that brings out the very best and the very worst in human nature. You've got to get that. Cities are not good things or bad things. Cities are magnifying glasses. They intensify and they bring people together. And therefore, the very best the human race is capable of and the very worst the human race is capable of are both here. So you have the most beautiful people in the world coming here to be photographed. And you have the most – the greatest athletes here to, you know, play professional ball. Or you have – you have the smartest people who come to go to business or to teach or to write. On the one hand, the very best the human race can give. On the other hand, the most violent, the most corrupt, the most greed. It's all here. And you have to understand that if you are going to understand cities. You know, Alexander Solzhenitsyn says that the line between good and evil goes down the middle of every human heart. And if cities are like magnifying glasses that bring out the very best and the very worst of human nature, then you must not have a romantic idea of New York or big cities, nor a negative view of New York or big cities. You need to see they're both wonderful and terrible. Here's how they are, wonderful and terrible. First of all, there's no better place – here's the wonderfulness. There's no better place to learn about life than in a place like New York. You're going to meet people. You're going to have friends. You're going to develop relationships with the kind of people here you would never meet anywhere else because of the diversity. Also, it's true that big cities, by and large, are places that make you better. So, for example, Jim Sleeper, in one of his books, says, the city creates a thirst for excellence. Now, I have to think about this for a second. If you live in New York for a while, and then you go back to wherever you were before, and you realize that the fruit is never as fresh, the restaurants by comparison stink, the live music everywhere else is tinny compared to what you hear here. And what's happening to you? Are you becoming a snob? You can. But I'll tell you what, what's actually happening is the dynamic of a big city is working on you so that you are actually getting someone out of that space, I'm becoming a snob. I want to tell you what. I want to tell you what. I want to tell you what. Are you becoming a snob? You can, but I'll tell you what, what's actually happening is the dynamic of a big city is working on you so that you are actually getting a thirst for excellence. Yeah, there could be a snob. You know, a Yankees fan once told me that, of course, if you're a Yankees fan, the minute you hear that Frank's not just on New York, New York, you think of the end of the game because they play it at the end of every Yankees game. And the person said to me, you know, it really works whether you've won or lost. It works perfectly to help you deal with the fact that you've won or the fact that you've lost. Because, you see, if you've won, you say, yeah, New York. Yeah. But if you've just lost and on that music comes, you say, well, you know what? We lost the game, but we're still New York and you're not. And therefore, we always win. Is that hubris? Obviously, I'm trying to say yes and no. The line between good and evil goes right down the middle of that. Do you know what I'm saying? There's a pride, there's a snobbishness that a lot of people just cannot stand about New Yorkers. They say, oh, you know, your music's better and your restaurants are better and the people are better and everything's better and it's the biggest and it's the best. And if you've lived here for a while and you go back to your family and nobody else lives in New York, you can be very, very, very tiresome. You know, Christmas and Thanksgiving, they say, just don't get them on the subject of New York. However, on the other hand, here's what Jim Sleeper is trying to say. Here's what the thirst of excellence is. I'm a pastor. I come here in New York to New York City in my late 30s. And first of all, I realized, number one, all kinds of things that I've said for 20 years. I've already been in the ministry for like 15 years or almost 20 years at that point. All kinds of things that I've said for years never were questioned. Here in New York, everybody said, why do you believe that? Why would you say that? And I was thinking, nobody ever asked me that before. I don't know. I've been saying that for a long time. I'm not really sure. You know, I had people after service, I had people come up and curse me for what I'd said. Use profanity. And say, you know, why did you blankety-blank that? You know, and I'd never gotten the kind of, and you have people of different religions. Ordinarily in church, you don't get people from different religions in your church. But you had Hindus and Muslims, Orthodox Jews in some cases would come up afterwards and said, here's why, you know, what you said I can't accept. And the diversity makes you think out everything you've ever done. It makes you come up with answers that maybe, you know, either you stick with what you've always said, and yet you can defend it better than you ever have, or else you change some of the things. Because there's so many people different for me, that made me more excellent as a preacher, but also because there were so many people like me. You know, I like to think I'm a smart guy, so I quote Nietzsche, but there's four people over there doing a PhD in philosophy at Fordham in Columbia, and they say, Nietzsche never said that, you know? And they, you know, and they email me and they write me, and I say, oh, really? And as you all know, look, you might be the very, very, very, very best violinist in your town in Ohio. Everybody gave you awards. You have all the gold medals around your neck, and you, you get in a Penn Station, and you get off the train, and as you're walking off the train, there's some guy begging, playing the violin, begging, people are throwing money in, and you listen to him, and he's better than you. And what do you do? Practice, practice, practice. We're so surrounded by people that are, we're so, there's more people like you here. Than anywhere else. And there's more people unlike you here than anywhere else. And as a result, it makes you dig down deep. Automatically, it creates a thirst for excellence. Automatically, it makes you better. Automatically. It's a place that makes you wiser about human life. Wiser about the human race. Wiser about what people in the world believe. Much, much less parochial. On the other hand, it's a terrible place. So these are terrible places. This is why. This is a very famous, you know, if you live in New York, you've got to read the article by E.B. White on New York. I hope you have. But if you haven't, there's one section where he says, by the way, the name of it is, here is New York. And it's a 1948 essay. And at one point he says, on any person, New York will bestow the gift of loneliness and the gift of privacy. This accounts for the presence within the city of a considerable section of the populace. For the residents of Manhattan are, to a large extent, those who pull up stakes somewhere and come to town seeking some greater or lesser grail. The capacity to make such dubious gifts is a mysterious quality of New York. It can destroy an individual or it can fulfill him. Now, what he's saying is that there can be no lonelier place in New York. And anybody who's lived here for about five years knows it. You know, you're here for a few years. is the best place. You make some friends. You're going out. You're seeing people. It's more people in tents. You're seeing people on the street. You're seeing people, and you feel like, I've never had more fellowship and more community than here. And then at the end of a year, half your best friends leave. And then every two years, half your best friends leave. And New York can bestow upon you the gift of loneliness that can, on the one hand, drive you to excellence or completely break you. There's terrible temptations here. There's also people who are absolutely ruthless, and they don't care. And if you're in their way, they're just going to step on you. And unless you've got community to handle those kinds of shocks, New York can really destroy you. Listen, it's one thing to be ruined, but if you work on Wall Street and you're ruined, you're really ruined. If you come here because you're an artist, and every day you're going to auditions, and you realize that no matter how good you are, you're constantly being turned down. Every day you're baring your heart and you're baring your soul in your auditions. And you're being treated, I mean, they don't call it a cattle call for nothing. You're being treated like an animal. You're being treated like, you know, a commodity. And almost never do you hear, and nobody ever says, great. Everybody says, next. And your soul's in the line, and it's just brutal. It's a very, very difficult place to be. And, of course, at the heart of every city is its God. A man who, some years ago, a Christian who was a city planner, was working for Disney and doing downtown Disney. And he was part of what's called the new urbanism, where people are trying to – we realize that urban living, mixed-use, walkable settlements that are more dense and more diverse, is a good way for human beings to live. And they were trying to recreate some of these new urban areas. And he said we were working off the – well, here's what he says. He says we were working off of the model of European towns. And he says, in the European towns, however, here's what he said. He says, when I was designing downtown Disney, we were modeling the area after European towns, and we suddenly recognized as planners that we had a God-shaped hole in the center of our master plan. Because historically, whatever you had downtown at the very center was a cathedral, or if it was a village, a small church, or in ancient times, a temple. And I realized we would have to fill this central spot with something else that people used to fill that God-shaped hole, like entertainment, or movies, or sports, or shops to buy material things, or office towers in which to make money. See, Frank Sinatra and the Tower of Babel in Genesis 11 have something in common. In Genesis 11, they said, let's build a skyscraper, let's build a city to make a name for ourselves. And, of course, that's what Frank Sinatra is singing about. He says, I'm going to New York City, what, to have a life? No. If I can make it there, I can make it anywhere, then I know I'm somebody. But I want you to realize that that's the worst possible place, the worst possible way to go to a city. If you go to a city to get an identity, to say, I live in New York, I'm cool, or I'm an actor, or I'm an artist, or I'm a businessman or woman, and I can live in New York and I can do it. If that's how you're coming, you're probably, the terribleness of New York is going to devastate you, and you're going to miss out on the wonderfulness. Look, last thing is this. The cities are our future. In 1950, there were two cities in the world with over 10 million people in them, London and New York. Today, there's 25 cities with over 10 million. In another 20 years, it'll be 40. Just recently, last year, the United Nations said for the first time, 2008, more than 50% of all the world's population lived in major cities. And by the next 20 years, it's going to go to 60%. The city is our future. There's another reason why the city is our future, and that's probably the environmental issues. When you're in an apartment versus in a detached single home, as the environmentalist will tell you, it takes about one-sixth as much energy to heat you and to deal with your needs as it does in a detached home. And therefore, increasingly, what's going to happen is, as the human race goes on, you're going to find that, frankly, the most ecologically efficient way of living is urban living. And not only that, the Bible starts in a garden, Genesis, but ends in a city, Revelation. And there's one place where God says to Jonah, who's really mad at this wicked pagan city, Nineveh. He says, look at this city, 120,000 people. And by the way, in those days, that was an enormous city. He says, 120,000 people here. How can you not love this city, he says to Jonah. you believe in the image of God? Do you really believe that every human being is made in the image of God and therefore is the apex of creation? He says, the city is the place where there's more people than plants. The country is the place where there's more plants than people. And because God loves people more than plants, he has to love the city more. Than the country. And he says, if you don't also love the city more than the country, you are guilty of a form of misanthropy, which means the hatred of humanity. In other words, you do find canyons and oceans and mountains way more beautiful than people. But God doesn't. And therefore, there's a powerful resource in the Christian theology for us to orient ourselves towards cities. And we're also told that in the end, what comes out of heaven at the end of the book of Revelation, the new city of God is the new heavens and new earth is an urban future. So demographically, even if you ask the United Nations, or theologically, if you ask the Bible, our future is urban. How are we going to live well there? There, I just want you to consider one thing. This will take about 60 seconds to say. Years ago, 2,000 years ago, there was another young man who went up to a big city, the biggest city in his country. And he went differently than you and I tend to go. I think even I came in a way to prove myself. When I look back on myself, I was a 38-year-old male. And you kind of sometimes say, you know, can I make it there? I'd be so manly if I did. It's very hard not to come like the people who built the Tower of Babel in Genesis 11 to make a name for ourselves. But there was a man who went up to Jerusalem, the biggest city. He was a young man. He was 33 years old. And he did not come to get power but to lose it. He didn't come to get accepted but to be rejected. He went to Jerusalem to be beaten and executed. There's a place where it tells us exactly what happened there. It says in Hebrews 13, it says, now Jesus suffered outside the city gate. He was rejected by the city. He went into the city and he was arrested and he was tried and he was found guilty in a trumped up unjust trial. And it says he suffered outside the city gate to make the people holy through his own blood. And we here do not have any enduring city but we're looking for the city that is to come. Jesus Christ went up to the city to serve. And he was killed. But he did it voluntarily. He died for our sins. Jesus Christ lost the city that is. So that we can be citizens in the city that is to come. Because when you believe in Jesus, you become citizens of that future city. That's the Christian theology. And if your identity is already intact in New York City, if you know it's not because you're making it in New York but because you're making it in the ultimate New York City. The ultimate city, it's called the New Jerusalem. Because you know you've got a place there and your name is written there. If that's your identity, then you can handle the vicissitudes of life here. And you can be a great citizen here. And the wonderfulness of it can build you up and turn you into something wise and great. And the terribleness of it, you're kept from it. Now, because you are a citizen of that great city because of the death of Jesus Christ, a young man who went to the city not to be served but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many. Let's just pray for a second. Our Father, I'm praying just because I felt like we should pray at the end even though this has just been a kind of survey of what the city is. I do ask that you would help us now to consider whoever we are, if we live in New York City, whether we're Christians or whether we're not, what it takes to enjoy life here, what it takes to make this a great city, a great place for human beings to live and thrive and flourish. And Father, for us who are believers, we particularly have great deep theological resources to do that. That we believe in the image of God. We know there's more image of God per square inch in a city than anywhere else. And we also know that your son came to the city not to be served but to serve. And we pray that you would help us to do that as well. Make us great citizens of this great city. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
