TITLE: No Condemnation
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 3:19-23
TOPICS: Prayer & Meditation
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/no-condemnation/

============================================================

You know, we've been looking through all fall and spring, and we've gone in series through the first epistle of John, the first letter of John the Apostle, and I'm going to read you the very last few verses of chapter 3, because tonight we get a chance to finish up what he says in chapter 3 before we actually begin a new series during the summer. So the passage that you've got printed right there, let me read it to you. It's 19, chapter 3, verses 19 to 24. This, then, is how we know that we belong to the truth, and how we set our hearts at rest in his presence. Whenever our hearts condemn us, for God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything. Dear friends, if our hearts do not condemn us, we have confidence before God, and we receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his commands and do what pleases him. And this is his command, to believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and to love one another as he commanded us. Those who obey his commands live in him, and he in them. And this is how we know that he lives in us. We know it by the Spirit he gave us. This is God's Word. What's the passage about? There's a lot more in here than we can get to tonight. But I think what it's about, surprisingly enough, I don't think right away you notice this, but as you read the thing, the passage is about, it's about prayer. And it's about something that happens in prayer. If you look carefully, you'll see, for example, it says in verse 19, it says, This is how we know that we belong to the truth, and how we set our hearts at rest in his presence. What does that mean? Obviously, there's a problem that's being raised. It's a problem of a restless heart, a difficulty in the heart, a condemning heart, a heart condemning us, guilt, accusation. But where does that arise? It arises in his presence. Well, what does that mean? And then, of course, if you look a little longer, you see, down in verse 21, it says, Dear friends, if our hearts don't condemn us, we have confidence before God and receive from him anything we ask, because we obey his commands. And right there, see the issue? The issue is, we've got to get by the condemning heart. We come into his presence, we feel a sense of condemnation. We have to get by that. We have to find a way of assuring ourselves. We have to deal with the condemnation so we can go on, and what? And pray, ask for things, things that we have need. What that's telling us is that when you pray, if you pray truly, something happens when you draw near in prayer that's profoundly serious, deeply troubling. In fact, I go so far as to say one of the ways you can tell that you haven't just prayed in some kind of general way, but you've actually sought to truly pray, as Christianity defines truly pray, as the Bible defines truly pray, the way you can tell you've truly prayed, in fact, the way you can tell you've actually moved toward the real God and toward his presence as you've experienced the trauma of a condemning heart. Now, if you look at this, if we want to look at this in the right way, I'd like to sort of divide it up and say the subject tells us four things about prayer. And those four things, I'm going to lay out like this, that prayer is universal, okay? Prayer is universal. Secondly, so after you say prayer is universal, you say prayer, well, I put it this way, some prayer is universal. In other words, everybody prays to some degree. But then secondly, I'd like to show you that this says that true prayer is approach. And then thirdly, that true prayer is traumatic, okay? And fourthly, true prayer requires some kind of assurance. Now, these aren't self-evident points until I go through them, all right? But prayer is universal. Prayer is approach. Prayer is traumatic. Prayer requires assurance. Look, number one, first of all, I'm going to say this kind of in passing, and yet important. If you're a person who's here and you're not sure, you know, where you stand on spiritual issues, somebody dragged you here, I don't know why, you're thinking of going to Central Park and it kind of overcast, but kind of rainy, and somebody says, I know a place where there's a good, you know, band and an interesting church, and you've come in here and you say, oh my gosh, sermon on prayer. I don't even know if I believe in it. I don't know where I stand on this thing, so I just check out, you know, I wonder how long this will last. Well, please don't. Here's why. The thing that you see underneath all the things... tells you to pray properly and to pray often, but the Bible never really comes after people and says, listen, you need to pray. It assumes that everybody prays. And I would like to point out to you that regardless of what your intellectual position is right now about God, you've prayed too. In fact, you do pray. Not only anecdotal evidence tells me that, but even the polls, the research tells me that regardless of what you say you believe about God, you pray. Everybody prays. There's an assumption here. Everybody prays. We're going to talk about what true prayer is and what prayer does and how you're supposed to react. But first, let's not move too fast. Let's just for a moment realize the Bible teaches that everybody prays. Everybody tries to pray. Everybody seeks. Now somebody says, what do you mean? Well, you know, someone says there's no atheists in a foxhole. Whenever you find someone being pulled out of the ocean, having been lost at sea and rescued, having grabbed a raft for a while, and they interview them, what was it like? Usually they'll say, you know, I don't think I believe in God, but I prayed my head off for the last three days. They always say that. Well, you say, what does that prove? It proves this. Prayer is a universal reflex of the human heart, and you pray to the degree that you are in touch with your humanity. The more human you know yourself to be, the more human you know yourself to feel, the more you sense your true humanity, the more you pray. That tells you a lot. Well, you say, what do I mean? Well, I mean something like this. Back in the garden, the Bible says, the serpent came and said to Adam and Eve, you've got to cut loose from the Lord if you want to be as God. Don't believe what the Lord said. You can take charge of your life. You are in control. You can have it all. Now, that lie soaked into our heart. It dropped in there. It seeped in there pretty deeply. And whether you believe in the Garden of Eden or not, I think you know that the Bible is saying that all of us do not believe that we're human. It takes years. It takes all sorts of reality to kind of wake us up to it. Kids, for example, have no idea that they're human. Whenever I've done funerals of teenagers, and all the teenage friends come to the funeral of a teenage colleague, there's an amazement. There's a dumbfoundedness. But generally, there's not a lot of illumination. I was reading the, I was reading a little autobiography by a guy who used to be an old rock and roll star. He's now in his late 50s or mid-50s. He's a Christian. His name was, well, when he was singing, his name was Dion. Remember him? He sang Run Around Sue and Why Must I Be a Teenager in Love. In the late 50s, he was touring the Midwest as one of four acts, four rock and roll acts. The other three were Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper, and Richie Valens. And the fourth one was Dion in the Belmonts. And they would move from town to town with a bus. And one night, Buddy Holly says to the rest of them, I said, I'm tired of the bus trips. Let's fly. It'll only be $35 a piece. We can fly and then we'll have some time to actually relax before the next show. And the Big Bopper, you remember the Big Bopper? He did Chantilly Lace. Remember that? Richie Valens did La Bamba, Buddy Holly, Peggy Sue. Very famous. You know why they're famous? Because they all died that night. Dion said, $35 is too much. I'm going to take the bus. The other three guys got on an airplane and they crashed. And as a result, you know, they're legends because they died. They were also very good. Dion says that when he got to the motel and he realized they were all dead, Dion was 19 years old at the time and he was a heroin addict already. And he said, I felt funny, but he said, you know what's funny? I was 19. I thought I was immortal. I thought I could handle the heroin. And even the fact that all my friends who were also around 20, 22 years old had died, I just felt like it couldn't happen to me. When you're young, he says in the autobiography, you just don't believe you're human. You believe you're his God. It takes a long time for it to sink in. When you realize you're mortal, when you realize you're human, when it finally sinks in, it's the nature of the human heart to start out in life not believing that you're human. And as a result, you don't have a lot of interest in praying. But when you start to get in touch with reality, when you're out on the boat, I mean when you're out in the ocean, and you're on the raft, you're actually seeing what you really are. You're mortal. You're vulnerable. You're vulnerable. And to the degree you realize you're human, you will find your heart just naturally praying. Why? That's what you're built for. I mean, listen, somebody who says, I don't even pray much, or I don't even know if I believe in God and so on, I want you to know that to the degree that you get in touch with your real condition, you find yourself praying. That ought to tell you something. It ought to tell you something about the nature of reality. It ought to tell you something about the nature of the world. It ought to tell you something about what your heart was built for. The fact of the matter is, if you don't pray, if you seldom pray, if you never call out to God, if you consider the whole idea of a sermon on prayer boring, you haven't grown up yet. Even if you are 55 years old, you haven't grown up yet. You still don't know who you are. You're still like Dion. Heroin addict. All his friends died. Didn't even feel grief. Couldn't happen to him. It's kind of weird. Now, that's the first point. Everybody prays. Everybody will pray. Everybody eventually will pray. You have prayed. You will pray. But now, since that's inevitable, let's figure out how you do it right. Now, here's the second thing we learn, and that is, you have a wonderful little definition, I think, of prayer here. We say everybody prays. Everybody needs to pray. Everybody will pray. Everybody will come after it. But what's the right way to do it? The right way to do it is described right here. Two phrases. First of all, it says, to pray is to go into his presence. Another way to put it is to pray is to go before him. See that? We have confidence before God, and that's where we're praying. Or it's going into his presence. Now, that's really very profound, and give me one or two minutes to show you how profound it is. Many people think of prayer as an exchange of information. I put up a prayer. You run in, and you put up a prayer. You say your prayers, people say. Well, I guess there's nothing wrong with saying that, but I think it shows it's revealing of an attitude. People come when there's trouble, and they go into a church, and they come up to the altar, and they say a prayer. They send up a prayer, people talk about. A lot of people think that prayer is an exchange of information. No. Real prayer is not information on information, but a life on a life. Real prayer is coming into the presence of God, seeking the presence of God, seeking a personal audience. In other words, let's put it another way. A lot of people see prayer as kind of sending a fax. You're just sending information. I've got a need. I've got a request. It's filling in an application, even making a phone call. Most people, the way they pray is the way I like to make phone calls. I'm always begging for the answering machine. I hope that person, I get the answering machine. Just think of how many. Here, I have 12 phone calls to make. I mean, this is a confession. It's time to do this, all right? You know, you have 12 phone calls to make, and you say, there's no way I'm going to get these 12 phone calls made in a half an hour unless I get 12 answering machines. It's just incredible, right? But if the first, you know, if I don't get any answering machines, this is going to be two calls probably, three calls. Well, I always enjoy them until the half hour is over, and I say, when am I going to make the other nine? A lot of people say, I just want to send the information. I don't want the personal interaction. Now, when you send a fax, when you make a phone call even, certainly when you write a letter, you're really in control. For example, when you're writing a letter, you can write the letter, and you can be listening to music. You know, you can be, you know, not having shaved. You could be, you know, not even having changed. You can write this wonderful letter, and you send it off. You see, even when you're on the phone, you can sort of be watching television. Or, you know, nobody, in fact, on the phone, and through the mail, and on the fax, you can hide who you are very easily. You can purport to be somebody that you aren't. But in a personal audience, when you have a personal audience with something, on the one hand, it means that you're totally attended to. You're seen for who you are. You can't hide who you are. You have to get dressed. You know, you can't watch the TV. You're out of control. You're attended, and you also have to give complete attention. You don't have to do that when you're faxing something. You don't have to do that when you're writing. You don't have to do it. Because when you have a personal audience, it's a total thing. Well, that's what prayer is supposed to be. In real prayer, first of all, real prayer means you give full attention, and secondly, you get full attention. In real prayer, you give full attention, and you get full attention. Now, let me show you what I mean just briefly. You know, what does it mean to come into the presence of God? point to God, God appears in a whirlwind. He doesn't really see God, but it is a place where he says, I heard of you with my ears, but now I see you with my eyes, and I repent. He's sensing the presence of God. What does it mean to be in the presence of God? I'll put it to you this way. You're in the presence of God when God becomes the governing reality. When things stop being abstract, you might know God loves you, but when you're before God, his love. You might know he's powerful, but when you're before God, his power. You might know he's sovereign intellectually, but when you're before him, his sovereignty governs the way you see things, governs the way you feel. I have to keep going back to her. Remember, Kathy and I used to run the youth group in our little church in Virginia, and one time, every so often I bring her up because it's so quintessential, it's so archetypical. She's a sweet lady and a Christian as far as I know, and she was 16 years old, and at one point she made this great statement that, you know, I as the pastor, my life has been impacted by it. I will never forget as long as I live. She said, I know God loves me, but what good is that if you can't get any dates? Now, I've never forgotten that. She said, I know God loves me. I know Jesus died for me. I know that I'm a daughter of the king. I know that I'm guided and cherished by the king of the universe, but nobody will take me out. What good is it? Now, those are both facts, aren't they? On the one hand, she knows that God loves her. On the other hand, she's lonely. No boy's her age thinks she's nice. Two facts. Before which one of those two facts is she living? In the presence of which of those facts is she living? Which fact is governing her? Which fact is the most real to her? Which fact is governing the way she sees everything? Now, the way I like to put it is they were both true. They were both in her mind, you see, in a sense. Both those facts. God loves me. Boys won't date me. But one was on audio. One was on video. One was just a knowledge, and the other one was filling her vision. When the psalmist says, I set the Lord ever before me, therefore I am not shaken, what is he doing? He says, I am disciplining myself to let God and who God is and what he's done govern me, and when I do that, nothing shakes me. God says to the psalmist, I will never leave or forsake you. The psalmist knows that. On the other hand, the psalmist also knows that the enemy could cut his head off. Which of those two truths does he live before? Which ones, you know, is he in the presence of? See, prayer is not sending a fax. Prayer is not just sending up information. Prayer is having a personal audience with God. I seek his presence. I want to see him. And that means I want his reality to overshadow me. I want it to come upon me. I want his reality to fill my vision. See, when you're on the phone, the other person, all you hear, you've got your kids in front of you, you've got the TV on, you see all these other things. A personal audience is different. Prayer is not just sending a fax. It's giving your full attention. It's seeking his presence. But not only that, it's also, and here's the frightening part, it's getting his full attention. When a person says, I know that I'm sinning here. I know that I'm sinning there. I know that I'm doing this and that wrong. But I'm going to pray to God. If you can, without thinking too much about all the little things that you know you're doing that God doesn't want you to do, and yet you've got a need, and you put a prayer up, that's sending a fax. Real prayer is coming before him. And to come before him means he sees you. It means it's a total thing. You're vulnerable. You can't go with just information. You've got to go with your whole self. You can't just walk in and say, I'd like to talk about one thing. See, you can do that on a phone. You can do that in a fax. You can make a person attend to just one little thing about you. You can even fool them about who you are. You can purport to be somebody you're not. That's not prayer. Prayer is giving your full attention and getting your full attention. Giving your full attention to God and getting his full attention. It means to be vulnerable. It means to allow yourself to be examined. Real prayer doesn't just go in with requests. It goes in and says, I've got requests and I've got needs, but I've also got a life to lay in front of you. Real prayer is not just laying your requests in front of him, but laying your whole life. morning. I mean, look, you can pray on the subway. You can pray, you know, driving around, walking around the street. You can do that. But that's only if you've established the presence of God in your life. This kind of prayer is absorbing. This kind of prayer takes everything. This kind of prayer makes you sweat. This kind of prayer will make you lose weight. This kind of prayer takes time. This kind of prayer takes all, every nerve of concentration. It's to lay your life in front of them. It's to let them examine you. It's to examine yourself. It's to say, I not only have my requests that I lay in front of you, I lay everything in front of you. It's to say, I want you to be the governing presence and force in my life. That's prayer. Don't you see? What a wonderful description. You can't get a better one than this. You can't get a more profound definition. Okay? We see prayer is universal, but real prayer is not just throwing out information. It's coming into his presence. Real prayer is approach. Okay. Thirdly, I told you that, you know, the headings aren't very self-explanatory, but I'm getting to them all. Now, thirdly, prayer is traumatic. Now, I hinted at this in the beginning, but now it's time to mention it. Look, it says, this then is how we know that we belong to the truth and how we set our hearts at rest in his presence whenever our hearts condemn us. For God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything. Why do our hearts condemn us? Because we've gone into his presence. There is nothing that more shakes my faith than my desire to be a Christian. See, boy, it's incredible. Confessions from the preacher tonight. Okay? There's nothing that shakes my faith and makes me less desirous to be a Christian than to go into a card shop and to, you know, a gift, you know, a greeting card shop and to go to the religious section and to see what people's religious sentiments and sensibilities are in this world. And almost always you've got, you know, the religious cards, you've got the folded hands and lots and lots and lots of pastels. Okay, folded hands, pastels everywhere, you know, stained glass windows, beams of light coming through the windows. Whenever there's any reference to the presence of God, that's what you've got. If it says near to God, pastels, you know, perfume, folded hands, you know, chestnuts roasting on an open fire, jack's frost nipping at your nose, you know, warm and cozy feelings, near to God, that is utterly, that's not just a little wrong, that is utterly opposite of what the Bible tells you is the actual experience of anyone who comes near the presence of God. Coming toward the presence of God is always traumatic. In fact, one of the ways you can tell that you're getting near the real God is your heart condemns you. Your heart does not say, how sweet it is, how wonderful it is just to be here by the fire, praying, being near God. Not at all. Now, you know, as you know, some of you do, and we can't spend much time on this, just take a look at anybody that tries to get near God. Look at Isaiah, chapter 6. Isaiah's like an awful lot of us. He went to church one day, and the last person he really thought he would get near would be God. He goes to church, in a sense. He goes to the temple. He sees God. He feels like he's coming apart. When Peter sees, gets near the greatness and the glory of God, he always trembles in fears. He says, depart from me. I'm a sinful man. Why? It's very normal. The closer you get to the light, the more you can see how much dirt's on your hands. You know? One of the worst things for a good physical image is to look in a mirror, right, when there's all these bright lights around. You know, there's some lights that reveal every zit you've ever had in your life. The last 25 years, it's still there. You say, oh, my word. You know, in other words, really good lights show your impurity. The closer you get to the real God, the holy God, the pure God, you will experience the trauma of his holiness. That's one of the ways you know. Your hearts will condemn you. Why? Because the closer you get to the standard, the more you'll see how far you fall short. It's only common sense. If you move on in, your heart will start to condemn you. It can get pretty bad. Look at Lady Macbeth. She went insane with a condemning heart. She went around. She couldn't get the blood off her hands. You know, out, damn spot. Macbeth is, you know, her husband looks at her and says, Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, pluck from the memory a rooted soul? with some sweet oblivious antidote cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff that weighs upon the heart. He says, what is the sweet oblivious antidote to a condemning heart, that perilous stuff that weighs upon the heart? You get near God, you're going to have a condemning heart. It's going to condemn you. It's going to say something like this, at least. It's going to say, and you call yourself a Christian. What about the golden rule? Why aren't you loving your neighbors yourself? How can you harbor the thoughts that you harbor? What if the people around you really knew? That's going to happen, and that's how you know you're near God. Now, lastly, therefore, this is the universal testimony of the Bible. You know, it's one of those things I'll take a bullet on. This is one of those things which, if it's not true, the whole Bible and all of Christianity falls. You get near God, you'll start to feel the trauma of that. Now, lastly, therefore, if you're trying to seek the real God out, you're going to start to find, you're going to see your sin. You're going to see your flaws. You're going to see your wrongdoing. You definitely will. Then what do you do? Now, notice what it says, and it's a wonderful thing that it says. It says, dear friends, oh, pardon me, this is how we set our hearts at rest. You have to have some way of setting your hearts at rest in his presence. For whenever our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything. Now, let me look at the clock, and I'll lay the principle down, and I'll just spend as much time as I feel like is discreet and right in drawing it up. But let me lay the principle down. If your heart condemns you, and if you are a Christian, you have to remember that chapter 3 assumes chapter 2. This is the same letter, and there's a wonderful place that we looked at months ago now where it says, if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and cleanses of all unrighteousness. Why? Because we're told, chapter 2, verse 1, dear children, I write to you so you won't sin, but if anyone sins, we have one who speaks to the Father on our behalf, an advocate, Jesus Christ the righteous one. He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, all right? Now, if you know that, and you say, I can't forgive myself, my heart condemns me, and I can't forgive myself. This is a normal thing. I hear it. You say it. Pastors hear it. You hear it from your friends. People will say, I know God forgives me, but somehow I just can't forgive myself. I know God says I'm forgiven, but I can't forgive myself. I can't get rid. I can't get rid of that damn spot, as Lady Macbeth says. I can't get rid of it. This text tells us, if that's true, you are promoting your heart over God. You are not innocent, and you are not helpless. If you understand the gospel, what I just said, if we confess our sins, we're faithful, and he's faithful and just to forgive us our sins. He's faithful and just to forgive us our sins and cleanse us of all unrighteousness. Why? Because if you're a Christian, we have an advocate with the Father, one who speaks before the Father, who's the atoning sacrifice for our sins. If you know that, and you cannot get rid of a condemning heart, it's because you have actually promoted your heart or something in your heart over God. If you see that God is greater than your heart, if you treat God as greater than your heart, at that point, you will put your heart at rest, and you'll be able to move right on through in prayer. But if you don't, you can't say, oh, what am I going to do about my guilt feelings? I can't help it. I have a bad self-image. I was mistreated. You know, I had condemning parents. Whatever. I just can't get over this self-image. You are not innocent, and you are not helpless. You are treating something as greater than God. Let me put it to you this way. Everybody says, oh, yes, I see that I'm, well, all Christians pretty much understand intellectually this fact. You're saved by grace, not by works. You're saved because you have Jesus Christ, our advocate, who stands before the Father. Right, Christian friends? You know this? You say you know that, but then when you say, you know, I can't forgive myself, I want you to look a little more deeply. I'll tell you what's going on here. There is something in your life that is a self-salvation project. There is something in your life that is actually the real source of your feeling good about yourself, and it's more a source than God. pseudo-Savior, but it's your real Savior. You see, for example, I remember some of you, when you are, you say, I'm a Christian, when you slip into sexual sin, you can easily forgive yourself, very easily. You say, I shouldn't have done that, right, sometimes too easily. But when you blow something in a career area, you can't forgive yourself. I did a stupid thing. You know, now I'm not going to move ahead. Others of you are the other way around. Your career means nothing to you, but I've talked to some of you who said, you know, I know that God forgives me for this particular, you know, raunchy sexual episode in my life, but I just cannot forgive myself. And, you know, very often you'll find that you come from a background, you come from a family that always looked at sexual sin as far worse than any other kind of sin. And deep down, you feel that that's the case. And you have always felt good about yourself, and you've maybe felt superior to other people because you've had self-control. Now, here's what I'm trying to get at. If you can't forgive yourself, it's because there's some other thing in your life that's really important to you, that's your real source of identity, more important than God, in spite of what you say with your lips. And that is not forgiving you. Because you may say you believe you're saved by faith, you're saved by grace, not by works, but in your actual psychological functioning, the reason you can feel good about yourself is because you're doing this, and you're achieving this, and you're achieving this. God is the only God that forgives. Because every other God will refuse. The God of career. The God of moral decency. In other words, if there's anything else you're serving, and you violate it, if there's any other standard that you're trying to really use to save yourself, and you violate it, you say, I can't forgive myself? No. No God but God will forgive you. And if you can't forgive yourself, is there some other God that you've promoted over this God, the real God? Don't you see? Paul says, it is God who saves, who is to condemn. What is he saying? He's saying, if you are still condemning yourself, and you know what Jesus Christ has done for you, how dare you? You are promoting your heart, your standards, these little false gods over God, if you can't forgive yourself, if you are wallowing in guilt and self-pity, and yet you understand that Jesus Christ is your advocate, you are not helpless, you are not innocent. It's a terrible thing that you're doing. Do you realize that? You must put your heart at rest. How do you do that? God is greater than your heart. And you know, it also mentions, we've got to close with this, he knows everything. You know, I remember about two years ago, no, more than that, I guess back in 1999, first couple years, I used this illustration I'm going to use about two or three times in the same year, and my wife came to me and said, why don't you get some new illustrations? You know, do a little bit of digging. Why do you go back to the illustration all the time? And my heart condemned me, and I thought, I'm being a bad preacher, so I stopped using it. But I can't resist tonight. Probably not a true story, but there was a, back in the days of the old Russian czars, one of the czars had a good friend who was a nobleman, but he was dying, and the nobleman said, could you adopt my little son? Because when I die, he won't have anyone, because his mother's dead too. And he died, and the czar adopted the son into his household, gave him everything, and he grew up, and he took a commission in the army. But he was not a very decent guy, and he really didn't have much self-control, and he gambled and deal with his gambling habit. He started to embezzle money from his division, because he was the bookkeeper. And at a certain point, it got really terrible. He had gotten so, he had been embezzling and embezzling, and you know, you can hide that for so long, and he realized that eventually it was going to come out. He realized that within a day or two, it was going to come out. He realized he'd be disgraced. So one night, he sat down over the books, he looked at them, he realized there was no way out, and he drank as much as he possibly could. He got himself as drunk as he possibly could, because he was going to kill himself. And he said, well, I've got to get myself really drunk so that I have the nerve to do it. And of course, what often happens when you do that is he got himself a little too drunk, and he just passed out. Evidently, the czar used to sometimes dress up as just an enlisted man in his garments, and walk around in the army to see what the people really were doing, and what they were really like, so they didn't just put on airs when the czar came. And he walked into the tent, and he saw the young man passed out, and he saw the revolver, and he saw the books open, and he looked, and he realized everything. And he wrote a note, and he sealed it with the czar seal, and he left. And when the young man woke up, he looked down, and there was the note. And the note said, And the note said, book. And the young man realized that the czar had come, and he'd seen everything. He knew everything. And he still loved him. Now, you know, Jesus Christ dressed up as one of us, and he came to earth, and he knows more about your heart than you know about your own heart. Do you realize that? Listen, I don't know how old you are. Most of you probably have 40, 50, 60 years left, at least, of life. There's all kinds of bad things in your heart that are going to jump out later. There's all kinds of selfish actions and selfish deeds. There's stuff in there that you're going to be so surprised at. You're going to say, I didn't know I was capable of that. You know, if you're having trouble forgiving yourself now, what are you going to do later? There's all kinds of stuff you haven't even seen. God knows everything. And yet, he has said, now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. He's looked into your heart. He's seen everything. And he's left a note with his seal. And he says, I will make up the difference. If you don't make God greater than your heart, you will live with a condemning heart. You're not innocent. You're not helpless. You don't have to do it. It doesn't honor him. You know what power you'll have if you understand this? Remember when the disciples came back, and they were throwing demons out with the power of Jesus? And they said to Jesus, wow. I mean, this is sort of a paraphrase from the Greek. Wow, Lord. Even the demons are subject to our name. This is in Luke 10, by the way. And Jesus says, rejoice not that the demons are subject to your name, but that your names are written in heaven. He says, just to know that your names are permanently written over my heart, the great high priest before the Father, your names are written on the breastplate, on the jewels over my heart before the Father, that I bear before the Father as your advocate. Just to know that your names are permanently engraved on the palms of my hands, he says in the Old Testament. See? To know that that is power. He says, casting demons out is nothing compared to the power of knowing that I will never, never, never, never, never forsake you. When your hearts condemn us, when our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and he knows everything. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for granting us the possibility of putting our hearts at rest. Lord, most everybody who gets near you, and they need to get near you, as soon as they get into touch with their humanity, they need to get near you. And as they do get near you, their hearts start to condemn them. We feel the vulnerability. What can we do? We can put our hearts at rest when we realize that you've looked into our hearts all the way. You see our sin, and yet you sent your Son to die for us anyway. And now he stands before us, our advocate before you. Lord, help us to have the joy of people who understand that, and who know that, and who live in the light of that. It's greater than being able to cast out demons. And now we pray that you would help us to experience all this, and have all this as we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
