TITLE: No Longer Children
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:11-16
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Discipleship and Spiritual Growth
SERIES: Lord of All
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/no-longer-children/

============================================================

Ephesians 4. The first half of Ephesians 4, in verses 1 to 6, we saw it talks about the great unity we have in the church even though we're diverse. And then verses 7 to 11 talks about the great diversity we have in the church even though we're one. And we cannot overlook the importance of this truth. Let me just drive it home for another minute or two. Andrew, the unity in diversity and the diversity in unity is so critical to the nature of the church that it is one of the main ways that anyone can tell whether God's really present in our midst. The unity in diversity and diversity in unity is one of the most unmistakable signs of the supernatural origin, the divine origin of the church, that if it's not there, the world has a right to reject us. The world has a right to say there's nothing special about you. Look at it this way. For example, the diversity in unity shows us the difference between real supernatural Christianity and cults. This passage of the Bible shows us that any presentation of the truth that creates a sameness amongst people, that creates a uniformity amongst people, is false and wrong. One of the things that the cults tend to do, and any authoritarian or totalitarian agency tends to do, is create a regimentation, is to create a sameness, is just to create people and say, we want you to talk and think and act in a certain way. I was reading, don't ask me why, but I've been reading a little bit of Groucho Marx recently. Not Karl Marx, Groucho Marx. He has some interesting things to say. I even quoted him on the front page of the bulletin. But Groucho Marx points out that every time a totalitarian government takes over, every time a dictatorship of the left or the right decides it's going to take over culture, the first people to go are the comics. And the reason for that is that sort of individuality cannot be tolerated by an authoritarian regime. Cults. Very often, cults are the kinds of religious organizations that grow very rapidly, but they create a sameness. Therefore, counterfeits of Christianity are always mechanical. Whereas the real church produces this glorious variety, this tremendous diversity. Very important. You know, it still amazes me when I hear people say, oh, you believe in the complete authority of the Bible, the necessity of the new birth and be born again. You're one of those strange cults. And they identify you with a number of other people who really are cult leaders, who do create that sameness, that are authoritarian, that do create that mechanical kind of unity, but I wish they'd just open their eyes. There's a tremendous difference between the real church and that sort of thing. Diversity and the unity is a very big part of our test of the reality of our church. But then we turn it around. The unity and diversity is as well. By that we mean this. The church has got this astonishing ability to take root in any kind of cultural soil and any kind of personality type. It is one of the ways in which we know that Christianity is from God. It's of divine origin. It's the only world religion, really, that really has caught, you might say, it's taken root in every kind of cultural soil. It truly is a universal religion. There is an Afghan church. There is a Korean church. There is a Thai church. There is a Colombian church. There is a Canadian church. It's really there. Other world religions tend so much to keep their roots in one cultural soil. There's a tendency, for example, amongst the Muslims, to say if you become a real Muslim, you have to take an Arabic name. Why? Because you essentially have to be Arabic. Judaism, great religion, also rooted in a particular ethnic group. Buddhism, a little less so, but essentially not a world religion, but one that is rooted in the East. But Christianity is a true world religion, and it's always been a sign of its reality. You know, for example, just to show you how widespread this is, one of my favorite quotes is, is the quote of Julian, one of the Roman emperors, the early Roman emperors, who tried to stamp out Christianity by reviving paganism. He tried to, you know, he subsidized all the pagan temples, and he tried very hard to get people to go back into the pagan cults, but Christianity was spreading so fast. And at one point, Julian says, the reason that Christianity is growing so rapidly is growing so rapidly is growing. Thank you. because of the way in which these, he called them the impious Galileans, that was a nasty way of talking about Christianity, he said these impious Galileans don't take care of their own poor only, but they take care of our poor as well. Now what he meant is the Jewish people took care of the Jewish poor and the Greeks took care of the Greek poor and the Romans took care of the Roman poor, but the Christians took care of everybody's poor. You know, Christians did not think of themselves as basically staying within a particular group or particular type. Almost every other religion tends to bind itself up with a particular community or ethnic group. You see how that works? They say, well of course I'm Buddhist, I'm Japanese. Well of course I'm Muslim, I'm Arabic. Well of course, and they just wrap it on up. Christianity refuses to be a river that stays inside those kinds of banks. It will always burst its banks. It must burst its banks. And that's the reason why, let me put it another way and not move on. There's a saying, a kind of common wisdom that goes like this. Well, that person says, I'm very glad you're religious. That's wonderful. For you. I'm not the religious type. And you know, it's fine that you have your religion, but don't you see how wrong and illogical it is to try to push your views on me? How silly it would be, the person says. For example, how silly it would be to take a person without a poetic spirit, without a poetic temperament or personality, and force him to write poetry. How silly it would be to come to a person without an athletic spirit, without any athletic ability, and force him to try to be a major league baseball player or a marathon runner. And so you don't, don't you see how silly it is for you to press your religion on me? Religion's fine for you. That's your type. You know, it's helpful for you, but I'm not that type. Now, that's utterly wrong and illogical. And here's the reason why. Because Christianity has converted every conceivable type of person. Every conceivable type of personality is well represented inside the church. And there are tons and, if anybody says, well, you know, religion, I'm not the type of person for religion, you have to look at them and say, give me your type. What type are you? And there are literally millions of people of your type who are testifying to the reality of the new birth in their lives. It's absolutely dishonest to say, I'm not the religious type. It's a whole lot better to say, I don't want Christianity. I don't want Jesus. I don't want what you've got. It's another thing to say, that's honest. It's another thing to say, I'm not the type. There is no such person. And that's one of the reasons why the diversity and the unity and the unity of the diversity of the church is so critical. It stops the mouth of the skeptics. Why do you think Jesus was able to look at all of us, our diversity, and say, Father, he says, make them one even as we are one that the world may know you sent me. The unity in the diversity, the diversity of the unity, God holds people together that no one else possibly can. There's no other way to explain it except that God is present. And that's the reason why it's so important for us to do this. First of all, we have to rejoice in our diversity. We have to. And to rejoice in our diversity means we must not push people or oppress people into a uniformity beyond that which is laid out in Scripture. Now, there are things that are laid out in Scripture. And if somebody says, well, you know, I'm just not the monogamous type, you know. At that point, you say, there's no such critter as a non-monogamous type. None of us are monogamous, you see, as long as we're living for ourselves. And this is one of those places where the Spirit of God's got to work in our lives. And you see, at that point, the person is demanding a kind of diversity that Scripture says, oh, no. That kind of diversity happens because of sin. But you see, where the Scripture hasn't spoken how wrong it is for us to try to push each other into certain molds. We have to rejoice. We have to revel. We have to relish in the diversity. See? But it's also true, on the other hand, that we've got to work work with all of our might for a unity amongst a diversity. It's not good enough to say, oh, isn't it great how many different kinds of people we have around here? That's not right. That's not good. It's not true. It's not enough. We have got to press for the unity. What this means is that every one of us have got to be extremely careful when we come into the church not to bring with us the way that we regard people outside of the church. All of us, unavoidably, are part of some kinds of groups. Social groups, vocational groups, ethnic groups, religious background, too. When you come into the church, here's the great danger. Outside of the church, there are certain kinds of other groups that could be acceptable when you look at us. See? been taught to be indifferent to, or even hostile to. And if when you come inside the church, you see someone else from that group, and you remember that they are part of that other group, and you regard them as such, then you're a stranger to the gospel. Don't you understand the radical nature of the gospel? That is, that person's past and your past do not matter. Paul says, at one time, we regarded this person and that person after the flesh, but we regard people that way no longer. We don't worry about the past. We don't worry about their past, your past, their pedigree, your pedigree. We're one in Christ, and the unity that we have to work at inside the diversity, and the diversity we have to relish and revel in inside the unity, are absolutely critical. Or we can just call it a day, as far as ever trying to have any impact on our society, making any difference in a city like this. That's what Paul says. That's what the message is. Now, having said all that, they're all different gifts. There's our diversity. Yet one Lord, one faith, one baptism. The climax of the passage is the thing that we just read here. Verse 11 through 14, 7 through 16. In verse 11, we're told that we have to all bring ourselves under the ministry of the apostles, prophets, evangelists, and pastors, and teachers. That means we have to build, we have to be built up from the Word. When you come and listen to preaching, you're doing this. When you go into your Bible studies, and you do it with one another, you're coming in under the ministry, we said, of the apostles, which is the Scripture. You're coming into the ministry of the pastors and the teachers. You're being built up according to the Word. Then in verses 12, we're told, you're built up so that we can all use our gifts, so we can be equipped for service and ministry. So if we're all taking in the Word, and if we're all serving using our gifts, the result is what's mentioned in verse 12 and following, and that is, we will come to maturity. The reason this is so important to really look at, and we'll do that now, to see exactly what this maturity is. See, he says, it was he who gave some of the apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers to prepare God's people for works of service, that the body of Christ might be built up until we all reach what? The unity in the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, and become mature, attaining to the fullness of the stature of Christ. What he's saying is it's not good enough to say we've got lots of Bible teaching. See, the ministry of the apostles, prophets, evangelists, and teachers, and we're all using our gifts. We're very busy. We've got all kinds of events going on, lots and lots of things, every night, every day, okay? Lots of busyness, unless we can show that there is some real result, and the result is real transactions between your soul and his heart. Real spiritual transactions, a real movement of capital, a real change in the status quo, real behavior change, real supernatural bottom line conformity and maturity to Jesus Christ in the way you behave, in the way your attitude, in the way you look at things. Are you changing? Now, we said this last week, but we have to go into this in a lot more detail. Very important. In chapter three of Revelation, Jesus writes a letter. Boy, wouldn't you like to get one of these letters he wrote to the churches in Revelation? He wrote a letter to the church in Sardis. You know, I can just imagine the pastor opening this letter. A letter from Jesus about my church. He opens up the letter, and inside, Jesus says, you have a reputation that you live, and yet you are dead. And what he's saying is, you have a reputation for being a very alive church, he says to the church of Sardis. Now, how would a church get a reputation for being very alive? Now, the only possibility would be if they had lots of great Bible teaching, and lots of the ministry of the Word, apostles, prophets, evangelists, and teachers, and everybody using their gifts, lots and lots of activity, lots of busyness, probably the church is thronged, lots of things going on, lots of ministries. And Jesus has the audacity to say, you have a reputation for being a very alive church, and yet you're dead. Now, how could that be? unless it's a lot like an engine idling. You know, you can rev that engine up and rev that engine up, but if the drivetrain is not, you know, engaged, if the engine is just going and going and going and going, and we haven't put it in gear, then all of that great revving of the engine is not getting the church anywhere. It's very possible to have a tremendous amount of activity, a tremendous amount of teaching and learning, tremendous amount of busyness and gifts going on, and ministries going on, and nobody is changing. Nobody's becoming more like Christ. You're not more loving and more patient. humble. You're not more patient, you're not more kind, you're not more faithful than you were last year. Nobody's looking at you and saying, it's incredible how you've changed. Until that's happening, the church is not functioning. It's not engaged. It's revving its motor. What's got to be produced is the unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God till we come into maturity, the whole measure of the fullness of Christ. Now, what does that mean? We better find out what it means. Because there's a sense in which we've all gotten that letter. You know, we can laugh and say, gosh, who would want a letter from Jesus Christ? I'm sorry, we've got it. It's here. You're opening it. You're looking at it. A letter to you. And we have to say, Lord, I don't want to have a name that I live and be dead. Now, what is it that we have got to attain to? First, the unity of the... It says the unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God. That's a really important phrase, and I'd like to unpack it. Achieve the unity. That's a beautiful statement. What it's saying is if we all grow in maturity, it will automatically create a unity. You know, there's a certain sense in which we don't have to have fellowship times if we were all mature. If we were really mature in Christ, you wouldn't have to do any planning of wonderful community and intimacy and relationship building. You wouldn't have to plan it. It would just happen, and it does happen. Well, what is this that we have to attain to? Unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God. Well, what is the faith of the Son of God? We have to achieve maturity in the faith of the Son of God and in the knowledge of the Son of God. Now, whenever the Bible talks about faith, it's talking about our belief. But when it talks about the faith, it's talking about a body of truth. The faith once delivered to the saints. The faith. We're supposed to have maturity in the faith, and that means we have got to master the body of teaching and of truth. The body of truth about what? The faith of the Son of God. You see, even though it says faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God, the little phrase of the Son of God modifies both faith and knowledge. So we're talking about the faith of the Son of God. There is a body of truth about Jesus, and you and I have got to master it, and I'll show you why. Now, what is that body of teaching? Well, you know, you say, Gosh, that's incredible. What it means is we have to master the Bible. Yes. But it's not good enough just to memorize your Bible verses and just to know all the Bible stories. You have to read the Bible as if it's all about Jesus. You have got to make sure that you see that the Bible is just not a, it's not like a telephone book full of spiritual phone numbers and information. What it actually is is all about Jesus. You must organize everything you learn in the Bible, say, What does this tell me about Jesus? Now, historically, and I think very practically, you can organize everything the Bible says about Jesus under three headings. He's a prophet, he's a priest, and he's a king. Everything fits there. Let me show you how it works. Everything fits there. He's a prophet, he's a priest, and a king. What's a prophet? A prophet is someone who speaks to human beings for God. Now, he's coming from God, and he's speaking to human beings. When we talk about Jesus' prophetic office, and what he does as a prophet, we're talking about a lot of things, but when he was on earth, he was a prophet because he gave us great teaching. The Sermon on the Mount, and the Bible is full of his teaching, and it's matchless teaching. It tells us how to deal with our possessions. It tells us how to operate in relationships. It tells us how to handle our work. It tells us how to relate to God. It tells us everything, and he was a wonderful prophet, but now that he's in heaven, and is he a prophet now? Yes, because he comes to us, and he illuminates our mind and our heart so we can understand his truth. You know that wonderful place at the end of the book of Luke, I guess it's Luke chapter 24, where Jesus meets these two disciples on the road to Emmaus, and they don't recognize him. He's the risen Lord. They don't recognize him, and he goes along, and he teaches them about the Bible, and at the end, you know, he breaks bread with them, and they suddenly realize it's Jesus, and he vanishes, and they turn to each other, and they said, didn't our hearts burn within us when he opened for us the Scripture? Now, anybody in this room who has any kind of living relationship with Jesus Christ knows that experience. Didn't our hearts burn within us when he opened for us the Scriptures? He still does that. When you open the Scriptures, and you find things leaping at you, when you find fingers pointing at you, when you find hands coming out and saying, there, there, there, out of the Scripture, when the Bible comes along, It's a flame because He's opening the Scriptures to you. He's still a prophet. Then secondly, He's a priest. The Bible tells us all about His priesthood. Now, a prophet is someone who speaks, comes from God and speaks to human beings. But a priest is someone who comes from human beings and speaks to God on behalf of the human beings. It's exactly the opposite. What does the Bible say about Jesus' priesthood? Well, when He was on earth, we're told He was the ultimate priest because all other priests walk in before God and they say, hear our prayer, O Lord, and forgive us our sins. And they offer up a sacrifice and they bring in a dead animal or something and they offer up a sacrifice. But Jesus Christ is the only one that came walking into the presence of God holding Himself and laying Himself down as a sacrifice. Well, does that mean His high priesthood is over? No, of course not. We're told in 1 John 2, verse 1, that if anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father. That means Jesus right now is our defense attorney. He's standing before the Father now. He's a priest now, speaking on our behalf. Now. What does that mean? It means everything. You know what it's like to be on trial, maybe, and to have a great defense attorney? If your defense attorney is brilliant, you look brilliant. If your defense attorney is eloquent, you look eloquent. If your defense attorney is a fool, you become a fool. If your defense attorney makes a mistake, everything is imputed to you. You're lost in your defense attorney. That defense attorney does well, you do well. Does poorly, you do poorly. You're saved or you're destroyed on the basis of what that person does. Everything is imputed to you. And the Bible says that's what Jesus is before the Father right now. How do you think you look then to the Father if you're lost in the advocate? How do you look right now? Is Jesus eloquent? Does Jesus look good? Is Jesus radiant? Is He the fairest amongst 10,000? Then so are you. God regards you as He regards Jesus. That's the high priesthood right now. And then we're told Jesus is prophet and priest, and He's king. King. What does that mean? Well, it means right now He's already king in one sense. The Bible tells us He does everything, He controls everything for us. It says at the end of chapter 1 of Ephesians, He is controlling all of history for the church. All of history. It says in Romans 8, 28, right? All things work together for good to them that love God. That's an astonishing thing. That is saying that Jesus is king now, and He loves you, and He is working everything out for us. He is working everything out for your benefit. Doesn't always look that way necessarily? Oh my, no. Don't forget the story of Dothan. See, there's a place in Palestine called Dothan, and there were two major incidents that happened in Dothan during the time of the Scripture in the Old Testament. First thing that happened in Dothan, or the second thing that happened in Dothan, was that Elisha, great prophet, and his servant were in the city of Dothan, and they were surrounded by the Assyrians. And Elisha and the servant prayed to God, and what God did was He sent chariots of fire, and they came on down, and they routed the Assyrians. Now that's service. We prayed chariots of fire, you know? Years before in Dothan, something else happened before they ever built a city. And that is Joseph came to see his brothers who were very jealous. They stripped him. They threw him into a pit, and they said, we're going to sell you into slavery and tell your father that you're dead. And Joseph was down in that pit, and he prayed, and he prayed, oh, deliver me. Don't let me go into slavery. Don't let me go into exile. Don't let me go into prison. Oh, Lord, hear my prayer. And what did God do? Chariots of fire, right? Came on down, routed all those poor, those stupid brothers, pulled Joseph up out of the pit, put him on a chariot, and he rode back. Just like with Elisha, right? No. What did God do? Nothing. He was sold into slavery. Did it get any better? No. He ended up in prison. Did it get any better? Yes. He became prime minister. But listen, it took years for that to happen. And what it means is that at Dothan, God was just as much present to Joseph in silence as he was to Elisha with the chariots of fire. God knows what he's doing. Jesus knows what he's doing. He's in charge. He's the king, I tell you. He knows more than you do. He's in charge of every circumstance in your life. And then he's king like that now, but the Bible tells us there's going to be a new kingdom in the future in which Jesus Christ becomes king actually, legally of everything. And he puts down all rebellion, and he puts down all evil. And when that happens, he puts down all the time and all the time and all the time , he future in which Jesus Christ becomes king actually, legally of everything, and he puts down all rebellion, and he puts down all evil, and when that happens, the world will erupt with glory, and all of us will be perfect, and all the tears will be wiped away, and all the things the scripture says about that, and we are part of the spread of that kingdom because he is now advancing his kingdom through the ministry of the gospel, and the ministry of the word, and the ministry of spiritual gifts. Jesus Christ, prophet, priest, and king, that is the faith. You've got to know those things. You've got to master those things, but it's not enough just to know facts, because you notice, we're not just told that you have to develop maturity in the unity of the faith only, but in the unity of faith and the knowledge of the Son of God. Now, you know what that word is. It's not the word gnosis, which many of you know, it's a pretty famous Greek word. It's the normal word for knowing. It's the word epignosis, epignosis. It means intense, deep knowledge. It means not just knowing something intellectually, but coming under the power of it. Ephesians 1 talks about it. When it says, I pray, Paul says, that the eyes of your heart will be enlightened. That's what it means. Do you know what that means? It means not, it means to move. You're supposed to know this stuff about Jesus Christ, but you've got to not just know it, but you have to move it from gnosis to epignosis. You can't just know it, you have to epi-know it. Now, I cannot, listen, at this point, it's just, I hate to be like this, but, you know, Paul at one point says, you made me talk personally, you forced me to act like a fool. Let me talk personally. Let me give you an example. When I first began to preach, as my wife will bear witness, every week was a tremendous strain. Every time I ever opened my mouth, because I said, I can't blow this. I've got to be good. Every single time I would ever preach, it was very much like coming, every single week was like the bottom of the ninth inning in the World Series, and I'm up to bat. It's like, it's like being, it's like being Jose Canseco, five million dollars a year, I better be good. You know, I really better be good. I had heard the idea that Jesus Christ had a prophetic ministry from heaven. I heard an idea that said, you know what, these people can't hear a thing you're saying, unless Jesus opens their hearts, unless their hearts burn and are inflamed within them, because he's opening the word. You can't do anything. You know, it's good to prepare. That's a way of saying, Lord, I'm going to make myself a living sacrifice to you and do my very best. But ultimately, Jesus has got to open. You can't reach their hearts. You can only reach their ears. You can't do any of that stuff. I remember one day I was reading a sermon about that, and I was studying the prophetic priesthood of Jesus Christ from heaven. And finally, even though I'd heard it intellectually, one day, you know what this is like. If anybody here with a living relationship with Christ knows, that was a day in which I went from knowing that truth to epi-knowing it. It just sank in. I said, what's the matter with me? Why am I so scared? What's going on? It began to comfort me. It began to thrill me. It began to change me. It moved from up here down to here. It moved into the center of my life and began to actually change. You see, epi-gnosis is not just intellectual, and it's not just emotional, and it's not just volitional. It's from the heart. It's personal. It's personal knowledge all the way down, affecting every part of you, every one of your faculties. You know, another good example of that is the thing I started to get into that you've heard, many of you, if you've been around long enough, have heard me preach about. The High Priesthood of Jesus Christ. I remember it when I read a sermon by a guy named Charles Hodge, who preached it 130 years ago, on Jesus, our Advocate. And I realized for the first time as I was reading that, that Jesus Christ was enough. That means I began to realize, I said, you know, my shyness, my fears, my overwork are all ways of denying the fact that Jesus has done it for me. I'm still trying to be my own Savior. I'm still trying to be my own Advocate. I'm walking in front of God all the time and saying, is this good enough? When only Jesus Christ can walk in with His own work and say, Father, I have fulfilled every demand of yours now, except my friend, my brother, my son, you see, into your family because of what I've done. And I was denying that. I was sort of muscling in front of Jesus saying, is it good enough? And when I read that sermon, I moved from knowing to epi-knowing. And I began to get thrilled by it. I began to get comforted by it. I began, now, look, I'm still a person as subject to fears as anybody. I've got to bat them down every day. But the way you bat them down is through epignosis. The way you bat them down, look, friends, every problem you've got is because you don't epi-know all about Jesus. You've got to move from just the faith into knowledge about Jesus. Look, is there anybody here that still struggles with anxiety? Right? Thank you. is King, doing everything, working everything out for the church. You might intellectually know Romans 8, 28, all things work together for good, but you don't epi-know it, do you? It hasn't moved in. You haven't achieved that knowledge in that area. Anybody here struggling with guilt? You Christ. And it goes for boredom, it goes for self-pity, it goes for depression, all of our problems. Here you are sitting there saying, oh Lord, Jesus Christ, I'm a Christian. Why am I not getting better? You know, why am I not growing? Come on, do it to me. When am I going to start to change? I try real hard. What do you mean you try real hard? Well, when I feel guilty, I say, don't feel guilty. Oh, that's great. When I worry, I say, don't worry, it's a sin. Oh, that's wonderful. That's ridiculous. That's like saying, don't think of elephant, don't think of elephant. You will. No, friends, you have got to lay aside the time. You've got to get into the Word. You've got to attain. You've got to attain the maturity in the faith. But then you've got to spend the time. You've got to seek. You've got to yearn. You've got to ask for the Spirit of God to take these truths and screw them on in. That's the reason why you've got to spend time praying these things into your truth, into your heart, the truth into your heart. Knowledge, unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God is more than intellectual knowledge, but it's not less. It's more than simply knowing biblical facts, but it's not less. You've got to dig in. You've got to open yourself. You've got to work at it. Don't say, do it to me. You've got to build, in a sense, you've got to build an offering. You've got to build an altar, and the altar has got to be your willingness to diligently get into the Word, to try to amend your life according to the Word, to use the means of grace, the sacraments, worship, prayer, fellowship, and say, Lord, I'm doing it. I'm doing it now. Come down, O Holy Spirit, and illumine me. Let my heart burn within me. Open the Scriptures to me. Make me like you. I want to attain the unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God. Now, then Paul, not to be one who is afraid of repetition, repeats himself. And this is the last thing we can look at here. Paul then goes ahead and says, after having said it positively, what you should be expecting, what you should be looking for, what you should be saying, all this busyness in our church has got to be producing this unity in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God, that we may become mature. Then Paul says it negatively. He just said it positively. Just in case some of you think you might be there, he wants to convict you. He says it negatively. He says, in other words, verse 14, then we will be no longer children, no longer children, tossed to and fro back and forth by the waves and blown here and there by every wind of teaching and by the cunning craftiness of men. He says, if anybody here thinks that you really have obtained that unity in the spirit and the bond of unity of this, pardon me, unity in the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God, then I want you to, for a moment, think about childhood. Here's what he's saying. Quickly, just a few teachings on this. One, every human being who gets into the faith, every person that becomes a Christian has to start out as a child. In the same way that when you're born into physical life, you have to start out as a child. Outside of Adam and Eve, every one of us has started as a child. So every person who is born again must start as a child. This shows that there is, this shows that Christian life is not an addendum or a continuation of any other life. It's not. There's a complete distinction made between Christians and non-Christians. Every person who becomes a Christian, who moves into Christ, starts out as a baby, starts out as a child. Paul doesn't say, you should never be infants. He says, you should no longer be infants. You should no longer be children. If we don't keep this in mind, we're going to fall into some real dangers. First of all, we have to realize that if you're a new believer, you can't do everything. Paul's constantly talking about, be careful about novices, be careful about rookies, don't give yourself too much to do. Watch yourself, be humble. And there are, God be praised, an awful lot of new Christians in this body. Secondly, the idea that everybody starts as a child is important because it means no matter how brilliant you are, no matter how able you are, you might be a world-class scholar, you might be a Nobel-winning, you know, Nobel Prize-winning poet or physicist or something like that, you start as an infant. And it's very easy for us to have a person who is extremely able and extremely prominent, who's a new Christian, and to say, certainly that person is ready to step into management, into leadership in the church. No way. Because in the church, you're stepping into the church. in the faith and in the knowledge of the Son of God that makes all the difference. Now, how do you know if you're a spiritual child? Very simple. If you don't think you're a child, you are really a child. And the only possible way that you might be getting into adolescence is you begin to realize your childishness. Look, children don't think they're children. Well, they know it intellectually. They say, of course, I'm a child, you're an adult. But they don't realize they're childish. They never will admit they're childish. They'll never say, yes, I'm so immature. They don't talk like that. The only way you know you're not a child anymore is you think of your childhood and you say, what a jerk I was. If you're not able to see that, if you're not able to look at any phase of your Christian life and say, what an absolute fool I was, and I better watch it because I may be kind of a fool now, you haven't even come out. Now, we're told two things about spiritual babyhood. Number one, spiritual children are fickle. And number two, they're deceivable. Now, by fickle, what we mean by that is you're unstable. Fickleness means that you're very, very changeable. Look, a child is unbelievable. A child's crying. Some of you who don't have children are amazed when you see this happen. A child's just crying, screaming your head off. And, you know, you go to them and say, oh, you know, I'll never live this down. I want to kill myself. I'm going to throw myself into the river. Let's get some ice cream. Okay. What are spiritual babies like? Spiritual babies are just the same way. First of all, you get all hyped up. You've read a book. You've heard a sermon. Man, am I going to change. Man, am I going to do something. And within a daze, you're discouraged. You forgot all about it. Or I'll give you another one. Here's even a better one in some ways. And that is, God answered your prayer. Oh, he loves me. He loves me. He loves me. Three days later, God's not answering your prayer. I wonder if he loves me. You know, you just zip around like that. There's not the stability. There's not the unity, in a sense. Not the continuity. But another reason that spiritual babies are fickle and unstable is because children do not know or believe, cannot articulate, have no concept of delayed gratification. Spiritual babies are always into deliverance. They're always into saying, I want the quick fix. I want to get ready. I want to get ready now. I want to be better now. Let's go. So, God comes to Paul, who is saying, deliver me from this thorn in the flesh. We don't know what it is. Could have been a physical ailment, probably. Could have been something else. Deliver me from this thorn in the flesh. And God says to Paul, no. No. My strength is made perfect in weakness. See, babies want steroids. You know, when you go into the gymnasium, your strength is made perfect in weakness. You build up your biceps. And, you know, as you're doing your weights and as you're doing your exercises, do you feel like you're getting stronger? Never. You always feel like you're getting weaker. But you're getting stronger. Your strength is being perfected in weakness. Babies hate discipline. Babies hate the long run. Babies can't stand it. They want deliverance. They don't want to do things the hard way. They don't want to gut it out. They don't want a long obedience in the same direction. They're unstable. And then secondly, and the last thing we can say, babies are deceivable. It says, not only that they're blown here and there, but by the cunning and craftiness of men in their deceitful scheming. Now, what that means is, listen, children, on the one hand, are unbelievably gullible, and on the other hand, are incredibly stubborn. You know, the kid comes to you and says, scissors won't work. They're broken. So you pick them up and you just say, well, look, you just weren't holding them right. They were broken a minute ago. What did you do to them? You're completely unopened to reason. They will not change their mind. On the other hand, they're totally gullible. You can tell them anything. You know, the straight face, and they say, is that right? Is that really true? A spiritual baby, on the one hand, look, spiritual babies go back and forth between being unbelievably open-minded, too open-minded, and not being open-minded at all. Spiritual babies are very confused because, on the one hand, they say, don't bother me with the facts. I know what I believe. That kind of attitude, don't show me anything in the Bible. That just confuses me. I know what somebody told me. I know what I believe now. That's baby. They were broken. Those scissors were broken. I know they were broken. On the other hand, just unable to take the Word of God and to use it as a standard, as a matrix, as a grid, as a way of judging whether or not these things that you're hearing are in error. The reason for that is that babies just haven't been around long enough to create a grid of experience by which they can... in there at all? Is there any similarity between your spiritual walk and the physical walk of babies and infants? Well, what should you do about that? Be of good cheer. Children grow up. But you've got to humble yourself now and say, I need the unity of the faith, in the faith, and in the knowledge of the Son of God. I really need it. I see in one sense I'm comforted by the fact that I'm a child. Children take time to grow up. I've been wanting everything now. Lord, I repent of that kind of impatience. I humble myself. I see that I'm a child. But on the other hand, you also have to say, I can't stay here. I can't stay a baby for a long time. Unlike physical children, who virtually grow up doing nothing about it, you cannot just be passive. You will not grow if you don't do anything about it. What do you do? All the things we've been talking about in here. But mainly, go to him and say, I want to be like Jesus. That's the main thing. Everything you read in the Bible, everything you do, all the busyness, everything in the church, everything that you do has to be judged by that. I want to be like him. I want to be like him. I want the unity and the faith and the knowledge of the Son of God. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask now that you take the things that convicted us. We talked about so many things, and everybody in this room had something that they realized applied to them. Help us now to apply it. Help us not to be like children who look in the mirror of the royal law and then walk away and forget what they saw. Help us by Tuesday to remember what we're thinking now. Help us by Wednesday. Help us to be no longer infants, blown about, tossed about. Help us into the fullness of the stature of Christ. We want that. We want that with all our heart. We yearn for that. And we thank you that this prayer will be answered because you have said in your word that the good work you began in us, you will bring to completion on the day of Jesus Christ. In his name we pray. Amen.
