TITLE: No Other Gospel
SCRIPTURE: Galatians 1:3-12
TOPICS: Race
SERIES: Galatians: New Freedom, New Family
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/no-other-gospel/

============================================================

Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father, to whom be glory forever and ever. I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you by the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel, which is really no gospel at all. Evidently, some people are throwing you into confusion and are trying to pervert the gospel of Christ, but even if we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preach to you, let him be eternally condemned. As we have already said, so now I say again, if anyone is preaching to you a gospel other than that which you accepted, let him be eternally condemned. Am I now trying to win the approval of men or of God, or am I trying to please men? If I were still trying to please men, I would not be a servant of Christ. I want you to know, brothers, that the gospel I preached is not something that man made up. I did not receive it from any man, nor was I taught it. Rather, I received it from revelation from Jesus Christ. This is God's word. Now, we're going through the book of Galatians in these evening services. We'll take a hiatus, of course, next Sunday night for the open forum, and we'll go right back to it. We're going through it verse by verse over a number of weeks, over a number of months. It's, by the way, a very good discipline. Because if the Bible, if the Bible is God's book, if it is not so much a human book reaching up for God, but a divine book reaching out for us, if the Bible is primarily God's truth and ideas about us rather than our ideas about him, then we'll only really profit from it if we read out of it what's there instead of reading in what we want to believe is there. And one of the best ways to do that is to take the discipline, we don't have to do it all the time, but one of the best ways to do that is the discipline of what we're doing, and that is, instead of going to your favorite topics and favorite texts, and I'm talking to me as much as you, you know, the speaker as much as the listeners, instead of going to our favorite topics and favorite texts, we work right on through, verse by verse, ignoring nothing and therefore really letting God speak. And when you go to your favorite topics and favorite texts, you're more likely to read in instead of read out. Now, the main thing that people have noticed, commentators have noticed about this early section is that Paul begins with a salutation, and in all the ancient letters and the Greek letters, and you can see it in all of Paul's letters and ancient letters, there was an introduction, Paul an apostle, and then there was the addressee to the churches of Galatia, and then there was a salutation, grace and peace to you from God our Father. But there's always a thanksgiving, always. I thank you, I thank God for you, or I'm thankful for this or that, or the things we've heard, always a thanksgiving, but not here. Commentators have noticed that Paul, there's no word of thanksgiving in the beginning, there's no word of thanksgiving anywhere in Galatians. And Paul jumps immediately in. There's no niceties, you see. Dear churches in Galatians, I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you by the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel, which is really no gospel at all. Now, what you have here is the subject. What is the subject? Paul mentions five times in just a couple of verses the word gospel. See it? You're deserting the one who called you by the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel, which is really no gospel at all. Evidently, some people are throwing you into confusion or trying to pervert the gospel. If we or an angel from heaven should preach a gospel other than the one we preached to you, let him be condemned. And then, after you think, oh, he's just, he's blowing a cork. Listen to that. He says, what does he say in verse 9? As we have already said. What do you mean as we have already said? In verse 8. What's he doing? He wants you to see that he's not just blowing a cork. He wants you to see that he is dead serious, that what he said, and he's saying again, is a result of studied reflection. He's absolutely calm. He's thought it out. What is he so concerned about? The gospel. Now, one of the things we see right away, though the whole book of Galatians is about this, we see a number of ways in which by talking to the Galatians and reminding them of who they are and reminding them of how they came into being, how they became Christians, how they became a church, he tells us, he gives us a little set of tests to know whether or not the gospel is in our life, in our lives. And all we have tonight is just a time just to take a look. But there are some tests here. There are four tests at least. And there's maybe more than that. But I have to give you four tests by which you can ask yourself, do I know what this gospel is, he's so upset that these people are losing grip on what the gospel is and actually are losing the gospel. on the gospel? How do you know if it's in your life? Paul obviously, by his extreme language, thinks that this is the most important thing in the world, in the universe, to understand the gospel, to grasp it, to have it in your life. There's four little tests, which are also four characteristics of the gospel. Number one, the first one is the power. Notice in verse six, I'm astonished that you're so quickly deserting the one who called you by the grace of Christ and are turning to a different gospel. Now, see the clauses? The synonym with different gospel, gospel. You're turning from the gospel to the different gospel, but instead of saying the true gospel, he says, called by the grace of Christ. It's a synonym for the gospel. And right away that tells us about the power. Now, why? In the Bible, the word called, when it refers to God, means something different, really, than when we use the term. There's no way around it. You have to pretty much translate it that way. I mean, you know, if you get into the Greek, you'll see it's just the word kaleo. It's the word call from which our English word basically derives. And so you have to translate a call, but it means something much more. Here's why. Our words essentially are powerless. Now, you know, that's an overstatement, but compared to what we're going to see in God, it's exactly the case. They're essentially powerless. The perfect example of the disjunction between word and reality, word and character, word and deed, word and action, is something that parents of little kids have experienced many, many times. You stand at the table and you call to your children, come to dinner. And little voice says, okay. Ten minutes later, nothing. You know, and you call. And then the voice says, coming. And another, let's see, give me another one. Just a minute, right there. And eventually, you see, there is a difference between calling your children and getting your children. Again, at some point you go and you have to turn off the TV and you have to pick the little thing up and you put it down. And you see, you actually, the reason it's such a good illustration is on both sides. First of all, your call is only a call. It's a mere call. It's not an action. It's calling the child and expressing a desire for what you want to see happen in reality. But, but you're, if you're, you, it's not the same thing as actually getting the child and actually bringing the reality into, uh, uh, into play. On the child's side, the child is saying on the side, on the front outside, I'm coming, but he's not. Okay, but it's not okay. See, be right there, but he won't be right there. Coming, but he's not coming. Just a minute, but it'll be an hour. And what we see is the utter, uh, the utter, uh, contrast between that and God's word. Because in the Bible, God's call is action. God's word is a deed. God's word is reality. See, when God says, let there be light, he doesn't say, now go get it. Let there be light. And there was light. When Jesus Christ says to the storm, peace be still, he doesn't say, now we have to go still it. Peace be still is to still. Let there be light is to let there, is, is to be light, you see. When Jesus says, Lazarus come forth, he doesn't say, now I'll have to go do artificial, you know, resuscitation. I'm not, you know, he doesn't. The word of God is a word of power. The word of God is power. Now, first test is very simple. The gospel is the call of God by grace. And we'll get to that in just one second. But right now, here's the way you can tell that the gospel is in your life. You've sensed, at some point, a power dealing with you. Something from the outside, an intervention. If that hasn't happened to you, you haven't, you have, you don't understand the gospel, you haven't grasped the gospel, you haven't experienced the gospel, you just haven't. Okay? The gospel is a power. Romans 1, 16, Paul says, I am not ashamed of the gospel for it is the power of God unto salvation. Have you thought of that? Have you ever heard that? Maybe you have. But have you thought of that? He doesn't say, I'm not ashamed of the gospel for it has the power of God or it results in the power of God or it expresses the power. It says it is the power of God. It's the power of God in verbal form. And so the first thing, the first is, if the gospel is in your life, there's been an intervention, there's been a disruption, there's been a disturbance, there's been a sense that you're, that something's dealing with you, something's getting to you. Has that happened to you? See? Okay. So the gospel is in your life, that something's getting to you. And so that's where I'm going. And so that's the problem. And so that's it. And so that's why he's wanting to do so. And so that's why it's the that something's dealing with you, something's getting to you. Has that happened to you? See? Okay. So the gospel's a power. If you haven't sensed the power dealing with you, you haven't gotten it. I'm not saying, by the way, it necessarily has to be incredibly traumatic. Have you ever noticed when Jesus Christ calls Lazarus, come forth, it's traumatic. Bang! Up he comes. On the other hand, if you read John chapter 1, he's been spending time with Peter and Andrew and James and John. And then later on, one day, he shows up at the boat and he says, follow me. And it says they dropped their nets and they went. When you read it in Matthew, Mark, and Luke, you kind of get the impression it's the first time that Jesus has ever even met them. And you say, man, that's a powerful word. But if you read the book of John, you'll see that Jesus has been working on them for a while. I mean, when we talk about the power, we don't necessarily mean, when I say you sense it dealing with you, that doesn't necessarily mean that you've had some horribly incredible, explosive, traumatic experience, but it's there. Something's going on. You know, when you become a Christian, you know, we were studying this morning a place where God encounters Jacob. And when you really meet God, I mean, God says to Jacob, what's your name? He says, my name is Jacob. He says, no, your name is Israel. You're not the same after you've met God. You are not. There's a sense almost in which when we get to Galatians 2 verse 20, it's a place where Paul says, it is I who live yet not I, but Christ who lives within me. That's almost confusion, isn't it? It is I who live. No, it is not I who live. Well, which is it, Paul? And the answer is, if you're a Christian, you don't understand yourself anymore. There's something inexplicable. There's something in you. There's something new. There's something different. You're not yourself. On the other hand, you really are yourself. Has that happened? Has there been a power? Okay. Secondly, the second thing we see is the gospel has content. And where we see that, okay, the first thing is the gospel has power. Secondly, the gospel has content. Where we see that are three different words. You see it when you see the word accepted. You even see it when you see the word perverted. They're trying to pervert the gospel. Down in verse 9, it says, you accepted the gospel. Okay? And then, of course, in verse 6, it calls the gospel grace. Now, what do we learn? Actually, there's two aspects to this. The first is the word reversed. Oh, I'm sorry. The word pervert means to reverse. Now, two weeks from tonight, I'll spend a lot more time on it, but it's very interesting. It's a Greek word that doesn't mean to distort a little bit. It means to turn inside out. And what Paul is saying is wrong with the false teachers who have come to these Galatians is that they reversed the gospel. You know what that means? Some people really don't like to think of truth this way. I like, a lot of people like to say, well, truth is story. Nowadays, they say truth is narrative. You can't break it down into propositions. You can't break it into this principle, that principle. You can't break it into either or. You can't do that. It's story. It's narrative. You see, it's bigger than that. Now, I'll tell you something. The gospel is truth. But as soon as you say you can't do that, what you're actually doing is you're not. You're whittling the gospel down. Of course, the gospel is narrative. Of course, the gospel is story. Of course, the gospel is more than propositions, but it's not less. Because when Paul says they've reversed it, as we will see later on, it's very simple. He's saying either you can say, I've received the grace of God and therefore I live a good life. Or you can say, I've lived a good life and therefore I've received the grace of God. But you see, Paul says it matters what the order is. The word pervert means to reverse, to change the order. And therefore, Paul says it matters, which means the gospel is not just a general kind of good feeling, but there's structure to it. There's propositions to it. There's an order to it. And if you put this together with the power, here's the second test. The way you know that the gospel has come into your life is that there is an illumination. I actually wrote this down. Let me give you a composite, a composite statement that I've probably heard from about 20,000 people in the 20 some years of my ministry. And I'm not kidding. I wrote it down. It kind of goes like this. They say, well, I never heard that before. I mean, I guess I'd heard those words or that content many times before, but I mean, it never clicked. How could I have missed it? But I did miss it. It never made sense to me. Oh, I mean, I thought it made sense to me, but now I realize it hadn't made sense to me, but now I realize I hadn't, I thought I'd gotten it, but I really hadn't gotten it at all. 20,000 times I've heard that. And the point is, because... the way you know you've heard the gospel is, the way you know the power is dealing with you is that your mind wakes up to some logic, to some truth, to some propositions. You say, I've never seen that before. I never got that before. There's a sense of illumination. That's extremely important. It's not just that you just get a sense of power, God's doing something, something's happening. It's not a general thing, you see. It means that for the first time you're hearing something that may be words on the page, but it never clicked. And unless, I can go so far as to say, unless this has happened to you, you have never, the gospel's never come into your life. Unless there has been a time in your life in which you said, I thought I understood this. I'd heard it before. I heard that Jesus died for your sins. I heard that you have to receive Christ. I heard that if you ask Christ, he'll forgive your sins. I heard about grace. I heard every one of the words, but I never saw them in the right order. I never realized there was an order to things. I never saw this. If that's never happened to you, you probably don't understand the gospel at all. You know, and awfully, there's hearing and then there's hearing. Have you heard it? Jesus says in Luke 8, take heed how you hear. You know, the greatest example I've got of this was many years ago. I was sitting in a committee, I was sitting in a committee, and we were listening to the testimonies of men who were going to be church planters, and I was a very young minister, and there were some older ministers around, and almost every one of them came in and they gave a testimony. They said, you know, I was raised in a church, but I never heard the gospel. But then they explained how it clicked. They said, I saw the order. I realized I had missed things up, and I became a Christian. And after about the fifth person in a row did that, I remember one of the ministers got up and he said, listen, before you start to think ill of all these churches where these young men were raised, I want to tell you something. And he told a story about how when he was a man in college or graduate school, he became a Christian. And when he became a Christian, everything lit up, and he was being discipled by a chaplain because he was in the military, I think. And at one point, he says, I don't know why no one's ever told me the gospel before you did. Nobody's ever told me the gospel before you did. And what I want to know, he said, is why Martin Luther doesn't know anything about the gospel. And the chaplain looked at him and said, what? And he said, yeah, I took a course. I was taking a course in New Testament, and I took a course, and I read a book by Martin Luther called Martin Luther's Commentary on the Galatians, and I even did, I used it for a paper, and, you know, the gospel wasn't in there. And the chaplain says, go back and get it now. This was a year ago or so, and he got it out, and he opened it up, and he says there on every page, underlined, highlighted, notated, was the gospel. He hadn't seen it. And he finished his story, and he said, right now, there are kids growing up in my church, and someday, some of them will give a testimony, and they'll say, I grew up in so-and-so's church, but I never heard the gospel. And there's people, there's kids right now growing up in Redeemer that someday probably will say, I grew up in that church in Manhattan, but I never heard the gospel till last year. And it's when a person says that, I never heard the gospel till last year or so on, that I have a good idea that they have heard. In fact, I'll go this far. The way you know you're growing in the gospel, when we go to the Lord's table, the Lord's table is the gospel, not in propositions, in narrative, in a picture. Here, broken bread, if the bread stays whole, you starve. If the bread is demolished, broken into pieces, you're made whole. See, it's the bread or you. You'll be in pieces, or the bread will be in pieces, you see. The wine will be poured out, or you will be poured out. There's the gospel. It's in narrative form, but it's also in propositional form. But here's one of the ways in which you know you're growing in the understanding of the gospel, and that is, if you think you understand it, you don't. If you feel like you've hardly ever understood it till this minute, you finally do. The less you think you understand it, the more amazed at how little you understand it, the more you do understand it. The less you think you're amazed, the less there's a sense of illumination, the less you understand it. Okay? Then, thirdly, third test, the drama. We see here the power of the gospel. We see here the content, that there's content, there's structure, there's real propositions, there's real truth here to the gospel. Thirdly, there's drama. And I just barely referred to this last week, but here it says, when he's describing the gospel, up in even the salutation, he says, Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the presence of our sins, to rescue us from the presence of God. father and him from him, to rescue us from the presence of God. When he's describing the gospel, up in even the salutation, he says, Grace and peace to you from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for our sins to rescue us from the present evil age. Here's a trait of the gospel, and here's one of the ways in which you, the third way in which you know you start to understand the gospel, and that is you understand the cosmic drama. You know, there's this place, you know, all the men in black ads kept saying, it's good enough to see again. And so we believed the ad. We went and saw it again. And there's one place, you know, when Tommy Lee Jones, if you don't know the story, ask somebody, because probably somebody next to you is gone. It was a pretty big box office hit. And, of course, it's about these guys, basically, who are trying to save the world from aliens, except that only a certain tiny little government agency understands about it. Everybody else doesn't know about it, because they have the little, you know, the little, you know, every so often my wife gets this in front of her children and says, you had a happy childhood. Your parents never blew up at you. They never said an intemperate word. Now, and, of course, what that is is a little thingamajigger in this comedy in which they do that to people when they've seen an alien, so they don't believe there are aliens because they forget. And at one point, you know, one of the agents is saying, there's a death ray, there's, you know, the earth is about to be destroyed. And Tommy Lee Jones says, the earth is always about to be destroyed. There's always an invading alien. There's always an invading army. There's always a death ray. The earth is always on the brink. And the reason that these people around here can lead their nice little lives is because they don't know anything about it. They don't have no idea about the cosmic drama. Now, that's how most people are. If you don't understand the gospel, you don't believe it. But if you understand the gospel, here's what you know. The world's falling apart. This present evil age, everything is disintegrating. Everything is falling apart. We're under condemnation. We're all dying. You know, the song goes, born free, but nobody is. You grow up, and you are enslaved to parental approval. And you spend thousands of dollars on therapists so that you can become enslaved to peer approval or so that you can be enslaved to what the art critics think about your art or so you can be enslaved to what some lover thinks about you. Or maybe you'll say, I don't care what anybody thinks, in which case you're the biggest slave of all. Because not only are you a slave to deception, because when someone says, I don't care what anybody thinks, that's a lie. Nobody says, I don't care if the whole world thinks I'm a bad singer. I'm a good singer. Nobody is self-accredited. And not only that, if you really come to the place where you don't care what anybody else thinks, you will think people are trash. Listen, everybody's a slave. But most people don't think so. Everybody's going to hell. Because everything's falling apart. Your body's falling apart. Your soul's falling apart. You see, everybody's in bondage. Everything's in slavery. In slavery, Jesus Christ has come. And he has rescued us. Now, when you become a Christian, when you understand the gospel, first of all, you understand that you are a slave and everybody is. Most of the other people are sort of, okay? They don't see it. They think you're making a big deal about it. But Christians, now suddenly, life isn't boring. Everything's a drama. Because you've been rescued. But you're rescued from the present evil age. Even though you're rescued from the age, you're not condemned anymore. There's liberation. But the age hasn't gone away. It's still around you. Things are still falling apart. There's still pressure. Drama. That's the reason why Eugene Peterson has this great book on Galatians. And he says this, which is pretty interesting. He says, There is freedom possible, but it's not natural. It shows itself as the product of a smooth... Pardon me. The freedom that is possible is not natural. It does not show itself as the product of a smoothly developing process. The natural unfolding of bud to blossom. No. Freedom is, we are told here in Galatians, not natural at all. It's a victorious prize in a pitched battle. Our freedom to live does not come out of a quiet Sunday afternoon in meadows fragrant with rows of Sharon and Easter lilies, but out of the dark traumatic agonies marked by Lucifer's plunge from the heights and war in heaven, cries for crucifixion, and the dreadful scream, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The story of freedom is like that of the earth's crust. Under the quiet and mild calm are exposed cross-sections that tell of volcanic eruptions and devastating earthquakes and droughts and floods. The present free moment that you have is not the natural accumulation of goodness, but a paragraph in a history of conflict comprising of alienation, reconciliation, war, peace. The verbs of freedom are raised, rescued, and God is the subject of each of them. Do you understand that? Do you see that you've been in bondage? Do you see everybody's in bondage? Does everybody else think what's the big deal? The gospel's come into your life. One more thing, and this is the last one. Have you felt a power? Has there been illumination? Have you thought, I never understood that it's not that I, you know, reversed. It's not that I'm good, and therefore I get God's grace, but I have God's grace. look, I am astonished that you are so quickly deserting the one who called you. When you desert the gospel, you desert the one. You're not deserting a proposition. You're deserting him because only in the gospel and only in the gospel do you actually develop a personal relationship with God. Well, how could that be? I'll tell you why. If you come to understand that God comes to you and gives you his grace, that God himself became a carpenter, that God himself came to earth and lived a life here and went through agony and had the cross and had the crown of thorns and had the nails and he did all that for you. Why? Because you were serviceable? Because you were good? Because you were this? No, simply because he loved you. Then and only then when you respond to that, when that melts your heart, you find for the first time you turn around and love him simply because of who he is. If you believe God will give me my reward as long as I have done these things, in other words, God doesn't love me for who I am. God loves me, not just the delight in who I am. God loves me for what I'm doing for him. Every other religion believes that. And therefore, you will only love God for what he's doing for you. You won't love him for himself. But when the gospel comes, you get him. And to lose the gospel is to lose him. See, when the gospel comes along, you stop obeying the law to procure things from the God, those things that you really delight in, and you start obeying the law in order to please the God who you delight in for himself. And therefore, has he become personal? Is he somebody you like spending time with alone? Is he someone that you can't wait to spend time with alone? People you really love, you can't wait to get alone. Get away from distractions. Spend hours with them. Is that how you feel with God? Or do you at least want that to be true in the gospels in your life? Are you ready? Friends, if there's anybody here, we're going to do the Lord's Supper, and the Lord's Supper is the gospel depicted. If you want to receive more of this personal touch, the intimacy of the gospel, the drama of the gospel, the power of the gospel, the illumination of the gospel, as you get the bread and as you get the cup, meditate on what he's done, and it'll sink in deeper and say, Lord, I hardly even begun to understand the gospel because these traits are sort of in my life, but they're not in my life in very great measure. And he will teach you. But if there's anybody here who says, I don't know that I am a Christian, maybe someday I will be. When the bread and the cup come along, if you're not a Christian, don't take it. But I say, take Christ. Do business with him. Here's the reason why. If it's really true that the reason people are Christians is because God calls you. You see, we're dead. Lazarus, come forth, but he calls you. You can't say, well, someday I'll become a Christian. You can't make yourself a Christian. If Jesus comes to you and says, I'm about to heal you. You're blind, but I want to heal you. You don't say, well, someday. Jesus, I might not be here someday. I'm here now. What do you mean someday? Because God calls. If you're feeling pressure, if you're feeling him deal with you, give yourself to him. Don't take the bread and the cup. Wait till later when you know you're a Christian. Take him. Hold on to him. Say, I'm responding to your grace. Oh, you, the one who rescued me from this present evil age. Let's pray.
