TITLE: On the Third Day (Easter)
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 15:1-14
TOPICS: Lent Easter Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: Lent – Nature of Sin
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/on-the-third-day-easter/

============================================================

1 Corinthians 15, 1 through 14. Now, brothers, I want to remind you of the gospel I preached to you, which you received and on which you have taken your stand. By this gospel you are saved, if you hold firmly to the word I preached to you, otherwise you have believed in vain. For what I received I passed on to you as of first importance, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures, and that he appeared to Peter, and then to the twelve, and after that he appeared to more than 500 of the brothers at the same time, most of whom are still living, though some have fallen asleep. Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles, and last of all, he appeared to me also as to one abnormally born, for I am the least of the apostles, and do not even deserve to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. But by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace to me was not without effect. No, I worked harder than all of them. Yet not I, but the grace of God that was with me. Whether then it was I or they, this is what we preach, and this is what you believed. But if it is preached that Christ has been raised from the dead, how can some of you say there is no resurrection of the dead? If there is no resurrection of the dead, then not even Christ has been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, our preaching is useless, and so is your faith. This is God's word. Well, I think all of you know it's Easter Sunday, and so no matter what you believe, and no matter why you're here, you know that today we're going to be talking about the resurrection of Jesus. And the passage I just read to you is one of the classic passages in the Bible on the resurrection of Jesus. What does it teach us? The main thing it teaches us is this. And this is the one thing I'd just like to press home to you this morning. This proves, this passage proves, that Christianity is primarily, and I mean primarily, the announcement of some historical facts. It's primarily the proclamation of certain world-changing historical events, and only secondarily is it a way of life. Only secondarily is it a philosophy. Only secondarily is it a set of principles for living. Primarily, it's a proclamation of certain historical world-changing events. Only secondarily is it a philosophy or of life or a set of principles for living. That is so absolutely critical to stress today, and let me show you why. First of all, everything about the text shows us this. At the very end, Paul says, if Christ is not raised, our preaching is useless. Now, you know, for us, the word preaching conjures up all sorts of images. When you think of preaching, you right away think of a pulpit. You think of a monologue. You think of someone who's a little self-righteous. Now, you have to realize that when Paul and the Christians came along, they had to find a word that would characterize their Christian communication. And they chose this word that here is translated preaching, but it had a completely different denotation and connotation at the time. It was, the word preacher was the word kerux. The word to preach meant it was the word keruso. And it is very different than the word to teach. The early Christian communicators chose this word as opposed to a word that would mean to philosophize or to teach or to spew out wisdom. The word kerux, the word preacher, was the word that meant a herald, a crier. In other words, that was the way in which the news media worked in those days. The news media worked through heralds, people that would run into town and they would cry out the events of the day. The other way that the news media worked was you had a billboard in the center of town and the herald might cry out what the news was and then he would also take and nail to the billboard certain notices. That was the news media of the day. And it's very important to see that back then, because of the venues they had, they didn't have a difference between hard news and soft news. You know what the difference is? See, soft news today means heartwarming stories and consumer tips. For example, experts reveal what to handle stress, or experts reveal a new diet that if you use it, you'll have more energy. Soft news, news that you can use, sometimes it's called. It's ideas, concepts, new perspectives, things that you can pick up or you can leave. Then there's hard news. Now, hard news are significant events that you need to know because it affects the life of the community. There's been a new administration elected. There's been a fire in this part of town. There's new taxes have been passed. There's a blizzard on the way. Now, hard news is different than soft news because hard news you can't ignore. Hard news doesn't suggest it affects you. If there's a fire over here, if there's a tax coming, if there's a war on, there's a military action, this affects you. And it'll overtake you. And it will run you down if you ignore it. Hard news. Now, today we can have hard news and soft news when we open our papers. We can have hard news and soft news when we watch the TV. But back then, the only way that news was, the only news. You didn't have the herald come into town and say, now for the style portion of our proclamation today. What are they wearing in Sparta this fall? Or you wouldn't have posted to the billboard what the philosophers in Athens are saying, how to deal with worry. You know, the latest tips on dealing with anxiety. It wouldn't be part of what a herald would say. And it wouldn't be part of what would be posted to a billboard because all they had was hard news. Paul and the early Christians specifically said the gospel, the message of Christianity is hard news. It's not a philosophy. It's not a way of dealing with life. Only secondarily is it. Because you see, hard news is always this. Something has actually happened. Something has happened in history that affects everything. That's the only kind of news that a crier would bring in. You wouldn't bring in, in other words, if running into Sparta would not be a crier telling you about local things that just happened in Athens. Instead, what would come in would be world-changing events, historical facts that affect the way things go. That is specifically what Paul meant when he said, I'm a preacher. All the early Christians said, this is the essential message of the Christian faith. It's different than every other kind of religion. Because all other kinds of religions always say, here is a way that you can live better. Here is a way to wisdom. Here is a way to deal with your problems. Here is a way to relate to God. Here is a way to come into unity with the infinite. Soft news. Christianity, alone of all the world religions, up to then and even today, comes in with hard news. Something has actually happened. Something has happened in history that you can't ignore, that will overtake you if you ignore it. Something has happened that changes everything. This is the differentia between Christianity and every other kind of faith. It's not a philosophy, it's not a way of life, only secondarily. Look, to understand what I mean, you, on the streets of Manhattan, everywhere, you find in the waste cans and also in stacks, these, these advertisements for the learning annex. What's the learning annex? How to do everything? How to deal with worry? A seminar or a book, how to deal with worry? How to find the love and keep the love of your life? How to gain confidence? How to compete? How to break into your chosen field? How to face grief and loss? Now, all those things are wonderful. They're great. But the learning annex comes in and says, experts will show you new perspectives on how you can deal with anxiety, can compete, can find the love of your life, and so on. That's a philosophy of life. Those are principles for living. And every other religion came in this way. Christianity was unique. It comes in and says, no, we are a philosophy later on. We are news. We have historical facts that change everything, and it'll affect the way in which you deal with worry, and it'll affect the way in which you compete, and it'll affect the way in which your relationships operate. But primarily, and first of all, we are hard news. Something has actually happened. Now, the reason I have to stress that, and I just digress for a second, is that most of the Protestant churches in this town go out of their way. And I'm not trying to compete with them at this time. town, but across the country, have decided within the last 50 or 60 years that Christianity really isn't different, it's really soft news, just like the other religions. On the European continent in the early part of the 20th century, there was a very big movement, and in this movement it said, if Christians are going to be giving the world a message that's palatable to modern women and men, they're going to have to demythologize the Christian faith. Now that's a big word, what does it mean? It meant this, we have to see that there's an awful lot of superstitious, miraculous elements in the Christian faith, and we are modern people, we can't believe these things anymore, but the essential principles of life that are in the Christian faith we can still abide by. So how did they demythologize Easter? It was very simple. They would say, ah, look at the doctrine of Easter. Well, unfortunately, we're modern people. We do not believe that the amino acids in Jesus' body rekindled. We do not believe that the stone rolled away and he rushed on out in such a way, so literally and physically and historically, that if you were there with a camera, you would have been able to capture it and record it. We can't believe in a literal, physical, historical resurrection anymore. We're modern men and women, but the principle of Easter we still have. And what is the principle of Easter? Ah, well, the principle of Easter is that doesn't nature itself teach you after winter comes spring? Doesn't nature itself teach you that even in a disaster and even in death there can be a new beginning? That even in our misfortunes we can discover lessons and we can grow and we can begin afresh? That's the principle of Easter. Now, what have they done? And when I say, I'm not trying to compete here, I'm just saying, when I say that that movement, that movement that said we have to demythologize the doctrine of Easter and demythologize Christianity, we still believe in the principles. We still believe in loving your neighbor. We still believe that in every death there can be life, that there can be hope even in the greatest of darkness. We still believe the principle of Easter, but we can't believe the facts. We can't believe those superstitious teachings about Jesus actually physically, historically rising from the grave. What they have done, it's a bald-faced decision to change Christianity in the image of every other religion. Look, you can reject Christianity, but you do not denude it. You do not emasculate it. You don't just take the guts and the heart out of it and make it, take away from it all of its uniqueness. In fact, if you do that and you say, well, originally Christianity was really just a set of teachings and somehow over the years it's got encrusted with these mythological, fantastic, and miraculous elements, you're flying in the face of history. Listen, all religions until Christianity came along tended to be, all of the religions of the Greeks and the Romans tended to be for cultured people, for the successful people, because see, religions are philosophies. They're ways of being wise and living in a wise way. Look at Buddhism, look at Confucianism, look at the Greek and Roman religions, but Christianity was different because Christianity did not come along and teach a general set of principles. Can you imagine? Christianity was full. The early converts were slaves. They were oppressed people. They were the dregs of society, people without hope, and they were changed, utterly changed. The early church grew because people came and said, what has gotten into these folks? Look at how generous they are with their money. Look at how they die for each other. Look at how they love one another. Look at the hope. Look at how they go to the lions singing. What message changed them like that? Can you imagine the apostles coming into these towns and saying, I have a new message? Does not nature itself teach you that after winter comes spring? Doesn't nature itself teach you that in every cloud there's a silver lining? That, you know, if even things are terrible, you're slaves and you're hopelessly lost for the rest of your lives. You're oppressed economically and there's no hope. But don't you see that somehow you can learn little lessons in there that'll make you able to be nicer people? Can you imagine the apostles coming in and preaching a philosophy? The learning annex. Ah, you slaves, you poor people that have been oppressed and beaten to death and your families have been destroyed and all that. Let me tell you what the experts are saying in Athens about how to handle worry. Let me show you how it. Okay. Thank you. me show how if you just have a better attitude toward life, you can do anything if you set your mind to it. And can you imagine a slave saying, Ah, this changes my life. Now I can face the relentless slavery of my life. Now I can face all the oppression of my life. After winter comes spring. There is absolutely no way to account for the existence of the Christian church. The Christian message, the gospel, is hard news. Something happened that changes everything. Something has come into history. God has come from outside of history. He was born. He died for our sins. He was raised. It all happened in history. So everything has changed. Everything. That's what changed those people. What else could possibly change those people? That's the only message that can change everybody from the people who are successful, you know, the elite, the ruling classes that had the time and had the leisure to think about philosophy and wisdom and so on. You know, they're the only ones that really got into religion until Christianity came along. And what happened was Christianity took the world by storm. It changed that old world. How could it have done that with a learning annex approach, with soft news? Couldn't have done it. Many of you come to the church looking for a learning annex kind of message. You want, with some Christian principles sprinkled on it, well, I've really got a problem. I'm in pain. I need practical help. You will get no help from Christianity unless first you see and accept the fact that certain things happened in history. You see, Christianity is a no-nonsense religion. The learning annex says, the experts say, listen, every time I ever read a book on how to handle worry by the experts, they always say, number one, see that worry is counterproductive. If you're worried about doing bad in that audition, well, that very worry might be a self-fulfilling prophecy and you'll do a bad job in the audition. See, first of all, that worry is self-defeating. And then secondly, begin to learn these techniques for substituting worry thoughts and anxious thoughts with positive thoughts. That's what they always say. Christianity, see, that's escapism. Christianity is the one thing that's not escapism. Christianity says, listen, if Christ was raised, then we have lots and lots of things to tell you about how to handle your worry. If Christ is raised, our preaching is not useless. The word there that Paul uses is kenos, functionless, without power. He says, if Christ was raised, there's lots of things to do about your worry. If Christ was raised, there's lots of things to do about how you compete, finding the love of your life. There's lots of things about how to break into the field. There's lots of things about facing suffering and death. Lots of things you can do. But if Christ is not raised, life stinks. And all the positive thinking is not going to change that. I mean, listen, Christianity is no nonsense. It's hard news. You can even see in the way in which Paul presents the gospel. Notice, Paul says, here's the gospel. Here's the Christian message. Verse 3, for what I received, I passed on to you as a first importance, that Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures, that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day, according to the scriptures. Look at what he says. That shows you the essence of the gospel. First of all, Paul does not say a thing about Jesus' practical principles for living. Oh, Jesus gave us lots of practical principles for living, but they're derivative. They're secondary. They're based on not what Jesus taught, but what Jesus did. Jesus died and he rose again. And notice, listen, if you take a look at how Paul preaches, you see he preaches and he presents his case as a, not as a philosopher, but as a herald. A philosopher says, here is my way of life. Try it on. But a herald says, here are the facts. Try to refute them. Notice what Paul does. He says, the resurrection of Christ happened. It happened historically, he says, on the third day. And he says, if you want to know the evidence, he appeared to Peter. Then he appeared to the twelve. Then he appeared to over 500 people who were still mostly alive. Now, see, when Paul wrote this book, 1 Corinthians, all scholars admit that this book was written just 20 years after the events, 20 years after the crucifixion of Christ. this is the main way in which we preach everywhere. This is the gospel, what he presents there in verses 3 to 8. This is what I preach everywhere. What does he preach? He doesn't say, Jesus tells you that if you trust in him and rest in him, you will be able to handle your anxiety and your stress. Yes, you'll be able to find new power and confidence. And just try him on. Go ahead, try it. He doesn't talk that way. Instead, he says, there is no hope unless God himself has punched a hole in the ceiling of the universe. And our great captain, Jesus Christ, who has opened a cleft in the pitiless walls of the universe, bids us come to see him. He has entered in. He was born. He died for our sins. And now he's raised again. He's risen from the dead. If all that's true, then you can be saved. Then there's hope for the future. Then you can have, your sins can be forgiven. Then you can have a relationship with God. Then the spirit of God can come into your life and change you. In other words, if the historical events happen, there's lots to do. And then what does he do? Instead of saying, try it, try it on. Instead, he says, look at the evidence. Now, here he is. We know this, that Paul went around Palestine and around the Mediterranean and around all the Roman Empire saying, there are hundreds of eyewitnesses to the resurrection of Jesus Christ. Go talk to them. By making these claims 20 years after the fact, by showing that this is how they preached everywhere, it shows that Christians were absolutely confident about the historical evidence for the resurrection. They were very in your face. You know, when Paul was in front of Agrippa and Festus in Acts chapter 26, he was a prisoner. And Festus and Agrippa were two royal personages, and they had Paul come out and explain his Christian faith. So he had an audience with these two kings. And he starts to talk about the gospel, and he talks about Christ's death and resurrection. And when he's in the middle of his discussion, suddenly Festus says, Paul, he says, your great learning has driven you mad. So Festus recognized that Paul was a scholar. And Festus recognized that Paul's teaching and his preaching was tremendously academically sound. But he says, you know, you believe somebody died for our sins and was raised again from the dead? Your great learning has driven you mad. And he comes back and says this, and it's an amazing statement. It shows you the in-your-face attitude of the heralds of the original Christian message. He says, I am not insane, most excellent Festus, but what I say is true and reasonable. King Agrippa from Palestine knows about these things, for these things were not done in a corner. He turns to Agrippa because Agrippa was Jewish, and Agrippa lived in Palestine during the life of Christ, and during the death and the resurrection. What does Paul say? Paul doesn't say, Festus, if you want to understand Christianity, you've got to apply the principles to your life and just simply live them out, and then you'll know. He doesn't say that. He says, when Festus says, you're crazy, Paul, nobody could rise from the dead. He turns to Agrippa and he says, Festus, I am not insane. What I am saying is reasonable and true. Talk to Agrippa. He knows these things were not done in a corner. What's that mean? Agrippa knows. Paul knows. The evidence was something that no one could refute. Agrippa does not say, hey, I was there, I know what happened. Agrippa simply says, you're trying to make me a Christian so soon? Even Agrippa realized the facts were very hard to refute. The tomb was empty. We know that because, you know, the early Christian church was built on the message the tomb was empty. So we know the tomb was empty. And he says, there's 500 witnesses running around that saw the risen Christ. People don't have hallucinations in groups. Go and talk to them. Try to find a hole in their case. Christianity is spreading like rapid fire and all the authorities were trying very, very hard to refute the facts of the case and they couldn't do it. And Paul says to Agrippa, he says to Festus and Agrippa, go ahead, ask Agrippa, the things that I'm talking to you about were not done in a corner. You know, Joseph Smith, the head of the Mormon church, what does he say? He says, Jesus appeared to me and three apostles came down from heaven and they told me that I was the head of a new religion, a new denomination and they laid hands on me. Nobody else saw Joseph Smith. He says, you'll have to trust me. Mohammed says the same thing. Mohammed says the same thing. Thank you. say the same thing. He only appeared to me. I alone heard him. You'll have to trust me. And of course, when they turn around, what they give you is a philosophy of life. Instead, the early Christian message is something happened that no one can refute. Hundreds of people saw it. I dare you to try to refute the evidence. Go and talk to the people who were there, says Paul. He can face them down. He says, Festus, these things were not done in a corner. The Mormon church started in a corner. Every other religion started in a corner. Not us. We're not coming in here with philosophy. We're not coming in here with wisdom saying, hey, try this on. This is not the style section. This is hard news. God came to earth, and he was raised from the dead. Now, Paul was a perfect example of it. Because Paul knew Christ when he was on the earth. Paul heard him teach and preach. Paul watched him do miracles. And yet, Paul was absolutely sure that Jesus Christ was an imposter. He was totally sure that he was a blasphemer. He sought to exterminate the Christians, and he was breathing out threats and slaughter against them. What changed him? The resurrection. The resurrection. Jesus Christ appeared right to him. He was knocked flat. And Paul suddenly realized, it's true. These things are not done in a corner. Look. Do you see the point? Now, having said that, let me just conclude this way. Anyway, if you understand that the essence of the Christian message is proclamation first, that there's no way you can understand how the church got started unless the resurrection. There is no way to understand how the world was so changed by the Christian message. If it was just a philosophy, it was a proclamation that something happened. That's the reason why Paul can taunt. We started our service this way. Paul is able to actually taunt at death. Why? Because he says in the beginning of Romans chapter 1, verse 4, it says, God declared him to be the Son of God with power by the resurrection. Paul didn't understand that he was the Son of God until he saw him raised. And he began to realize what Jesus has done. There's hope. Why? Because this is the Son of God. Death could not hold him down. It says in Acts chapter 2, when the first sermon was preached by Peter, he says, he rose from the dead because death could not hold him. It was impossible for death to hold him. Now, you think about the power of death for a minute. Think about it. Nothing can stop death. No human being can stop death. Death, the power of decay, the second law of thermodynamics, even mountains can't stop death. The mountains eventually get worn down to pebbles. Even the sun and the stars can't stop death. Even they burn out and they go to decay. Think of the power of death. And yet, someone came who overmatched death. Jesus Christ was swallowed by death and exploded in its bowels. Jesus Christ did not just defy death. He did not just deny death. He destroyed death. And that's the reason why Paul can say later on in this chapter, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? At the top of the service, we said, only Christians have this unbelievable ability to handle worry and handle anxiety. Why? Because they can look at the most powerful obstacle to happiness in the universe, death itself, and actually taunt it. Hey, Dylan Thomas says, we rage against the dying of the light. He was a great poet. And he was showing the desperate outrage that anybody who doesn't believe in the fact of the resurrection has to face in the face of death. Albert Camus said, no matter what you enjoy in life, the fact that you're going to die casts a shadow on it. You know, Camus, at one point in one of his books, he says this. He says, if I told you I'm going to kill you in 30 minutes, you say, why not kill me now? And he said, well, what do you like to do? Tell me the thing you most enjoy doing. He said, well, I love to listen to Haydn on my stereo. Great, I say, well, I don't want to, you know, I don't want to be too cold about this. Listen to Haydn for 30 minutes and then I'll kill you. Have some fun before you die. And you say, well, I don't know, but I guess there's something about the fact I'm going to die at 7.30 that'll make it hard for me to enjoy my Haydn at 7 o'clock. Well, Camus says, but don't you understand? That's the situation all of you are in. You're going to die? You don't know when you're going to die, but you're going to die? You don't know when you're going to die. You don't know when you're going to die. Thank you. Well, Camus says, but don't you understand? That's the situation all of you are in. You're going to die? You don't know when you're going to die, but you're going to die? How can you enjoy anything? You're going to die. And Dylan Thomas says, we rage against the dying of the light. Paul's attitude is this, spare not death, do thy worst. For if you reach out to hold me and grab me and choke me, all you will do is make me better than I was before. Reach out and get me, and all you can do is make me glorious, more glorious than I was before. Death, I taunt you. Death, I take the football and I shake it in your face. I hot dog before you, death. Death, where is thy sting? Grave, where is thy victory? Now, do you see why Paul says, if the proclamation is true, then our preaching is not just not useless, our preaching is very useful. You've got something to handle anything. Christian friends, do you believe in the risen Christ? Is he your savior? In that case, you can face death, but you can face anything. Can you face worry? Can you face troubles? You already sang about it in the first hymn. Ours, the cross, the graves, the skies. See, if you believe that the risen Christ is now in control of history, you know even the bad things that happen to you are crosses that are going to rise you. They're going to raise you. Come on, crosses, says a Christian. The lower you lay me, the higher you'll raise me. Come on, crosses, you say. Jesus, the risen Lord, is in charge of everything. He's working all things out to my good. So even bad things that happen to me. One of the things that somebody told me before I came to New York to start this church, somebody said to me, listen, if you're a Christian and you believe in the risen Christ and that he's in charge of all history, even if you go to New York and you fail, it will be because God is preparing you for some other ministry and you wouldn't be qualified for it unless you failed in New York. Well, you see, if you believe in the risen Christ, you're able to come up here. And somebody said to me when I first got here, are you sure you're going to succeed? And I said, sort of. Well, that's a shorthand for saying, come on, crosses. The lower you lay me, the higher you'll raise me. Come on, death. The worst thing that could happen to me will be the best thing that can happen to me. What do I have of fear? Because of the facts. Now listen, friends, last thing. Do you believe this? Do you understand this? To people who are believers, I just want to ask you, are you using this on yourself? Are you cowed by your worries? Are you so desperately lonely? Do you lack the joy that the early Christians had? It's not because they were made of sterner stuff than you, better stuff than you. They were using the doctrine of the resurrection and they were looking at everything through it. Are you doing that? The early Christians had a rollicking joy. Even when the world was on top of them, they felt they were on top of the world and they won. Because they know. They looked at death and they said, you can't hurt me. They looked at troubles and they said, you can't hurt me. Why? Because of the fact of the resurrection. Because Jesus has come. If there's anybody here who says, but I'm just too unworthy. I'd like to be a Christian, but I've messed my life up and I'm too unworthy of Jesus. Notice what Paul said. Who's the first person that he went to see? He went to see Peter. He went to see James. The Bible tells us that Peter and James rejected him. Hurt him badly. Jesus, though, as his first act after he was raised, goes to see the people that hurt him the most. He goes to see the people who have wronged him the most. That's the way he is. And if you feel like you've wronged him terribly, you can still come and say today, I want to meet you. And if there's anybody here who says, well, I came here looking for help with my problems. Or I came here for looking for help for the world and all you did was give me all this dogma, all this dogmatism. Yes, there is no way to help without dogma. You're looking at the wrong place. Christianity is not a bunch of optimistic stories. So what if spring comes after winter? Unless the resurrection comes after the crucifixion. Let us pray. Our Father, as we come to you and we seek to meet you at your table, we pray that we might meet the risen Lord, not just believe in him. Let the resurrection not just be something we believe in, though we must believe in it. Let it be something we experience. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen. Proclamation that something happened. That's the reason why Paul can taunt. We started our service this way. Paul is able to actually taunt at death. Why? Because he says in the beginning, declared him to be the son of God with power by the resurrection. Paul didn't understand that he was a son of God until he saw him raised and he began to realize what Jesus has done. There's hope. Why? Because this is the son of God. Death could not hold him down. It says in Acts chapter 2 when the first sermon was preached by Peter it says he rose from the dead because death could not hold him. It was impossible for death to hold him. Now you think about the power of death for a minute. Think about it. Nothing can stop death. No human being can stop death. The power of decay. The second law of thermodynamics. Even mountains can't stop death. The mountains eventually get worn down to pebbles. Even the sun and the stars can't stop death. Even they burn out and they go to decay. Think of the power of death. And yet someone came who overmatched death. Jesus Christ was swallowed by death and exploded in its bowels. Jesus Christ did not just defy death. He did not just deny death. He destroyed death. And that's the reason why Paul can say later on in this chapter Oh death where is thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? At the top of the service we said only Christians have this unbelievable ability to handle worry and handle anxiety. Why? Because they can look at the most powerful obstacle to happiness in the universe, death itself, and actually taunt it. Hey Dylan Thomas says we rage against the dying of the light. He was a great poet. And he was showing the desperate outrage that anybody who doesn't believe in the fact of the resurrection has to face in the face of death. Albert Camus said no matter what you enjoy in life the fact that you're going to die casts a shadow on it. You know Camus at one point in one of his books he says this. He says if I told you I'm going to kill you in 30 minutes you say why not kill me now? And he said well what do you like to do? Tell me the thing you most enjoy doing. He said well I love to listen to Haydn on my stereo. Great he said I say well I don't want to you know I don't want to be too cold about this. Listen to Haydn for 30 minutes and then I'll kill you. Have some fun before you die. And you say well I don't know but I guess there's something about the fact I'm going to die at 7 30 that'll make it hard for me to enjoy my Haydn at 7 o'clock. Well Camus says but don't you understand that's the situation all of you are in. You're going to die? You don't know when you're going to die but you're going to die? How can you enjoy anything? You're going to die. And Dylan Thomas says we rage against the dying of the light. Paul's attitude is this. Spare not death. Do thy worst. For if you reach out to hold me and grab me and choke me all you will do is make me better than I was before. Reach out and get me and all you can do is make me glorious more glorious than I was before. Death I taunt you. Death I take the football and I shake it in your face. I hot dog before you death. Death where is thy sting? Grave where is thy victory? Now do you see why Paul says if the proclamation is true then our preaching is not just not useless our preaching is very useful. You've got something to handle anything. Christian friends do you believe in the risen Christ? Is he your savior? In that case you can face death but you can face anything. Can you face worry? Can you face troubles? You already sang about it in the first hymn. Ours the cross the graves the skies. See if you believe that the risen Christ is now in control of history you know even the bad things that happen to you are crosses that are going to rise you. They're going to raise you. Come on crosses says a Christian. The lower you lay me the higher you'll raise me. Come on crosses you say. Jesus the risen Lord is in charge of everything. He's working all things out to my good. So even bad things that happen to me. One of the things that somebody told me before I came to New York to start this church. Somebody said to me listen if you're a Christian you believe in the risen Christ and that he's in charge of all history even if you go to New York and you fail it will be because God is preparing you for some other ministry and you wouldn't be qualified for it unless you failed in New York. Well you see if you believe in the risen Christ you're able to come up here and somebody said to me when I first got here are you sure you're going to succeed and I said sort of. Well that's a shorthand for saying come on crosses the lower you lay me the higher you'll raise me. happen to me will be the best thing that can happen to me. What do I have of fear? Because of the facts. Now listen, friends, last thing. Do you believe this? Do you understand this? To people who are believers, I just want to ask you, are you using this on yourself? Are you cowed by your worries? Are you so desperately lonely? Do you lack the joy that the early Christians had? It's not because they were made of sterner stuff than you, better stuff than you. They were using the doctrine of the resurrection, and they were looking at everything through it. Are you doing that? The early Christians had a rollicking joy, even when the world was on top of them, they felt they were on top of the world, and they won. Because they know, they looked at death, and they said, you can't hurt me. They looked at troubles, and they said, you can't hurt me. Why? Because of the fact of the resurrection. Because Jesus has come. If there's anybody here who says, but I'm just too unworthy, I'd like to be a Christian, but I've messed my life up, and I'm too unworthy of Jesus. Notice what Paul said. Who's the first person that he went to see? He went to see Peter. He went to see James. The Bible tells us that Peter and James rejected him, hurt him badly. Jesus, though, as his first act after he was raised, goes to see the people that hurt him the most. He goes to see the people who have wronged him the most. That's the way he is. And if you feel like you've wronged him terribly, you can still come and say today, I want to meet you. And if there's anybody here who says, well, I came here looking for help with my problems, or I came here looking for help for the world, and all you did was give me all this dogma, all this dogmatism. Yes, there is no way to help without dogma. You're looking at the wrong place. Christianity is not a bunch of optimistic stories. So what if spring comes after winter? Unless the resurrection comes after the crucifixion. Let us pray. Our Father, as we come to you and we seek to meet you at your table, we pray that we might meet the risen Lord, not just believe in him. Let the resurrection not just be something we believe in, though we must believe in it, let it be something we experience. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
