TITLE: One Way or Many?
SCRIPTURE: John 14:5-10
TOPICS: Salvation
SERIES: Christ the Controversialist – Confrontations With Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/one-way-or-many/

============================================================

Read with me the passage that we're going to be based on our teaching on. It's printed in the bulletin. One bit of bad news or good news, depending on how you look at it, we won't be able to do the question and answer time after the service. So if you've got questions, you're going to have to hold on to them until next week because we have to have the children's program in here in this space during the class time. So you're just going to have to hold on to your questions. And when you hear the text, you're going to say, this was a conspiracy. But anyway, let's take a look. John 14, verses 5 to 10. And Thomas said to him, Lord, we don't know where you are going, so how can we know the way? And Jesus answered, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. If you really knew me, you would know my Father as well. From now on, you do know him and have seen him. Philip said, Lord, show us the Father and that will be enough for us. And Jesus answered, don't you know me, Philip, even after I've been among you such a long time? Anyone who has seen me has seen the Father. How can you say, show us the Father? Don't you believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me? The words I say to you are not just my own. Rather, it is the Father living in me who is doing his work. This is God's word. Now, what we're looking at in a series on Sunday mornings is we're looking at Jesus' controversies. We're looking at debates he had. We're looking at outrageous statements he made that were controversial, that made people upset, that made people apoplectic. Now, someone says, now, how is that appropriate for the joyous Christmas season? Why are we talking about something like this? And here's why. Jesus Christ was a teacher, and he was a teacher who walked around and he told people to love each other. And he was kind to the poor. And he laid his hands on the sick. And he fed the hungry. He did all these things. And we know that. And, of course, that's not controversial at all. Who's going to argue with that? But there's been lots of people who have done that. There have been lots of people in history at all places and times who told, let's just love each other, and who cared for the sick and were kind to the poor and so forth. But why did this one, of all the great teachers of love and all the sages and wise people, why did this one become the most influential single figure in the history of the world? It's not because of the uncontroversial things. It's not because of those things. It couldn't have been. Plenty of people have done those things. It's because of what we sing about at Christmas, the claim. The claim. Veiled in flesh, the Godhead see. Hail the incarnate deity. We didn't sing that this morning, but that's in the Christmas carol. And you see that outrages people. That's controversial. That makes people upset. That gets people hostile. But you see, it's in the claims that you see the difference between Jesus Christ and everybody else. Why did he become who he did? And therefore, you're not going to come to grips with the real Jesus unless you come to grips with these enormous claims. Maybe the most enormous and maybe the most outrageous of all is the one we read right there in John chapter 14, verse 6. I am the way, the truth, the life. No one comes to the Father except through me. See? Now, let's take a look at that. Even though, right away, somebody has to say, well, okay, claims, the claims. That's why we're looking at the claims, the controversies, to get the real Jesus. But how do you know that he claimed this? Just because John says he claimed this. And we have to, just for a minute, think about this. There are plenty of people who say there's no way that Jesus could have ever claimed such a thing. Somebody wrote this down. And I have to ask, now, there's very thoughtful people, very, very wise and educated people who say this. And if I ask one of those people, why couldn't Jesus have said this? They say, well, because no Jewish teacher would have said this. I say, why? And they'll say this. They say, because the Hebrew understanding of God is unique in the world. If people in the East, their understanding of God was God is really, in a sense, an emanation of, or it's the life force of nature. God is nature. Or God is the life force in nature. And doesn't exist apart from nature. But the Hebrews said, no, God exists above nature. God existed before nature. God created nature. He is infinitely exalted and transcended above nature. So it's a far loftier view than in the East. And if you come over to the West and you look at the gods of the Western world, you'll see the gods of the Western world tended to be, they were, of course, they were, Hebrew God was holy. Absolutely, utterly holy. So holy that the Jews would not speak his name. They would not write his name. See, utterly holy compared to the western gods, utterly transcendent compared to the eastern understanding of God. And therefore, you see, in the east, in the east, if a man came and said, I am God, I am the way to God, I am divine, in the east people would say, okay, because what he was meaning to them, what they'd understand is he was saying, I have more of that divine spark in me than in most people. Most people have it, I have more of the divine consciousness, I have more of the divine force. That's all. And if somebody comes to the west and comes to the Greeks or the Romans or the Norse or whoever and says, I am divine, they would understand that he was saying, I'm a person of great power, I'm a representative of the gods, you see, I'm Hermes or I'm one of these gods maybe, and they say, okay. But you see, my educated friend would say, no Jewish person could possibly ever say he was God. It would be inconceivable. These are the last people on the face of the earth who would ever allow, ever grant that a human being could be God. But you're making my point. My point is this. It is a simple fact of history that thousands, within just a few years of the death of this man, thousands of people in Jerusalem, in Judea, were believing, were worshiping somebody. They were worshiping Jesus Christ. And here's what I want to know. What could have possibly brought about that? What earthquake? There were lots of Messiah claimants, but there was never anybody. It's true. There was never anybody that claimed this and got a following. There must, what stupendous kind of life and what enormous kinds of claims, there's a footprint in history. There's a huge footprint there. You say, well, somebody must have made it up. No Jewish teacher would have said that. But what got all those thousands of Jewish people to believe that somebody was God who understood God in the biblical way? Utterly transcendent, utterly holy. Somebody claimed this. Somebody did it, and somebody convinced them, and we've got to look at it. They're there. Now, the claim, I'm going to go right word by word. Let me look at the nature of the claim, which is the first part of verse six. I am the way, the truth, and the life. And then we'll look at the uniqueness of the claim, which is the second part of the verse. No one comes to the Father but by me. See? Let's look at the nature of the claim, and then the uniqueness of the claim. And the only way to do this, this is a pregnant, this is pregnant, so we have to deliver. This is more, this is septuplets. Okay? I. The first thing here is we see Jesus claims extremity. Okay? Come with me. His claims demand extremity. I. Now, we say what? What? Here. Jesus Christ, if you read the Gospels, you will see a man who is just, you'll see lots of humility and no modesty. Lots of humility and no modesty. What do I mean? I mean this. If you read through, you look at the actions of Jesus, and they are unbelievably humble. He was so tender, so very tender with people, so gentle with the sleepless disciples, sleepy disciples, so kind to the prostitutes, so gentle, approachable to children, weeping in sympathy with people all the time, incredibly humble in his actions, but in his words, no modesty at all. And he's always pushing the envelope on who he is. He's always bringing it up. He's always pushing it by saying, I am. So, like, for example, Martha, her brother Lazarus is dead, and says to the Lord Jesus, he says, you know, if you were here, he wouldn't have died, but he'll be raised on the resurrection of the dead in the last day. What does Jesus say? I am the resurrection. Remember John 11. He doesn't say, I don't point to the resurrection. I'm the resurrection. In Mark chapter 2, Jesus heals a man on the Sabbath. Well, the leaders come together and say, you shouldn't be working on the Sabbath. We shouldn't be working on the Sabbath. What does Jesus say? I'm the Lord of the Sabbath. He says, I don't point to the Sabbath. I am the source and author of the eternal Sabbath rest. I, in the wisdom literature, Hebrew wisdom literature, in fact, all Near Eastern wisdom literature talked about wisdom as having a yoke. And there's all sorts of places in the wisdom literature of the Near East where it says, put the yoke of wisdom on you, and put the burden of wisdom on you. And Jesus Christ says, come unto me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you. And what's he saying? He doesn't say, I point to wisdom. I'm wisdom. My yoke. My burden. These are astounding. And these are extreme. If somebody comes to you and says, I'm your leader, and I want you to die. I want you to fight to the last inch. I want you to, without any condition, without any flinching, I want you to fight, and I want you to die, and I want you to sacrifice. I want you to give your all for justice, for love, for life, for truth. You say, okay. But what if he comes and says, for me? Now, see, here's a man who actually comes and says, I am the truth. I am life. I am justice. I am love. You must die for me. In all honesty, a person who comes and talks like that, if you ran into somebody like that today, if you knew of someone, a leader in the world today, we would all consider him utterly dangerous. We would utterly reject him. We would want nothing. We wouldn't know if he was mad, or if he was bad, or if it was a combination of mad or bad, it wouldn't matter. We would totally reject him. And therefore, Jesus claims absolutely demand extremity. He's always trying to knock you off dead center. What do I mean? The average person in New York City, and I know this because of the polls. I know this because of the studies. The average person in New York City likes Jesus Christ, doesn't like the church. The average person in New York City thinks well of Jesus Christ with some reservations. And everything Jesus does in the book of, in the gospel, shows that he was continually, relentlessly, always trying to avoid that. He was trying to say, you may not like me with reservations. If you listen to me, if you have any intellectual integrity, you hear what I'm saying? I'm going to push you out to the extremes. You either have to reject me because what I'm saying is the worst thing anybody's ever said, or you're going to have to accept me because what I'm saying is the best thing anybody ever said. Because if it's true, it's the best thing. If it's not true, it's the worst thing. But you can't like me. I won't let you like me. It's incredible. People do say in the polls, they like Jesus, they don't think much of the church. What's so bad about the church? Hypocrisy, incompetence, boredom. This is demonic unless it's true. How could you like Jesus and not like the church? You're not listening to Jesus. You're not listening to him. His claims. On Palm Sunday, Jesus went out of his way to make sure that the people proclaimed him king as he wrote in. And that put the leaders of the city in an enormous difficulty because the rulers of the city of Jerusalem, because he was proclaimed the king on the way in, either now they had to bow to him and admit he was, because everybody's going to say, what do you think of the king? Either they had to bow to him or they had to destroy him. And Jesus pushed that. Jesus pushed that. And he pushes it to you. Anybody who's looking at the data, anybody who's seeking him, Jesus says the same thing to you that he said to Jerusalem, crown me or kill me. Crown me or kill me. I am the resurrection. I am wisdom. I am the Sabbath. I am the life. I am the truth. I. Now, either that's right and you have to come and adore me or it's wrong and you have to destroy me. But how dare you like me with reservations and how dare you like me more than the church? The church is bland. The church is mediocre. The church is hypocritical. The church is incompetent. The church is boring. That's nothing compared to how bad I am unless I'm telling you the truth. So, first of all, I, the claims, demand extreme. They demand extremity. They demand extreme action. Secondly, I'm going to skip am for a minute. I am the way. Secondly, the claims promise intimacy. I am the way. The way to what? Well, to come to the father. But look a little careful, look, look more carefully. What is he actually saying? Is he saying without me, you can't know anything about God? You can't be wise. You can't be good. You can't know any truth. That's not what he's saying. No, he's not. But what he is saying is, he says, I'm the only way to come to the father. But in verse seven, look it, if you knew me, you would know my father as well. From now on, you do know me and have seen him. Here's what he's saying. I'm the only way to know the father. Jesus is saying, now see, before we look at the exclusivity and the bad news, let's look at the sweetness. Look at the enormous sweetness. Jesus claims promise intimacy with God. Jesus says, I am the only way, and I'm going to try to show you right here. I am the only way to change God from a boss into a father. God, if you've got one at all, from fear and uncertainty into absolute confidence, warmth, and love. I'm the only way. Look, he's the only way to change God from a boss into a father. My children know that if they say they're going to get in at 10 o'clock and they're not in at 10 o'clock, I'll be angry, but they're not worried about being fired as sons. They're not worried about it. They know, and I know, that frankly, they haven't even begun to plumb the depths of what their parents, what their mother and father, would probably be likely to do if they go astray. It scares me when I think of what I'm probably, just as a, as a finite, weak, semi-competent parent, absolutely average in my parenting from what I can tell. It scares me to realize occasionally I plumb the depths of how far I would go if I had to, to save a child. You know, if a child, if a child drops into the icy river, even the most incompetent parent doesn't even think about the danger. In goes the parent. Okay? Doesn't matter. Doesn't matter whether you can swim. In goes the parent. There is no, there, it's very hard for me to imagine, and it's hard for my wife to imagine. We realize, we get scared when we realize the things we would do for our children. But Jesus says, there's absolutely no other way for you to feel that way about God, to have that kind of confidence that God loves you like that. That God would go to unbelievable extremes of his own suffering like that. Now, you think about it. The offensiveness of this is, Jesus is saying, only through me can you know the Father. Say, oh, well, what about a good Muslim or a Buddhist or a good person who's not a Christian, not a believer of any religion at all? Jesus says, fine, go ahead, just compare. Is there any other way except you believe what I'm telling you? And that is, I am the Son of God. I came to earth. My Father sent me. I came and I lost my Father. And I took all hell into my soul so we wouldn't lose you. I was punished. I paid the debt, the penalty of your sin. I did that. I suffered. Now, there is not a single other religion anywhere that would ever dare to say God suffered. There's not a single religion anywhere that would dare say, and I'll get back to it in a minute, that you can absolutely know that God loves you much more than you love yourself. And that you can't be fired. And that he's got his everlasting arms on you. There's, let's listen, let's just be factual about it. There is no other religion would ever claim any of those things. And Jesus, therefore, is actually saying something very, very true. If I am who I say I am, then I am absolutely the only way all the way in to the Father. I'm the only way. I'm the only way. Amazing. He's the only way that you could possibly know that. And then secondly, I mean, thirdly, let's keep going. I shows that his claims, what? They demand extremity. I am the way show that his claims, what? Promise intimacy. Thirdly, I am the way, the truth. And this is where we actually see the key to the whole thing, where his claims really, really, really do profess divinity. When he says, I am the truth. Now, he doesn't say, I point to the truth. You know, there's this remarkable little place in Matthew 23, verse 34, where Jesus very casually offhand says, I keep sending you prophets and wise men. Do you know what he's saying here? He is saying, I am not a teacher. I am not a wise man. I am not one of the great founders. I'm not one of the great sages. I'm not one of the great gurus. Over the centuries, every one of them has come from me. They point to me. Some very well, some poorly, some partially. Every single guru, every single sage, every single founder of every religion, every prophet, everybody, I sent them. Here's what he's saying. Because they all point to the truth, but I am the truth. Now, when he says that, I want you to realize the background is chapter one of the book of John. And in chapter one of the book of John, John says in the Greek, he says, in the beginning was the logos. Now, it's translated word in English, but it's the logos. And that was, at the time, a loaded word. Because the philosophes, the Greeks, for years had been looking for the reason for life. And that's what the logos was, your reason for life. The philosophes were looking for, they wanted to say, you know what, you're never going to understand, you don't understand an entity unless you're... if you see somebody trying to cook a meal on a little electric space heater, you say, stop. You could burn down your apartment. Why? Because the space heater, the Logos of the space heater, the reason it was not built for that. And therefore, you don't know how to use it. You don't know what is right and wrong with regard to the space heater unless you know what it's for. Well, the Greeks understood this, and this is common sense. How do you know what's right or wrong? How do you know what's right or wrong to live? How do you know what's important and unimportant? Well, how do you know what to do? Well, you won't know anything unless you know your Logos, your reason, what you were built for. But by the time of the Greek, by the time that John was writing, the philosophers had pretty much broken down. They'd been saying, this is the thing to live for, and this is the thing that, this is the truth, this is what life's about, and they all broke down. And frankly, we're living in the same time. See, at the time that John wrote the Gospel, the intellectuals said, there is no meaning in life. There is no truth, capital T. It's not there. There is no way to make life coherent. It's just not there. And that's exactly what's being said today. And then, and then John comes in with a bomb. And here's what the bomb is. Do you know the reason why I think, it's not just true in intellectual history, but in personal history, you say, I've got to have something to live for. I've got to have a truth. I've got to have something that's my bottom line. And so you choose one. And it could be, it could be altruistic. It could be, I'm going to work for a political cause to free, you know, of freeing some group of people that are oppressed. Or it could be to work for justice in a general way. Or it could be something very different. It could be to live a moral life. Or it could be, you're an artist, and you have an inner muse, and you've got talents, and you say, it's my job, the truth, the thing I'm going to live for, is to listen to my inner muse so that I can produce the best possible art, so that I can enlighten the people around me. But everybody's got to have a truth. But here's the problem. Whatever truth you choose, it can't love you. Whatever truth, whatever it is that you decide I'm going to live for, it will tyrannize you. It can't hug you. It can't forgive you. It can only demand. And it will tyrannize you, and you will eventually just be destroyed because any truth, anything worth living for, you're going to fail. And when you fail, it can't lift you down. It can't pick you up. It can't wipe your tears. It's a thing. It's an abstraction. So what we do is we turn. You know what we do? We get rid of the idea of truth and causes, and we try to find love. And we turn to people, friends, or peer groups, or more likely romance. But here's what we have. We find that the truths let us down. They disappoint us because they can't love us. But when we turn to our loves, at first we think, now I finally found the person of my dreams. But eventually we get destroyed there because just as truth can't love us, our loves aren't true. They're flawed. They're people. They're like you. You know, you're looking for somebody less flawed than you, but it's almost impossible. And you find them, and they let you down, or they lie to you, or they're not there for you. Don't you see why people have gotten rid of the truth? Don't you see why people get cynical about love? And John comes in, in verse chapter 1, and says, in the beginning there was the Word. There was the Logos. It did exist. And it became flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld its glory. And see, here's what Jesus is saying. Here's what John is saying. This is philosophical dynamite, and this is unique too. No other religion would ever dare say that. In Jesus Christ, the truth has become a person. Let's keep going. The absolute has become a particular. The universal has become a particular. The absolute has become a flesh and blood person. The truth has become someone who can love you, and hug you, and forgive you. You finally have a love that is absolutely true, and you finally have a truth that can finally love you, and it's the only truth that can possibly forgive you. This is the meaning of life. This is what you were built for. Don't you see what you're doing to yourself? All the other truths, they'll never really be able to hold you up, because this is the truth to which all those truths point. And without this, you're going to put too much weight on any other truth, and it will let you down. And this is the love to which all other loves point. And any other love that you go after, it will let you down unless you let it point. And you see this. Jesus Christ says, I am the truth. I don't point to the truth. I am the truth. Do you see that? That is the thing that you've got to do. You've got to know Jesus. If he is the truth that's become a person, and that because he died on the cross, opens the way to intimacy with the Father. way in. Now let's go to the end, and that is, I'm the life, only a word on this. When people hear what I've just said, wait a minute, they say, I have got to admit, I've got to admit that my truths and my loves are penultimate, and this is the ultimate. Wait a minute, I've got to admit that somehow I'm a sinner, so that I'll be moved when I see that there is a God who actually suffered for me. And that's the only way I'm going to find my relationship with him going from being a boss to being a father, being cold and hard to being something that melts my heart. I have to see I'm a sinner. I have to see that I have to turn away from other things that I thought were penultimate, but I have to kind of, in a sense, sort of lose my, boy, this is going to take a lot of strength. And see, Jesus Christ comes along and says, don't worry, I'm not just giving you a blueprint, I'm also the life. I'm not just telling you what to do, I will come inside, I will regenerate you. If you reach out to grab me, I will come in, and I will change you, I will regenerate you. I'm not just the truth, I'm the life. Now, why did I skip I am? Here's the simplicity. Jesus doesn't say, I point to the way. Every other founder of every other religion says, go do that and you'll find God. He says, I am the way. Do you realize what's going on? Over the years, people I've seen who decide they want God, so they come to church and they start to read the Bible and say, I'm going to live like Jesus. I'm going to try to be like Jesus. I'm going to live just like him. I'm going to do everything he says. I'm going to follow all his rules. I'm going to follow his example. What you're doing is you're turning him, you're turning him, you're just making him like every other founder of every other religion. He'll just crush you if you do that. You see what's going on here? He is the way. In other words, he says, I did not come to show you how to strive. I did the striving. I did not come to show you a mountain of righteousness to climb. I climbed it. I didn't come to show you how to live the perfect life and die the death. I lived the life you should have lived. I died the death. You should have died. I am the way. Come ask for me. Come grab me. Come rest in me. Just reach out and say, Father, love me and accept me because of what Jesus did, and you're there. I'm the way. I don't point to it. I am the way. Christianity is Christ. The gospel is not instruction. It's an announcement. The gospel doesn't say do. It says it's been done. Now, you look at the uniqueness. You see everything that's going on in the first part of the verse. Now, we go to the second part, but only for a second. In the first part of the verse, it tells you, and I hope you can see this, if Jesus Christ is who he says he is in I, I am, if he is that, then he's the way, he's the truth, and the life. And the fact of the matter is, if he is that, there is no other religion that even comes close to trying to give you that. If he is not that, then frankly, he's demonic. It's a terrible thing, but he doesn't fit in as one way among many. He can't. He's either the only way all the way in, or he really is something that should be rejected as being very, very bad, but he doesn't fit in. And that's the reason why he says no one comes to the Father but by me. Now, I want to conclude by saying if you say that's kind of exclusive, yes, but in two ways, Christian exclusivity that says the only way you can get all the way in is through Jesus. The only way you can be saved is through Jesus. The only way you can have all your sins forgiven is through Jesus. The only way you can know God is the Father is through Jesus. Well, I say that, but it's exclusive, sure, but it is the most inclusive exclusivity. Why? Well, first of all, it's the most inclusive exclusivity because it allows the weakest to come. Now, you see, when somebody says, well, why couldn't any good person find God? The premise behind that, the premise saying, why couldn't any good person find God? The premise is the good find God, not the bad. Now, one of the reasons why people say that is because they're worried about the people that never heard about Jesus. And of course, that makes sense to be upset about that. I don't know much myself. You know, when Peter, when Jesus was telling Peter at the end of the book of John that he was going to die, he was going to die on the cross, Jesus told Peter that Peter was going to actually die a martyr's death. Peter turns to John and says, what about him? Lord, what about this guy? And what does Jesus say? What about this guy? Follow me. He says, am I under obligation to tell you their story? I'm here to tell you your story. Now, look, and it makes sense to say, well, what about the people that never heard? But here's what I want to know. If you say the good people are in and the bad people are out, what about the bad people? See, you say, well, it's not fair. What if you were raised in a place where you didn't hear about Jesus? Well, I want to know something. What, how fair is it if you're raised in a nasty, broken, violent home? So you grew up hating and being hated and you'd be turned into a serial killer. like that, but you've had this wonderful upbringing, wonderful home? Listen, life is not fair. And the fact of the matter is, if you say any good person can find God, what you're saying is the good people are in and the bad people are out, but if you say, if Jesus Christ says, through me, admitting that you're not good and your only fitness is to admit that you're not fit and to see the incredible thing that God has done for you in Jesus Christ, then that means the proud, the humble are in and the proud are out. Did you hear that? The humble are in and the proud are out. Now, either way, it's exclusive. I've had people say, what I don't like about the gospel is the gospel seems to be saying that a person could live a terrible life, be a serial killer, and in the very end of his life, on his deathbed, receive Christ and be saved. I don't buy that. In other words, you're more exclusive than Christianity. You're going to be exclusive somehow. Which way is it? Christianity is the most inclusive exclusivity because it opens to the weakest. But then lastly, Christianity is the most inclusive exclusivity because if you're a Christian, you're the only, you're the only people who have, now listen Christians, if you're a Christian, you're the only people whose thought system keeps you from thinking the opposition are dangerous fools. You see, if you belong to a religion that says you'll find God if you're good enough, then you have to feel superior to people who are on the other side, who are not religious, who are in the wrong religion. You have to feel superior because you're saved by your works. If you're a secular person, if you're a secular person and you believe all religions are relative, then you feel superior to the people who think their religion's true. I put a little blurb about that in the bulletin, and don't look at it right now, but Leslie Newbigin in his book, The Gospel in a Pluralistic Society, is wonderful about that. And he tells the story how people like to say, well, no religion has all the truth. Every religion is like six blind men grabbing an elephant, and one blind man grabs the trunk and says, God is like a hose. Another blind man grabs the elephant's leg and says, no, God is more like a tree stump. Another person grabs the elephant's tail and says, no, God is more like a string. And so you see, every religion has part of the truth, but nobody sees all the truth. And that's how secular people like to see it. And Leslie Newbigin says, but you realize the problem with that story? The only way you could possibly say, the only way you could possibly know that every religion has part of the truth is if you see the whole picture. The only way you know that every single religion is blind is if you think you're not. The only possible way to say nobody has superior knowledge is to assume you have the superior knowledge that nobody else you just say is supposed to have. And therefore, if you're a secular relativist, you're arrogant, you feel superior to people who aren't. And if you are a religious person who believes you're saved because you're a good person, you're going to be superior to the secular person or the other religion or the irreligious people. If you're a Christian, you are saved by grace. And when you talk to an atheist or a Buddhist, you know this person is likely better than you. You're not saved because you're better. You're saved because of grace. And we are the only people that when we talk to people who oppose us, we should not act like they're dangerous fools. Christianity, in other words, is the only exclusivity that creates a spirit of humility. And the only reason why most people don't see it in Christians is because most Christians don't understand they're saved by grace. Jesus Christ says to Christians, he says to Philip, have you been around me so long and you don't know me? Intimacy with God is what he died for. Intimacy with God is what the whole history of the universe is about. Intimacy with God is what the cross is about. Intimacy with God is why he suffered what he suffered. And you're not praying. Christian friends, pray. Know him. Do you have that access? Yes. Is that, do you sense that love? Do you know him? Are you working at it? Are you availing yourself of that? Everything is for that. Are you like Philip? You're around Jesus. See, verse 9. You're around me, Philip, and you don't know. Some of you have been around him for years and you don't know him. On the other hand, Christians, unless we are the most kind to people who disagree with us, unless we are the most flexible, unless we have the most tolerance of ambiguity, that shows, do you hear what I just said? The most tolerance for ambiguity, that shows you don't know you're a sinner saved by grace, you've slipped back, and you're missing everything about the gospel. Because, you see, we have to be sympathetic. Everybody else's truth won't forgive them. That's why they're unhappy. We have a person who's the truth, who forgives us, and as a result, we should be the most forgiving of them. and mighty. And until we are like that, why should the world believe these incredible claims? On the other hand, if you're here and you're not a believer, I want to know something. Are you at the extremes? Jesus Christ says you've got not a shred of intellectual integrity if you like him with reservations. Adore him, or hate him, or better yet, explore him. Jesus says in Revelation 2, you're neither hot nor cold, so I spew you out of my mouth. He's likening us to food. Cold food's pretty good, hot food's pretty good, lukewarm food. And Jesus says, if you hate me, or if you love me, you're closer to who I really claim to be than if you're lukewarm. And yet 95% of all the people I meet are lukewarm. Look at him until you see. Okay? You can know the Father through him. Intimacy. If what he says is true. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for granting us the right to be your children if we believe and receive you. Now we ask that you would apply these truths to our hearts by your Holy Spirit. In Jesus' name, we ask it. Amen.
