TITLE: Our Covenant God: What Can I Really Trust In?
SCRIPTURE: Hebrews 6:12-20
TOPICS: Trust and Assurance God's Love
SERIES: The Attributes of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/our-covenant-god-what-can-i-really-trust-in/

============================================================

I'd like to draw our attention to Hebrews chapter 6, verses 12 through 20. We do not want you to become lazy, but to imitate those who through faith and patience inherit what has been promised. When God made his promise to Abraham, since there was no one greater for him to swear by, he swore by himself, saying, I will surely bless you and give you many descendants. And so after waiting patiently, Abraham received what was promised. Men swear by someone greater than themselves, and the oath confirms what is said and puts an end to all argument, because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear to the heirs of what was promised. He confirmed it with an oath. God did this so that, by two unchangeable things in which it is impossible for God to lie, we who have fled to take hold of the hope offered to us may be greatly encouraged. We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, firm and secure. It enters the inner sanctuary behind the curtain, where Jesus, who went before us, has entered on our behalf. He has become a high priest forever in the order of Melchizedek. This is God's word. Every single week we're looking at another attribute of God. We're getting to know him quality by quality, characteristic by characteristic, excellency by excellency. And today we look at his faithfulness, his trustworthiness. He is one who can be trusted. He wants the heirs of the promise to Abraham to know that he will make good on his promise. He will be there. You can trust him. Life is very hard. Shakespeare writes in Macbeth a great line, and really a very demoralizing line the more you think about it, each new morn, new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face. What an awful thought. Beautiful, of course. Each new morn, new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face. And the whole idea behind that, of course, is that every day there are thousands and millions of people who are experiencing life-shattering losses. However, it's not just in those kinds of losses that it's difficult to trust God. Most of us are not experiencing those kinds of things every day. We're discouraged because we live almost knee-deep in the muck of adversity after adversity, little adversities, little frustrations that all add up, and throw us to the ground. Part of the... I read about a book for high school students, which captures what I'm trying to say. The title is, If God Loves Me, Why Can't I Get My Locker Opened? It's an interesting book. And it captures the idea that one of the things that just casts us down is that no one thing really is that life-shattering. And yet here we are feeling so discouraged and so demoralized. And one of the problems of... One of the reasons we're so demoralized is we almost feel like, why should I let all these things bother us the way...bother me the way I do, and yet I do. This text tells us that God must be trusted, that God can be trusted. In other words, this text tells us three things about God. That trusting in God is necessary, it's possible, and it's practical. It's absolutely necessary that you trust God. That's the first thing that we see from this text. Then secondly, it is possible to trust God. And then thirdly, it's something that you really can do, and there's some ideas in the text that give you practical handles on how to go about actually trusting Him. First, trusting God is necessary. It says, we have an anchor for the soul. Now that's interesting. It's in verse 19. Jesus Christ is an anchor for the soul. That means that your soul is the nature that it needs an anchor. Once a year, once a year only, it's amazing, once a year I play golf, once a year I go out on a boat every year, and I take my kids out into the middle of Lake Erie to fish, because they're tired of fishing for the little teeny weeny little fish that are in the creek, and what they want to do is they want to go out, and they want to haul in big. or in the evening, and of course I'll do it in the evening, before nightfall. And you go out as far as you possibly can without going so far that you can't get back in before dark. If you don't get back in before dark, you're in a lot of trouble. So when you get on out there, while you're fishing, you have to drop your anchor. Why? Because you've got to make sure that you have yourself anchored, or else the current will pull you out into the middle of the lake, which is a very large lake, Lake Erie, and you will not be able to get back in time. What makes an anchor good? What is there about the anchor that gives you security? There's got to be two things about it that gives you that security. First, it's got to be attached to you. It's got to be committed to you. You can't break the bond between you and the anchor. But then secondly, the anchor has to go into a realm where we can't go. It doesn't go into the water to get us security. We don't need the anchor just to go into the water. We're already in the water, and the water's the problem. You can't get security in the water. The water moves. The water changes. The water's in flux. The water is, it's the vicissitudes of the water, which are the problem. What the anchor has to do is it has to go to a place where we cannot get. It has to go to the bottom of the lake where there are rocks that are immobile, that are stable, that are permanent. And if the anchor not only is committed to us, but also enters into that realm and locks onto those rocks, then the immobility and the permanence and the solidity of those rocks is actually transferred, any physicist will tell you, through the anchor and the chain to the boat. You need an anchor for the soul, this text tells you. Why does that mean? We need a spiritual anchor because we have human souls even more than that boat needed a physical anchor. Why? If you live in time and space and history, it is like water spiritually. Nothing is secure here. Nothing. Everything changes. Everything. The philosopher Heraclitus once said, in trying to get this point across, you can't step into the same river twice. But he also was right in saying, and you can't step into the same road twice. Now, the river seems to be changing faster than the road, but they're both changing. And they're both changing irretrievably. You can't step out into the same day twice. You can't go home to the same family twice. There's no going home. Everything is changing. Every tree is coming down. Every mountain is being ground down into the dust. Every planet is eventually going to burn out. Every sun is going to go out. Every star. Everything is changing. Absolutely everything. We're in flux. One of the hard things about getting older is to see that. Is to see everything changing. One of the hard things about getting older is also to see how quickly people get over you. How quickly your company seems to get over you when you're gone. How quickly, even after a funeral, one of the things that's unnerving about going to lots of funerals is to see how quickly people move right on without the person they just say goodbye to. Garrison Keillor, in one of his monologues, said that he was watching a PBS special on a day in the life of a doctor in a hospital. And it just follows doctors around in a hospital. I always wonder how they make those things in a way that makes people able to act naturally. I guess they get used to it. So they were following these doctors around. And Keillor said it was very distressing to see these doctors talking. They would get around and they'd say, Ah, the patient in room 548 died this morning. The last procedure didn't work. Okay. Who's got the charts on the patient in room 540? And Keillor says, He says, It was very unnerving. I always thought, you know, that I always hoped that when I died in the hospital, my doctor would, you know, dissolve into tears. Have to take the rest of the day off. You know? Say, gosh, guys, the patient in room 548 died. I just don't have to go home. I'll see you tomorrow. And you see, Noah said, Well, who's got the charts for the patient in room 540? They have to do that. And what's so funny and so poignant and so painful about that joke of Garrison Keillor is this. They have to move on. We all have to move on because we actually can't be committed immutably and unchangeably to anything that's human in passing. We've got to... that we're sitting in, no matter what the relationship is, no matter what it is, because every chair eventually crumbles out from under us, and eventually we do too. You see, here's the irony of the problem. We want to have someone immutably and unchangeably committed to us, someone who's always there, and yet we ourselves cannot be that for anybody else. One of the reasons we get married is because we want to know that on the day we die, somebody will not only dissolve into tears, but take at least the rest of the day off. There will be finally somebody who will be there for us till the end. But here's the problem. The reason that he or she is going to go home and take at least the day off and dissolve into tears is because now you're not there for them. You're gone. You cannot be the anchor for that person's soul. Your doctor can't be the anchor. Is there anything that will last? Is there anyone who can be there for us all the time, unchangeably? Or to put it another way, are there any rocks at the bottom of the universe? Is there anything that doesn't change? Is there anything that we can count on? Is there any solidity? Is there any kind of real strength that we can count on that will never let us down? And is there any way we can connect to it? Now the answer to the Bible is this. Isn't it odd that you want someone like that when there isn't anybody like that? Or is it possible that the concept and the desire for it is inexplicable other than to explain it by saying, the reason you want someone like that is because you were created by someone like that and you want to be back with someone like that? I'll put it this way. I'll put it this way, and let's move on. Trusting God is necessary. That word is really too weak. You have to trust God. There is no alternative for trusting God. Your soul has to have an anchor like that. You see, the anchor has got to be someone that is not of time and space. It's got to be someone who goes through the water of time and space into another realm. Our anchor goes behind the curtain. It's got to be someone who's not only connected to us in time and comes to us in time, but is also of and from and to eternity. You've got to have someone like that. Somebody out there says, well, I don't believe in some... I don't know that I believe that there is a God. I don't know, how can I trust in God if I don't believe in a God? I didn't... Right now, I'm not trying to prove God. I'm just trying to prove that you cannot live without Him. I think that's a very... I think that is something you can prove. Unless you trust God, you'll have to trust other people, and they'll continually let you down. They'll continually... Even the best of them, they'll die. Until you go crazy. And then you won't be able to trust anyone but yourself. And then that'll harden you and alienate you. That's the only three alternatives there are. Trust God. Trust others and go crazy. Trust yourself and go hard. Which is it? Every one of you is on one path or another. Oh, you don't immediately get to those three places, but there's only three destinations, and everybody's on one of those roads. And the way most people do it is they start off trusting other people until their hearts are broken. So often, they switch over to the other road and say, I'm going to only trust myself. And then they go down the road to hardness, and you lose your humanity. You must trust God or lose your humanity. We're all haunted by Psalm 103, even if we've never heard it. As for man, his days are like grass. He flourishes like a flower of the field. And the wind passes over it, and it's gone. And its place remembers it no more. And we're galvanized by the place in Malachi 3, where God says, I, the Lord God, change not. Therefore, you sons of Jacob are not consumed. I, the Lord God, change not. Therefore, you sons of Jacob are not consumed. You've got to trust God. It's necessary. Secondly, it's possible. Why is it possible? Because we've got a God who is trustworthy. And he demonstrates it to Abraham. And he demonstrates it to all of us through Abraham. That's the reason why the Hebrews writer actually goes to this wonderful text, this story about how God made sure that Abraham saw his trustworthiness with his own eyes, and made Abraham into a faithful, great-hearted person. Jeff read it this morning, from Genesis 15. The quote here in the passage I read, God is to say, not only do I want Abraham, but I want the heirs of what I promised to Abraham to also know that I'm trustworthy. He made Abraham trustworthy. Look, first of all, Abraham became a trustworthy person, but how and why? Abraham is every bit as much like you and me, much more like you and me than you would think. Pardon me. When you read about these great heroes of the faith in the Bible, they always seem to be made of sterner stuff, special stuff, different than you and me. Not a bit. But look, Abraham had been told by God to leave his country, Ur of the Chaldees, and wander in another land that someday God was going to give him. But for now, you just wander in it. And he should wait for God to give him a child. And out of this, out of the, out of Sarah's womb would come a child and a great nation, a great, huge family would come. Well, Abraham got that promise when he was 75, and when he was 100 years old, it hadn't come true yet. He's 100. Sarah's 90. They're wandering around, not even settling down, waiting for a child. 100 years old and your life hasn't started yet. So Sarah is constantly looking at Abraham and saying, you have blown your life because you've tried to trust God. Don't any of you feel that way? And Abraham turns to Sarah, and we're told in Romans 4, it says, against hope he believed in hope. And he staggered not at the promise of God, which said, so shall thy seed be. Now, how did Abraham become such a stalwart? Because God showed him himself in Genesis 15. You see, he's not as stern and as great a person as you think. He's made like you and me. God appears to him in Genesis 15 and says, Abraham, look at the heavens. Look at the stars. Can you count the stars? So shall thy seed be. So shall thy offspring be. Now, what does Abraham do when God comes to him again? Now, this is 25 years. 25 years now he's been promising Abraham, Abraham, I'm going to give you land and I'm going to give you a family. Nothing's happened. And Abraham looks up at God, who's just spoken out of a cloud or something. And what does he say? He says, oh, God, having you, you know, speak to me out of a cloud really helps a lot right now and I really am full of faith. No, instead he says, how do I know? That takes a little bit of guts to talk to, you know, the thunder and lightning and the booming voice coming out of heaven or whatever it was. But God was actually miraculously revealing himself and speaking to Abraham and saying, I'm going to give you a land. I'm going to give you a family. And Abraham has the audacity to say, how do I know? It's just like you and me. And God says, I'll show you. God says, get some animals, cut them in half. And then suddenly God appears as a smoking pot or a blazing torch and he passes through the pieces. And as he passes between the pieces of the animal, he said, I will give you this nation and I will give you this land and I will make your family into a great nation. And Abraham is shaken to the roots. Why? You know why? Because what God is doing, in those days you didn't sign a covenant, a contract, you cut a covenant or a contract. What does that mean? Every time a covenant is made, you'll go through the Old Testament, every time a covenant is made, whether it's done by circumcision, whether it's done like this, there's always a shedding of blood. Because the way in the Near East, this isn't just biblical, this is the way it was in all the Near Eastern peoples. The way you made a covenant was you cut blood, you cut an animal, you shed blood and then you walked around it or through it and said, if I don't do what I have just promised, may I be cut off like this. That was the way you did it. You did it publicly. Now, why was he staggered? Because God was saying, Abraham, may I be cut off if this doesn't, if I don't follow through. Abraham is amazed, Abraham is staggered, but even Abraham has no idea what God is going to have to do to make good that claim. I've had people. problem with trusting God is not that I don't think he's trustworthy. My biggest problem, and I'm not saying this is true of all of you, but some of you can identify with this, my biggest problem with trusting God is that I'm not trustworthy. One person once said it to me this way, you keep saying God's covenant God, that he promises us this thing by covenant. That doesn't help me a bit, because a covenant's always a two-way thing. And whenever a man makes a covenant with another man in the Bible, whenever you see this happening, you always say, I will do this if you do this. And just because God has sworn to bless me and sworn to be there for me forever and sworn to save me and to love me, that doesn't help me a bit because I'm not keeping up my side. So the real problem is, every Sunday, this person said, I wonder, having failed him so often this week, having broken my word so often this week, having failed my own standards, let alone God's standards this week, how do I know he's still there for me? How can he assure me of the unchangeable purpose of his oath? When God went through the pieces and said, may I be cut off if I don't give you all this blessing? Abraham was not at all able to realize what it was going to cost God in order to keep his promise. Isaiah 58 verse 3 says about the Messiah, he was cut off from the land of the living. And for the transgression of my people, he was stricken. What God had to do is this. You want to know how God can promise that he will give you those blessings? He says, may I be cut off if I don't give these blessings? And I will even send my son to be cut off in your place. All covenant breakers have to be cut off. That is always the punishment for covenant breaking. And so I'm going to even pay that. I will be cut off. That I might say to you. I will give you this land. I will give you a family. I will be there for you. I will bless you. Do you understand why Abraham realized at that moment that this was a God who we trusted? And do you see the logic before we finish up with a couple practical ideas here? Do you see the logic? Somebody says, well, you still haven't proven to me that it's possible. Oh, really? The logic of Hebrews says, because he could not swear by anyone greater than himself. He swore by himself. Do you see the logic? Here's what he's saying to Abraham. Can you hear it? Abraham, you want to know how you know. Abraham, how do you know anything? You want to know how I can know that I can trust you, God? How can you know anything, Abraham? You can't know anything without trusting something in order to know it. If you think you know something, it means you're trusting your mind. You're trusting your eyes. You're trusting your logic, maybe. You're trusting your friends' opinions. You're trusting popular opinion. You're trusting the experts. You're trusting the Gallup poll. There's no way to know anything without trusting something else in order to know it. There's no way to know anything without actually trusting some authority. You can't doubt everything at once, because in order to doubt something, you have to doubt it from a position of faith in something. And he says, Abraham, look at all the other things you trust. Look at all the other authorities that you could possibly swear by. Look at them all. I am far, far more reliable than any of them. Abraham, what alternative have you got? Your life is not really in your hands anyway. Your life is not in your hands. Abraham, either I am your foundation and everything is secure no matter how crazy the circumstances of your life appear to be, or I am not your foundation and everything is insecure no matter how orderly the circumstances of your life seem to be for the present. Either I'm in charge of the universe, and if you trust me, everything will be all right, or else I'm not in charge of the universe, in which case nothing can be trusted. Life's a crapshoot then. The universe is an accident. And if you really can't trust anything, you can't trust your conclusion that you can't trust anything, because you'd be trusting your mind. And what makes you think that your mind, Abraham, aren't you 100 years old by now? Don't you realize how often your mind hasn't worked right? How dare you trust anything more than me? How can you know anything? There is nothing higher than me. Trust me, Abraham. Come to me, Abraham. What's your alternative? And Abraham. Welcome to the chapter 2. Abraham . . . . . . . . . . . and Abraham You know, anything. There is nothing higher than me. Trust me, Abraham. Come to me, Abraham. What's your alternative? And Abraham looked at what he was promising and said, Of course I will. And he gave glory to God, and he was persuaded that God could do what he said. Now, finally, you have to trust God. It's necessary. You can trust God. It's possible. He's trustworthy. And if he's not trustworthy, you've got nothing to put in its place. No way can anything else be more trustworthy than the God who would appear and do this. Now, lastly, how can you really trust him? And all I'm going to do is I'm going to throw out some very practical things that have helped me, especially as I've thought about this text and thought about these things over the years. First of all, a lot of people are constantly saying, I'd like to trust God, but I can't. How do I do it? Number one, Abraham did not trust God through gimmicks. He just looked at God. We're about to proceed to receive the Lord's Supper. To proceed to receive the Lord's Supper. When you see the broken and poured-out elements, you should be doing exactly what Abraham did. Look at it. Abraham became faithful because of the faithfulness of God revealed. This is one of the ways in which that can happen. You have to look at it. You have to say, I am never going to become a trusting person instead of a scaredy cat which I am now. I'm never going to become a stable person instead of the undulating up-and-down person that I am now. I'm never going to become a faithful person. I'm never going to be a person that follows through. That's what it means to be faithful unless I look at God who is faithful. My faithfulness comes from Him. My faithfulness is a response to Him. I'm going to look. I'm going to contemplate. I'm going to sing about it. You're going to get more faithful if you sing the hymns and if you take the bread in the cup, if you pray the prayers from your heart when you get out of here, you're going to be participating in what Abraham participated in. Look at God, first thing. Secondly, if you want to trust God, make sure you realize that the promises of God almost always go deeper than your expectations. One of the reasons God's promises are difficult to see how He's fulfilling them is because they actually promise more than what you expect, not less. You take a look at a promise like this in Psalms. Trust in the Lord with all your heart and, you know, rest in Him and follow Him and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart. You know that? Trust in the Lord. You know, in all your ways acknowledge Him and so forth. He will give thee the desires of thine heart. Well, what's your first response to that? You say, great! Desires of my heart. A great career. Somebody who loves me forever. You know, where are they? You don't realize that those are means to an end. The real desires of your heart are for significance, for acceptance, for closure, for impact on the world, for glory. And the great career that you envision and the person who loves you forever that you envision at the age at which you envision meeting that person and so on are only the means that you think will satisfy the desires of your heart that you know. God is a God. He says, I will give thee the desires of thine heart but you may not know really what will satisfy those desires as well as I do. Trust me. You know, when you get a little kid, never forget the C.S. Lewis illustration. Lewis says, if you have a child who's never been to the beach who's sitting there playing in the mud puddle, there's the mud and there's the little, there's the mud and there's the water and he's playing with his his cars and trucks and all that and you sit around and you come up to them and you say, we're going to the beach, we're going to the beach and he's never seen the beach and he says, I can't go to the beach, I'm having too much fun here. You sit down, what can you say to a child like that? All you can say is, you've got to trust me. The fun that you're trying to find in this mud puddle is not present in this mud puddle to the degree it is present where I'm taking you. You've got to trust me. What you really want here, I'm going to give you somewhere else. Can you trust in a God who knows your heart better than you? One more thing. If you're going to trust God, you have to look at him. If you're going to trust God, you have to realize he knows your desires of your heart better than you. And thirdly, if you're going to trust God, you've got to obey him unconditionally. You have to obey him tomorrow even though you think that it's going to cost you. Realize disobedience is always distrust. What you're really saying is I'm afraid that what I'm going to lose through obedience is going to be greater than anything you're going to put back. be your own trust, you're going to have to be your own reward. If you want to disobey, you're going to have to say, Lord, I don't believe that you can reward me as well as I can reward myself. It would feel so good to pay that person back. It would feel so good to do this or that. And God says, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of anybody's imagination what I will give those who trust me. Look. Look. Look at him. He's done. Look at him cut. Look at him cut off. And it'll make you a great heart. Let's pray. Father, as we come to the table, show us what you showed Abraham. Make us what you made Abraham. For your son's sake and for your name's sake. Amen.
