TITLE: Our Love Is Here to Stay: Marriage in the New Millennium (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Marriage
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/our-love-is-here-to-stay-marriage-in-the-new-millennium-an-open-forum/

============================================================

When I have an evening in which the art has addressed a subject, I always, being not so much an artist but a talker, I like to talk about it. And you notice, I personally think that jazz and the blues probably does a more realistic, better take on love and marriage than the other pop forms. So for example, let me give you a couple of popular songs, their take on love and marriage. There's, here's Masquerade, you know, which says, you used to love me and now the love is over and that's a realistic. And then you have Petula Clark, you know, which my love is brighter than the brightest star that shines every night above and there is nothing in the world that will ever change my love. That's saccharin, it's sugary, it's moving, it made her a lot of money. Masquerade is wrestling with the ambiguities of love and marriage. It's, for example, Save Your Love For Me, interesting. Here's a guy, it was written by Buddy Johnson, it's hard to know quite what the authors, you know, the lyricists were thinking, but it seems like here you have a guy who's committed to the idea that exclusive love, being tied down, you know, marriage exclusivity is unrealistic. So he's committed to a life in which, you know, you've got to be able to do what you want when you want to do. He's fallen in love with somebody and he keeps saying, I know it's a fool, I know it's ridiculous for me to ask you this. He says, please save your love for me. You may have fun in a crowd, but for crying out loud, darling, please save your love for me. He says there's a collision going on between what he feels inside and what he thinks the realism of the way in which he can live his life. But not for me, you know, it talks about the fact that generally all the movies say that the plot can't have a happy ending unless there's a marriage knot, but it hasn't happened for him or for her. Jazz is more realistic about the ambiguities of marriage. You can't get rid of marriage. Whenever you say marriage is how it keeps coming back, you can't sort of be idealistic about marriage when you think this is it, this is going to solve everything if you just find that one true love. We're at a time right now in which marriage is actually being kind of evaluated a lot. The occasion for it is actually the controversy about gay marriage. I don't want to be asked questions about the merits or demerits of that because I didn't prepare for that. And I don't think I'm, why would I, I'm not an expert on that. But what has occurred to me over the last eight, nine months is when, because of that issue, people are constantly saying, well, what's marriage about? And where is marriage going? And I'd like to, I would like to suggest the ambivalence of jazz actually tells us a lot about where we are right now with marriage and the future of marriage. And in order to get ready for even thinking about the future of marriage, what will marriage in the millennium be? Where is marriage going in our society? I didn't know what to do. I'm a pastor, you know. What do I know? So what I did was I sat down and, believe it or not, read two articles on the history of marriage law and Western civilization. Believe it or not, it was illuminating, very illuminating to me, and I think will be illuminating to you. That's why I'm going to just give you a kind of overview of it. There have been, the laws of our society aren't done in a vacuum. They always draw on some moral tradition. No one's neutral. As soon as you decide something is bad or something is wrong or this is good for people, that's bad for people, that's not science. Science can tell you what is. Science can't tell you what ought to be. You know, that's a famous, the philosopher David Hume was very famous. He argued you can't turn an is into an ought. Just because science says this is how people are, this is normal, that doesn't mean that's good. There's no way, scientifically, to determine ought. And therefore, as soon as you say people ought to be like this or we ought to be like that, you're actually drawing on moral commitments, faith commitments, faith assumptions. You can't help it. There have been three moral traditions that have come to bear on our marriage law. There have been three stages in Western history in which one of those moral traditions has had sort of ascendancy, but we actually, what we feel about marriage, what we do about marriage in our society is actually the, in some ways, the conflation of all three. Let me tell you what they are. The Catholic tradition, which had really dominated Western marriage law from about 1300 to 1600 AD, saw, first of all and primarily, marriage was a sacrament. That is, they said the primary thing about marriage is marriage is a... You can see the applicant on Tuesday partlie. It is not later Saturday, but it is not happening. saw, first of all and primarily, marriage was a sacrament. That is, they said the primary thing about marriage is marriage is a transaction between the couple and God. And because the idea that marriage is a sacrament is something still with us, it's very, very much a part of Western society. The idea that of all the relationships, there's something sacred, something special about this, is still with us, and actually, it's good. It's a very good influence in our society. Under the influence of Catholicism and Western law, a couple of things were the case. First of all, the Catholic Church did not believe the state should have anything to do with marriage at all. It was the Church's job. It was the Church's job, in a sense, to dispense grace to the people who were getting married. So it was the Church's job to say who could be married, who couldn't be married, and so forth. Another thing, of course, as you know, in the Catholic understanding of marriage, was that once you're married in the eyes of God, you're married. And so Catholicism essentially didn't believe in divorce, but they believed in annulment, which is to declare certain marriages illegitimate from the start. And so the Catholic Church put its layer, you might say, into Western society. Now, along comes Protestantism, which actually, Protestantism had its influence on Western jurisprudence from about 1600 to about 1900. And some of you, especially those of you who are Protestants, might find this interesting. Protestantism did not believe that the main transaction in a marriage was between God and the individuals, God and the couple. It actually, Protestants have never believed marriage was a sacrament. Now, we can get back to that if you want to question me. I'm a Protestant minister, and I think that's partly wrong, but I'm basically there as a Protestant. And basically, Protestants believed that when you got married, you were actually making an agreement with society, that marriage was an interlocking commitment of the couple to society. And therefore, Protestants believed that the state should do marriages and should authorize and actually subsidize, like we do today, give benefits to marriage. Why? Now, the question would be, why should the state, according to Protestantism, why should the state subsidize one particular relationship? Why should there be benefits? Why should there be special property rights? In other words, why should the state authorize, legalize, or support one relationship? There's all kinds of relationships, you know. There's all sorts of other relationships. Why that one? And the answer of the Protestants was, because marriage isn't really a right. It's a responsibility. Marriage can do something for the state that the state can't do for itself. And what that is, is raise children. Protestants didn't say it's the only reason you get married. You know, I was married happily before I had children. I have married happily as they leave, you know, for various reasons. My marriage is not all about children. But, why should the state do marriages, subsidize marriages, be involved with marriages? And the answer is, because all of us need to have happy, healthy children nurtured and raised. And common sense, moral tradition, and today, empirical evidence, we'll get back to this in a second, says that children are not raised very well in warehouses. They're not raised very well in institutions. They're raised much better in a highly individualized, specialized, nurturing environment called a family. And therefore, if stable relationships, long-term relationships, are the best place for children to be raised, then the state has a vested interest in it. And the state wants to do it well, wants to have these marriages stay together, because if it doesn't, the problems of kids are going to be the problems of all of us. So, the Protestantism, if you think about it, if you've ever been to a Protestant Christian service, it's interlocking. The parents are giving their consent. The civil magistrate has given its consent. The church and God has given its consent. So, you have, basically, it's really not a covenant just between the couple. It's an interlocking relationship of the couple with the society, which is holding the couple responsible to, you know, stay together, because it's the basic building block of society. Now, from 1900 till the present, there's a third moral tradition that has reared up and become more dominant now than the Protestant tradition. That's called the Enlightenment tradition. Now, the Enlightenment was a, most of you, you know, think of the Enlightenment as a kind of philosophical movement. It was, but you must consider it's a moral tradition. If you today believe that God, if God exists, should be kept out of public affairs, that God doesn't do miracles, God doesn't come in and do, you know, take a part in the daily affairs of men and women, but that God needs to be kind of kept out of the public life, that's not a scientific postulate. That's a faith assumption. It's a moral tradition. It's a theological belief. What? not. I mean, you can't prove it. You're taking it by faith. And the Enlightenment moral tradition came along and said that it's the individual right, individuals and their rights, is the main way to decide what is good and bad in society. Protestantism looked more, and Catholicism also looked at the stability of the family and society, whereas the Enlightenment came along and said, no, the rights of the individual. And the Enlightenment moral tradition said that marriage is between the two parties, period. No one else has any say. Two consenting adults that come together, the covenant's just between the two people, not between the people and to perform some sort of social function. You get married if it meets your individual needs, period. You don't get married in order to provide social function. You don't get married in order to be faithful to God. You get married if it satisfies you. Now, under the Enlightenment, here's what's interesting. When the Protestants came in and they became dominant, divorce law happened. Before the Protestants came up, there was no divorce law. But Protestants, since they believed that the state married you, they didn't believe it was a sacrament so that once you're married in the eyes of God, it's eternal. Protestants believed you could get divorced. But they made it very hard. At least they believed in it. And they believed you could get divorced under three circumstances, adultery, desertion, or abuse, you know, cruelty. When you get to the Enlightenment, however, the Enlightenment began to say, no, the covenant's just between the couple. So they began to even change things further. So, for example, the idea of parental consent, which up until the 1920s and 1930s was required to get married, if your parents were alive, believe it or not. Because, you see, Protestantism believed that your marriage was part of an interlocking. You were actually, when you got married, you were performing a social function for society. You weren't getting married just for yourself. And so, but under the Enlightenment influence, you get rid of parental consent, get rid of alimony, because that means you have, you know, abiding. Alimony is really a holdover from the idea that once you're married, you're married. You get rid of, you have prenuptial and intonuptial agreements, which means the couple has the right to actually determine the level of duties within marriage. The couple has complete control as to what they want the marriage to be. And so, and you have divorce laws that make it, you know, getting, make it easier than it used to be in order to get a divorce. Now, gay marriage, again, I don't want to talk about gay marriage per se. You have to realize that gay marriage is not a new idea. It's part of, it's one more step in the Enlightenment tradition. You know, if you notice, when people object to gay marriage, they say the purpose of marriage is to raise children, and you need to have a role model of female and male. That's, that only figures. Well, the proponents of gay marriage come along and say marriage is a right, and we should have the right to marry. The Protestant tradition says it's not a right. It's a responsibility to perform a social function. Can you perform the social function as well as a heterosexual couple? The gay marriage proponents go along and say that shouldn't be an issue. That has nothing to do with it. We should have the rights and benefits that heterosexual couples have. As soon as you call marriage a right, you're in the Enlightenment tradition, see? And you're just pushing it a step further. And you're moving away from the Protestant tradition that said, or the Catholic tradition that said, when you get married, you're entering into a covenant with others besides the two of you. Notice, you know, this is a lecture, and I'm not trying to say these are bad and these are good. I'm just trying to show you what's happening. Because when you hear people say, gay marriage will redefine marriage, or when you hear people say, we just want the right to marry, people are talking out of a tradition, and the traditions are vying for power. And one tradition is going to get more power after this is all done. But I don't think that's really ultimately what I want to leave you with. I want to leave you with the fact that we've come to a crossroads. John Witt, who wrote the articles on, he teaches law at Emory University, John Witt Jr., and he wrote the articles on marital law that I read to get ready for tonight, has a wonderful little conclusion as to where we are today. If you ask the question, what's the future of marriage? What will marriage be in the new millennium? Will it continue to go down the enlightenment path, so more and more it will get easier and easier to get in and get out? Less and less, fewer and fewer people will be married. It will sort of lose the clout it used to have. It won't be as binding. Is that the direction we're going in, or will there be a, you know, here's what he says. Very interesting. He says, We cannot wax nostalgic about a prior goal and age of marriage and the family, nor wax myopic about... All right. autonomy. We cannot be, on the one hand, blind to the patriarchy, paternalism, and plain prudishness of the past. Nor can we be blind to the massive social, psychological, and spiritual costs of the modern sexual revolution. Now, here's what he's saying. He says, on the one hand, if you are a person who feels like we've become too individualistic, the emphasis is too much on the Enlightenment idea of the individuals more important than the family and the collective and the society. The problem is, if you go back to the way marriage was done in the past, in the name of keeping the family together, the laws definitely, definitely kept both women and children in abusive relationships. The laws absolutely, in order to keep people together, favored the husband and the father. And there was a great deal, he says, patriarchy, paternalism, there was a lot of oppression, there was a lot of violence. The Enlightenment rightly unraveled that to give people the freedom. But on the other hand, notice what he says, we can't be myopic. About what's happened as a result. There is a new study out, and it's going to have huge ramifications, though you've probably never heard of it. But it'll take its, it'll have its effect in academia. It's called, the book is called Hardwired to Connect. The group that put it out is a board, or you might say a panel called the Children at Risk. It's the most bipartisan across the board. It's not a Democratic or Republican front organization, which most of these are. It's people from Harvard and Duke, and it was sponsored by Dartmouth Medical School. It's all kinds of psychiatrists and doctors and sociologists. It's the best. And they come up with some remarkable, stuff you've probably heard for 10 years, but kind of empirical evidence. For a quick example, in the last 40 years, the teenage suicide rate has gone up, as some of you probably know, to 450%. Kids kill themselves at four to five times the rate they did when I was born, teenagers, in 1950. Emil Durkheim always said that the greatest, probably the greatest barometer of the health of the social fabric of a culture is its suicide rate. People commit suicide if they don't feel they belong, if they're not sure what their meaning in life is, if they don't know what their purpose is. That's why. Now, why would that be happening? The second thing he discovered, and this is kind of proven across, is that if children, there's two things. If a child is raised with its intact family, in other words, with the same father and mother, it is two to three times less likely to have suicide attempts, drug addiction, problems with the law, two to three times. If on top of that, believe it or not, you have a kid who goes weekly to some religious church or synagogue or mosque, some religious moral community. If you have an intact family going to a moral community, the statistics are shocking. The statistics of things like the drug addiction and social problems and emotional problems and suicide rates, the kids who are in moral communities and who are in intact families have about a five to ten times better chance of avoiding those things. And the rate of those things, I mean, the children at risk said at least 20% of all adolescents have got some kind of serious emotional problem, whereas 40 years ago it was something like 7% from what they can tell. Now, what is John Wood saying? He's saying in spite of the fact that there was oppression under the old regime, probably the facts are going to push us to do something to make it both harder to get married and harder to get unmarried. Because why? The social costs are for all of us. In other words, kids are just simply, how do you say it, we're running up against the reality that the Protestants had something right when they said marriage is basically a social function and basically it's all of our concern because we're all picking up the social costs of people in prison and that sort of thing, of marriages that are poorly run. It's not your business if your marriage is poorly run. It's all of our business, which is something that up until this particular year, for the last ten years, most Americans would say that's just not true. My marriage is my business. But increasingly, Wood says, the facts, the empirical evidence is going to show we all have an interest in seeing marriages prosper and stay together and to do the things necessary to kind of encourage that, which means make it harder to get married and make it harder to get out. But do it in a way that doesn't privilege the male. So he's saying, he thinks that the future of marriage is not that it's going to go away, it can't go away because kids want to go away. going back. And that's why he says we mustn't glorify the past, but we mustn't in any way be myopic about the realities of the present. We're going to have to make some changes. In other words, the pendulum's going to have to swing back, and it probably will. Now, I would say the secret to this, and here's my conclusion, then we can take some questions. I mean, I'm a pastor, which means I'm kind of a counselor, so I know how hard marriage is. That's one of the reasons I like the blues. It's right, but you just can't say, let's just dropkick it. It just can't be done. We can't. We'll have to come back to it. There is no other way to do many of the things that we need to do in having a decent social fabric. The Bible, Christianity, has always said the key is the ability to see a promise as a freeing thing and not just as a binding thing. One of the things I like about jazz is the freedom of it. As we were talking to the guys before, I said, you know, if you're playing Mozart, there's a finite number of notes, and you have to play every one of them, so the music controls you. You sit down, you have to do it. But I said, you know, what I want to know is, because I said, how long is the music? And John said, oh, 45 minutes. I said, well, how would you know? Your thesis is jazz. Theoretically, it could go on forever. You know, the notes aren't there. You just, you know, look it. Can you see these things? What are these diagonal lines? Does that just mean you just do things? See, now here's notes. These are notes they have to play, because it says so. But then there's just lines. Now, this is a lot more like marriage. Because here's what I asked him. I said, well, you know, you'd go on and on and on. He says, oh, no. He says, we wouldn't let each other do that. If the saxophone starts going on too long, you know, next thing you know, the drummer starts to say, it's time to end. There's ways that they do that. As a community, the community actually controls it. You notice them watching each other and saying, it's time to move on, time to move on. That's a little bit more like a marriage. There's form and there's freedom. A whole lot of freedom inside the marriage. But there's form. Form, there has to be form, or you'd never come back if it goes to 2 o'clock at the end of jazz. Anyway, a promise in marriage is the thing that binds you. Let me just read you three things and show you why Christianity gives you a resource. I mean, whether you're a Protestant, a Catholic, or an Enlightenment person who really isn't very religious, I think you'll find this interesting. Lewis Smeeds wrote this article about promising. He was an ethicist in a school in California. He said, When I make a promise, I bear witness that my future with you is not locked into a bionic beam by which I was stuck with a fateful combination of X's and Y's in the hand I was dealt out by my parents' genetic deck. When I make a promise, I testify that I was not routed along some unalterable itinerary by the psychic conditioning visited upon me by my slightly wacky parents. When I make a promise, I declare that my future with people who depend on me is not predetermined by the mixed-up culture of my tender years. I am not faded. I am not determined. I am not a lump of human dough whipped into shape by the contingent reinforcement and aversive conditioning of my past or present. I know as well as the next person I cannot create my life de novo. I am well aware that much of what I am and what I do is a gift or a curse for my past. But when I make a promise, to anyone, I rise above all the conditioning that limits me. No German shepherd ever promised to be there with me. No human computer ever promised to be my loyal help. Only a person can make a promise. And when he does, he is most free. In fact, it's what makes you a person because he moves on and he says, when I married my wife, I had a smidgen, I had hardly a smidgen of sense of what I was getting into. How could I know how much she would change over the years? How could I know how much I would change? And he says, my wife has lived with five different men since we were married and every one of them is me. The connecting link with my old self has been the memory of the name I took back on the day I married her in which I said, I am he who will be there with you. When we slough off that name, when we lose that identity, we can hardly find ourselves again. And the bonds that connect us to others will be frayed to breaking. What he's saying is, he says, you know, he'd been married for 60 years. He says, I'm so different than the man that married her. So, and what keeps me together? That is, you know, what gives me a coherent identity through all those years? Why are we together? Why is, because the one thing I said is, I don't know who I'm going to be, I don't know what's going to happen, but I promise that 50 years from now I'm going to be there for you. And he says, that's the core identity that's made him a coherent being. He says, if he didn't keep his promises, he wouldn't know who he is. to freedom promise is the way to community promise is the way to identity how do you get where do you but where do you get the power to keep your promises which is what your marriages need is what we need you know a lot of people are afraid of marriage because they're afraid of making a promise don't be afraid of making a promise but here's where you get the power to do that from the christian point of view your salvation is based on a promise god came to abraham and said i'm going to bless you and abraham says how do i know and god said cut some animals in half so abraham did and god appeared and went between the pieces now in the old testament or in ancient semitic cultures the way you took a promise made a promise was you cut an animal in half walk between the pieces and that was your way of saying if i don't do everything i'm promising to do today may i be cut into pieces and may i be you know my flesh and my bones be strewn upon the desert for the jackals to eat it's a much better way to make a promise than many of us do today we just sign a piece of paper um god goes between the pieces god makes a promise to say to abraham i'm going to bless you and your descendants i'm going to come into this world i'm going to i'm going to heal this this rotten world and it's on the basis of that promise that all our salvation depends a little later uh god appears to moses and he says i am who i am out of the burning bush and some john courtney murray uh translates that as as uh god saying i am the one who will always be there with you what i am today and saying to you today i promise to always be saying that to you if i say i love you today i will love you if i say i'll be with you today i will be with you and when he goes between the pieces he's actually saying i'm going to bless you even if it means i have to be torn to pieces like this in order to do it and when jesus goes to the cross the garden of gethsemane what does he say he says is there any way out of this let this cup pass from me you know he's clearly scared he's clearly upset he's clearly in agony but he goes anyway why because he's the god who said i will be there with you and that's why he's there and that's why he's on the cross he's keeping his promise if you know that i mean personally and existentially you know and you realize well you know the ultimate promise keeper is keeping his promise to me that is the that's the inspiration that's the motivation um and i said that's the power that helps a christian not be afraid to make promises and then keep them once you make them and we really need promise keepers i don't know talking about the movement we need promise keepers is the movement still around i don't even know now um that's my overview of the whole history of western marriage jurisprudence the three seasons of catholic protestant and enlightenment the fact is that we are the product right now in our attitudes and in our laws of all three traditions and actually probably enlightenment traditions getting a little bit too much of an edge and probably the pendulum will have to swing back partly because the empirical evidence of what happens to kids that's my thinking um hopefully that was helpful we will take some questions we got a few minutes because the reason i'm going to take questions is much of what i just said was obscure some of it was probably uh needed needed to be nuanced and you're going to help me clarify and nuance any questions want to have a question or two about what i just said or did you probably don't have to stand up the acoustics are wonderful in here being unmarried myself from a divorced family it seems as though people find generation yes are afraid to that character to maintain that what an easy question to answer it is an easy question as you know it's just like any chicken egg thing you have to break into the circle someplace so um i would say the action leads action leads to character character leads to action uh character is too inchoate it's just something that you really don't have total control over so you have to make the action you know action leads to character character leads to action you can't just say you know you know i'm working on my character it just doesn't happen that way i mean uh you know patience doesn't come by saying i'm really going to work on my patience something bad has to come into your life that you that you muster patience for and when you muster patience for it passes into you and it becomes a habitual part of your being you become to make you do the action. So the way, in one sense, it's an easy question because they're both right. It's chicken and egg. They both lead to one another. But you only have the ability to break into the circle at the point of action. And there is no doubt, and by the way, here's a disadvantage. If you're raised in a really, really happy family and marriage, you might actually be at a disadvantage because you may not realize how hard marriage is. You either may not see it. You know, your own parents certainly don't show you all that. Or it's also a possibility that your parents kind of lucked out and just happened. I mean, you know, those of you who have children, you realize one child comes along and, oh, children are easy. Then the next child comes along. And it has nothing to do with, it's just the way they're wired. So it's a possibility that if you were raised in a really great, placid marriage, you may actually be a little less prepared for marriage than you ought to be. On the other hand, if you are, though, the one advantage you've got in a situation like that is you're not scared of making the promise, which is a big problem. On the other hand, if you're raised in a, if you come up in a broken home, what they call broken homes and that sort of thing, you're actually prepared for marriage in some ways that the person who comes up in the, in the, the great, you know, intact home isn't. However, you probably, I would say the biggest problem is the fear of making the promise. I just said, at least if you're a Christian or even if you're not a Christian, if there are resources for, for learning how Christianity does give you a resource. If you say, Hey, I've had an experience of that, that Jesus, you know, has made a promise to me. And, um, uh, I think the idea would be to say, if, if, if the, if the Lord of the universe has made a promise to love me and care for me, then I don't have to be as scared of anything. I don't have to be as scared as of sickness. I don't have to be as scared as marital problems. I don't have to be as scared of anything. So the, the, the promise of Jesus has to be enough of an existential reality in your life that it helps you just become less fearful of life in general. So there's disadvantages, but they're not, they're not insurmountable. Next question. Other questions? I can't see. Yes, go ahead. Um, both Catholics and Protestants, of course, think that, um, if you can't have children, you should, and that you shouldn't, yeah, they have, they would say, you shouldn't voluntarily not have children. And by the way, hopefully, you know, nobody's going to come after you with a pitchfork if you, I mean, I, Kathy and I, uh, for example, have very strong, uh, very, very good friends that have decided, uh, who are strong Protestant Christians. In fact, one of whom happens to be a Protestant minister, Presbyterian minister. They've decided they didn't want to have children because for various reasons, even though they could. And we, you know, we sat down and said, well, you know, I mean, obviously I don't think the, I don't think the government should, there's a difference between Christian marriage and the government marriage. I mean, if you are in a Christian community, I think there's higher standards inside the Christian community. I'm sure it's the same thing for Jewish and Muslim, et cetera. You've got, you've got two things going on and I would, and inside the Protestant community, but if you are, and I'm a Protestant minister, I would say that generally speaking, you should see marriage is not just a way for two people to be fulfilled, but to build community. You're, you're building the social fabric. You're building the church by having children. You're creating a community. You're creating a community in which you're trying to practice what you, what you've gotten from God in relationships. That having more children means you have more relationships. So yeah, in general, Protestants and Catholics have said, if you can have children, you should. I don't think they would say, oh, it's a sin if you don't. It's just that you're not understanding the full theological richness of the purposes of marriage if you don't. That's all. So there we go. If you're saying, don't, don't think about the birth control deal. Protestants have never had a problem with birth control. Catholics have for very different reasons, but they both would say that one of the purposes of marriage is procreation, not the only purpose. Okay. Some other questions since I've got a couple more. It's later than the last time, so you might just be brain dead. But why not? I've been talking for three and a half hours, so I should be brain dead. Yeah. Do you have some sympathy with the view that the Catholic Union is before should be able to get it? No, but I do have a lot of sympathy with the view that marriage is a sacrament. I'm not supposed to because I'm a Presbyterian minister. But marriage, what marriage is a sacrament means is that the very institution, unlike other institutions, like just having a friend. And I believe... Thank you. they would say is that when you enter into marriage, God's grace comes into your life in a special way and in the life of the people around you, because marriage is actually not just a human institution, but it's a reflection of something in God. It's a reflection of God's way of loving us and so forth. I think he's right, and they're right, and the reason I said he was, I had a friend of mine in seminary, this is a long time ago, as you know, who wrote a paper called Marriage is a Vehicle for Redemption, which if you've ever come to a wedding that I've ever done, believe it or not, I basically preached that paper written in 1974 by Arvin Engelson, who's I think an evangelical free pastor, and he's not a Catholic, but what he said was, for example, the whole paper is based on the idea that there's nothing like marriage that shows you your sin. There's nothing like marriage that throats, that sends you to God. Now don't forget, some of you know that Christianity was the first religion to come along and say being a long-term single is a valid paradigm. When Paul said that in 1 Corinthians 6 and 7, there was no other religion on the face of the earth that says all right to be unmarried. If you were, some of you know, you know, in ancient Rome, it was illegal. If you're a woman who was widowed and you lost your husband, you had to remarry in two years or you were fined. Because pagan society had no concept of a woman having any kind of worth unless she was a baby factory. What's interesting about Christianity is Christianity said, no, you don't have to get married again, you don't have to marry at all. And no religion ever said that because they really did believe that ultimately marriage is only an image of the ultimate marriage, which is our union with Christ. So that kind of puts marriage in its place. It doesn't say, oh, you know, if you're not married, you're only half a human being and you won't be fulfilled. Having said that, marriage does link us to God in some way because of God's nature and into your life comes a new self-discovery of who you are, a new desire for God's grace, a new need for God's grace. There's nothing like marriage that means you need God's grace. And so in all those ways, marriage is a sacrament. So, you know, I mean, I'm a Presbyterian. I would say that it's, you know, when Catholics say marriage is a sacrament, that means only the church can do it. And when the church does it, you get the grace automatically. I'm not that kind of, I don't believe that because I'm a Protestant, but I do think that they're basically onto something when they say marriage is a sacrament. But I do, I absolutely think that once you're divorced, you're divorced in the eyes of God. I mean, because I'm a Protestant enough to say that marriage is basically a human institution ordained by God that is a part of a covenant with the state. So when you get divorced, you're not still married in the eyes of God. You're divorced. So you saw I'm a Protestant there. Last chance for a couple questions. If you're, if I'm short, I could probably get two in. If I'm long, I can get one in. Anybody else? Yes. Yes. Keep going. Okay, this will be the last question. Not partly because I don't like the direction the questions are going now. No, no, probably because it's getting late. Well, I mean, I think, I think almost, this isn't rocket science that anybody who's married would say, if you get married young, you're actually, and I, see, I had two churches. And my first church was in Hopewell, Virginia, where nobody went to college. My second church is here. So I would say both places are really weird, uh, in that, in that people in my first church got married way too young and people in this, in my, this church wait way too long. You know, I'm, I'm not sure where I should be going. You know, is it, would you write, would Ohio be all right? Would that be the place where everybody does it just right? Um, I just noticed that if you get married too young, um, you think you know who you are. The real problem is you really don't know who that person is at all. It's like the, Lewis Smedes problem. And, um, I don't think I, I don't think I brought it up here, but, uh, some of you know now, uh, the real problem there is when you get married real young, you think you found the right person, but you haven't because marriage is so powerful that when the person gets into marriage, including you, you change so drastically. anybody you choose to marry says, this is the one. Well, you have no idea what that person is going to be like in five years, and you're going to be very different. And that's the reason why the promise is important. And sometimes you say, this isn't the person I wanted to marry. But see, if you sit around looking at other people thinking, well, it would be so much to marry him or to her, the real problem is the same thing will happen. You know, you go, you're looking at someone who's not married to you, and therefore you think you know what that person is going to be like. As soon as they get in, you change them just by getting into marriage. And therefore, holding on to the promise, I will be there with you. That's who I am, and that's who she is. And therefore, through the changes, you just have to say, it will be a means of grace for us to stay faithful to each other. Even though right now you seem like a stranger, I'm going to have to kind of re-get married to you. You know, because my wife having children was quite different than a wife who hadn't had children. Me in one job was utterly different than me as a teacher, was utterly different than me as a church planter. And so that's the big problem. When you get, if you get married older, though, I would say the biggest problem is the selfishness. That you just come up against yourself. You're used to having life your way. It's a very frightening thing. You know, the night after you get back from your honeymoon to sort of say you're going out, and she says, where? Well, and when will you be back? And you suddenly realize, my life isn't my own at all. And so if you get married later, the sheer selfishness is it'll be a shock. A shock at how you are used to being your own boss, and now you're a couple. When you're really young, you almost like it. You know, you kind of like it. When you get married young, you're kind of malleable. You're sort of like the Pillsbury Doughboy. You know, you're sort of changing all the time. The real problem is going to be to handle the changes as they come, to stay married to the stranger. You know, as Stanley Harawas says, everybody marries the wrong person. You always marry the wrong person. And the challenge of marriage is to stay married to this, is to love and care for the stranger you find yourself married to every 10 years. So, but you know what? It's a means of grace just to say, if not you, I'll be having to do it with somebody else. And you're the one God has given me, and so I'm going to do it. And you and I are going to be honing each other. And it's really true, last thing. You know the image of the gem tumbler? You know, I usually use it when I do at a wedding. But if you put two gems into a tumbler, I actually saw somebody doing this this summer out in the Smoky Mountains. You buy a gem, and they say you want it polished or not. And what you do is they stick it into a gem tumbler. Now, if you put the gems into the tumbler, and they go around, they knock the rough edges off of each other. And when it comes out, they're beautiful through a constructive conflict. But here's the problem. If you don't put grinding compound in there, two things happen. Either the stones bounce off of each other, and therefore don't really polish each other, or else they crack each other. Now, the idea would be, in marriage, the danger is love without truth. So you basically stay away from each other, because you just don't want to deal with the problems. So you really don't hone each other. You don't turn each other into patient, loving, great people. You just stay away, because you just can't handle the conflict. Or the other is truth without love, where you just wail on each other, and you just confront each other. And that's cracking. In other words, you can either bounce off and not polish, or crack. So what's the compound in marriage? I mean, I'm sure there's plenty of people who are not Christians. Not even religious have got great marriages. But I do know the compound for a Christian would be that Jesus promised to me. He stayed with me. You know, Charles Spurgeon says, when you look at the cross, in the greatest act of love in the history of the world, Jesus just stayed. He looked down, and he saw people deserting him, betraying him, denying him. And in the greatest act of love, he stayed. He just stayed there. Now, if I have that in my life, I can handle my promises. This doesn't mean, by the way, I have to stay in a marriage through abuse and cruelty. Don't forget, I'm a Protestant. And I do believe in divorce. If the covenant is just badly, badly broken, I mean, sometimes marriages go. But in general, Jesus' death on the cross is my rubbing compound, my grinding compound. That's in there, then I won't crack her, you know, or bounce off of her. But we will hone each other. And we have. Okay, now, the artists want to thank you, because you were a particularly good audience. Several of the artists said, good energy with this group. They really reacted. You were good for them. They were good for you. You were good for me. And I'm going to say good night. Thanks. Thank you.
