TITLE: Our Cross: Path of Suffering
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 1:6-9
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Following Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/our-cross-path-of-suffering/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from 1 Peter chapter 1 verses 6 through 9 and chapter 3 verses 13 through 18. In all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you may have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials. These have come so that the proven genuineness of your faith, of greater worth than gold which perishes even though refined by fire, may result in praise, glory, and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed. Though you have not seen him, you love him. And even though you do not see him now, you believe in him and are filled with an inexpressible and glorious joy. For you are receiving the end result of your faith, the salvation of your souls. Who is going to harm you if you are eager to do good? But even if you should suffer for what is right, you are blessed. Do not fear their threats. Do not be frightened. But in your hearts, revere Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have. But do this with gentleness and respect. Keeping a clear conscience so that those who speak maliciously against your good behavior in Christ may be ashamed of their slander. For it is better, if it is God's will, to suffer for doing good than for doing evil. For Christ also suffered, once for sins, the righteousness for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. He was put to death in the body, but made alive in the spirit. The word of the Lord. Thanks be to God. So each week we're looking at how Christians can grow into Christ-likeness. And each week we're looking at something from the book of 1 or 2 Peter. We're looking at the different conditions, contexts, instruments, means, ways and means through which we grow into Christ-likeness. And the one we come to tonight is actually one that is probably the main theme of 1 Peter, at least. And that is that it's through trials and through troubles and through difficulties and through suffering is one of the main ways in which we grow into Christ-likeness. Now let's take a look and see what these two passages, one from chapter 1, one from chapter 3, there's actually more than that because the book, as I just mentioned, the book of 1 Peter is probably more about suffering than anything else. It might be the only book in the New Testament that is actually completely devoted to the subject of suffering. Job is the other one in the Old Testament. And so let's see what we learn here. We learn, I'd say, I'd like to pull out three things. One is the inevitability of suffering, the good potential of suffering, the good potential of suffering, and the disciplines you need to practice during suffering if you are going to have those good outcomes. So the inevitability, the potential, and the disciplines of suffering. First, the inevitability. Now this is, the first thing I want to press is a little obvious maybe, but important. In verse 6 it says, In all this you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while you have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trials. You have had to suffer. Now to say have had to, it's kind of an awkward English construction, but it's getting across a Greek term that simply means it's necessary. It's necessary that you suffer. So Peter is not simply saying that suffering is possible, but that actually it's inevitable. We live in a broken world. And from a number of points of view, I'll give you three real quickly. We should expect suffering and not be surprised by it. In fact, in chapter 4, verse 12 of 1 Peter, Peter actually says to his Christian readers, Don't be surprised when suffering comes upon you as if it's something strange. Don't be surprised as if it's something strange. He said you should be prepared for it, because if you're not prepared for it, you're not ready for life. And New Yorkers, by the way, in particular, think that if I just do everything just right, if I push all the buttons, if I get the right consultants, if I really have my act together, I can kind of put together this designer life. And I don't care how hard you work. I don't care what kind of manager you are. I don't even care what kind of powerful person you are. You cannot stop bereavement, physical illnesses, financial reversals, personal betrayals. Those things will happen to you, and they will cause searing pain. So, why is it an example? He was the perfect man, and yet he, without complaining, suffered terribly for some greater good. Jesus Christ suffered terribly, and he was a good man, a perfect man. He suffered terribly to bring about God's redemptive purposes. Why do you think you and I would be any different? What makes us think that we would be exempt? Americans, by the way, are particularly bad at this. Dr. Paul Brand, who was a British surgeon, very well-known surgeon, spent half of his life practicing in India and half of his life in America. And this is what he said. He says, in the United States, patients lived at a greater comfort level than any I had previously treated, but seemed far less equipped to handle suffering and far more traumatized by it. There's a man who would know. He says, Christians are considerably more traumatized by suffering. In fact, I'd go so far as to say that for a lot of Americans, two-thirds of the pain they suffer when they suffer is shock at the fact they're suffering. You know, there's the thing that's happened to you, and then there's the shock, shock, shock that why is this even happening to me? Because Americans tend to feel, I mean, Dr. Brand said, that when suffering comes upon them, they're just traumatized by what in the world's going on. We don't expect it. Don't be surprised when suffering comes upon you as if it's something strange, Peter says. Think of the nature of the world. It's broken. Think of Jesus. Think of God. Think of, be ready. It's inevitable. Point one. Point two, there is good potential in suffering, and even though there's a lot of things the Bible says about suffering, what I want to do tonight is just take the image that Peter gives us, because it's a fascinating and fruitful image to meditate on. It's in verse seven. It says, these have come, these trials have come, so that the proven genuineness of your faith, of greater worth than gold, which perishes even though refined by fire may result in praise, glory, and honor when Jesus Christ is revealed. Now, the image he's using is a furnace. Gold goes through a furnace and is refined. It's purified. And what he is proposing is that just as when gold goes through fire, it becomes something greater, so faith, our faith, when it goes through suffering, can become something wonderful as well. Now, he makes a brief point about the fact that your faith is far more valuable than gold, because even gold that's refined by fire eventually goes away with everything else in the world. Nevertheless, there's an analogy. Faith is like the gold. Suffering is like the fire. How so? Well, now, here's what little I know about goldsmithing. I don't know much, but I learned enough to figure out this illustration. You put gold through a fire, it softens it, it melts it, but the fire cannot kindle it. It doesn't kindle, it doesn't go to ashes, it doesn't destroy it. But what the fire does do is it takes the impurities in the gold and does something to them. The fire can't really touch the gold that much, but that's not the purpose of putting gold through fire. It's trying to deal with the impurities. See, when you take gold out of the ground, it's always got impurities in it, things that are not gold. And if you want pure gold, you want to get the impurities out. Now, what I understand is when you put the gold through the fire, what the fire does is it makes the impurities separate from the gold so that the goldsmith can skim them off. There's impurities in the gold and the fire affects the impurities in particular, makes them visible, raises them to the surface or whatever, and they can be skimmed off and taken out. Now, that's an extremely interesting metaphor because then the question is this, when we suffer, it does something to our faith. What does it do? How is gold like our faith? And the answer is our faith has got lots of impurities in it, lots of impurities. What do you mean impurities? Well, our faith in God, we have faith in God, we have faith in Jesus, we have faith in our salvation, we believe all these things, and yet, the way most Christians actually live is though we say we believe in God, and we do, and we say we believe in Jesus, and we do, the things that we really trust, our career, our romantic relationship, you know, there these are good things, but we over-invest our heart in them, and they become the real things we trust. And that's where most of our problems come from. Let me give you an example. Some years ago, I heard, and I'll keep these dates straight, some years ago I heard a man give a testimony of his conversion in front of a conference, a Christian conference. He was speaking in the year 2009, and he was talking about a conversion experience that had happened to him four years before, I guess, around 2005. Here's what he said. This man had been a very successful fund manager, so he was pretty wealthy. He had been very successful in investing. And in 2005, evidently, he'd had a really bad year, and he was really rattled by it, really rattled by it. And he was talking to some Christian friends who were trying to talk to him about Christ. He says, oh, I don't have any faith. I wish I had faith. That'd be nice. You guys have faith. I'm not that kind of person. I have no faith. And they said, really? You don't have any faith? And something like this, if I remember, this is what they said. They said, you know, you do have faith. What is your meaning in life? What do you look to that enables you to feel safe in the world? What is the source of your self-esteem and your self-worth and your self-image? It's your money, and it's your success. That's what you put your faith in. You have enormous faith. It's your meaning in life. It's your hope. It's your self-worth. You've invested your heart in these things. And the problem is you're having a bad year, and that's the reason why you feel so fragile. You know why you're feeling so fragile? Because your faith is in something that's fragile. Because everything in this world is fragile. And it was very interesting to him, and it was actually quite eye-opening to him, and he thought about it, and evidently there was a process. He looked at Christianity. He thought about it, and he became a Christian. And he gave his testimony four years later in front of this group of people, many of whom were also, by the way, people in the investment community. And this is 2009. Some of you remember how bad that year was. 2008, 2009. And this is what he said. I was there. I wrote this down. Maybe not verbatim, but pretty close because it was so striking. He said, I'm giving you this testimony because four years later I'm in a field that we used to call wealth management, he said. I guess nowadays all we can call it is sort of wealth survival. And then this is what he said. I have lost an enormous amount of money this year. And here's what I want you to know. Now, I've never been happier in my life. If the Great Recession had happened four years ago when my faith was in something else, I know where the vodka bottle is, and I would have driven myself right into the ground. You could have heard a pin drop in that room. Hear that? He says, I have lost an enormous amount of money this year. And here's what I want you to know. I've never been happier in my life. Now, what happened? He went through a relatively mild fire. He had a bad year in 2005. And what it did was it showed him what he really believed in. The fire brought out what he really believed in. And he realized, wait, if that's what I'm really resting, I'm in trouble. And so later on in 2009, a vastly more terrible recession happened. And what happened? His faith resulted in praise, glory, and honor when Jesus Christ was revealed. In other words, what happened was, it's like this. You may think you believe in God. But when suffering comes, it separates out the impurities in your faith. And you see, it's really my reputation. It's really my success. It's my wealth. It's this person in my life. It's my approval. It's power, approval, comfort, control, whatever. These are the things I'm really believing in. And that's the reason why I'm up and down, up and down, why I'm so anxious, why I'm so angry. And so when suffering comes, it brings out the impurities in your faith. It shows you how little you really believe in God. His love is not tangible. His power is not tangible to you. If it really was, if your faith was what it should be, you could handle life. But you're not. And so when the suffering comes, when you're in the fire, it brings out those impurities. And there's only two things you can do at that point. One is you can say, God, you're not enough. I cannot live without these things. I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say, God, I've got to say And there's only two things you can do at that point. One is you can say, God, you're not enough. I cannot live without these things. I've got to have my wealth, I've got to have my health, I've got to have my beauty, I've got to have my, you know, popularity, I've got to have these things. I have to. You're not enough. That's one thing you could say. Or you could say, like what Jacob said when he was wrestling with God in Genesis 32. Do you remember that? He's holding on to God and he says, I will not let you go till you bless me. And what that means, I think, is that in suffering, you get a hold of God. And you say, I want you to be my real wealth so I don't go up and down all the time over financial wealth. I want you to be my real beauty. I want you to be my real love. I really want to know you in a way I haven't known you before. Because then I can handle life. But right now I'm so fragile. In other words, the impurities come to the surface and you skim them off and you take hold of God. And that's why suffering, like a furnace, has tremendous potential to turn you into pure gold. See it? Now, how can that actually happen? See, the question comes up then. Okay, so you're saying that when suffering comes, I need to take hold of God. It can really refine me. Oh, yeah. In fact, somebody once said this. It said, if you handle suffering properly, here's four things that happens. Because suffering humbles you and gives you far more self-knowledge than you had before. You'll know yourself in a way that non-sufferers have not. Secondly, it will teach you not to idolize or over-invest your heart in many things. You'll be a lot freer. You'll be a lot happier. You'll have a lot more poise because you're not resting your whole life on all these things that have to go right. Three, it greatly enhances your intimacy with dependence on and experience of God's love and presence. And fourth, it just makes you far more wise, compassionate, and generally more useful in the lives of others, especially those who suffer. You've been there. You can help others. That's turning you to gold. Now, how does that happen? When you're in the fire, what do you have to do? What do you mean take hold of God? Well, there's three things I'd like you to see that the text talks about. There's probably more, but I'm sticking with the text I've got, 1 Peter 1 and 3. Here are three things. The first thing is, these are the disciplines now, the disciplines that you have to practice. When difficulty and suffering comes, if you are going to have the suffering turn you into something good instead of just, you know, break your heart. First of all, number one, don't be stoic, cry. Don't be stoic, cry. You say, where do you get that? Well, right at the top. Verse 6. David Martin Lloyd-Jones, the great British preacher, preached a sermon on this many years ago. This very verse that was in a book of his sermons that had a big impact on me in my youth. And it's verse 6. It's an intriguing verse. It says, in all this you greatly rejoice. Now, he's talking about verses 1 to 5. And verses 1 to 5 is talking about all the things, basically the stuff we have as Christians. We're born again to a living hope. We have the hope of the resurrection to come and all that. But, so he says, you greatly rejoice in your Christian benefits and things. But then it says, now, for a little while, you have had to suffer grief in all kinds of trial. Now, first of all, look at this. Suffer grief in all kinds of trials. The trials are the circumstances. Bad things are happening to you. Relational betrayals, financial reversals, illnesses, bereavement. Bad things are happening to you. But it's not just that bad things happen to Christians. You suffer grief in those bad things. And the word suffering grief means you hurt. It's a word that means agonizing pain. Agonizing pain. So Christians, even though they're rejoicing in what they have in Christ, at the same time, notice it's two present tenses. In these you greatly rejoice. That's the present tense. And yet you're in searing pain. That's the present tense. It doesn't say, well, since you're rejoicing, you're really not that unhappy because you're rejoicing in Jesus. Nor does it say, because you're in pain, you're not rejoicing in Jesus. They're happening together. Now, let me just take a minute or two to try to drive this home. An awful lot of Christians think what it means to rejoice in the Lord during suffering. They basically think of that as a form of stoicism. Stoicism, the Greek. Stoicism. Stoics, lots and lots of shame and honor cultures have the same view, that if you're a strong person and suffering happens, you just don't let it get to you. You keep a stiff upper lip. You don't let it get to you. You don't let it make you weep and break down. That's not the Bible. That's not Christianity. That's not healthy either, by the way. That's not what you see here. What it's saying is that even though you're rejoicing, you're in pain. I've had people say, I've said, well, how are you doing? You know, I'm a pastor, and I guess they think they're supposed to give me a Christian answer. They say, well, I'm just rejoicing in Christ, you know, and I'm not letting it get to me. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Read the book of Job. Just read the book of Job. Bad things happen to him. I mean, his children die, and all of his finances are wiped out. And we're told he tore his robes, and he cried out, and he fell on the ground. And all through the book of Job, he's constantly complaining. He's cursing the day that he was born. He curses the day of his birth. And he's constantly challenging God. He says, God, if you just appeared before me, I have some questions for you. And at the end of the book of Job, you know, you and I reading it would say, boy, he kind of lost it in there a few times. I mean, he's constantly pouring his heart out, saying some of the most awful things. I mean, just searing pain. And at the end of the book, God vindicates Job and says, Job, you were faithful to me. And we go, what? That's because we're more, we tend to think that Christianity is stoicism. So here's the point. Job never walked away from God. All those horrible things that he said, all that searing expressions of pain, he was doing it to God. He was pouring his life out to God. And in the end, God says, you were faithful to me. Why? He doesn't expect you to be doing stiff upper lip. It's not Christian. It's not right. The Stoics say, don't let it get to you. But the Bible, read the book of Job. Read the book of Jeremiah. Read the Psalms. And listen to Jesus Christ crying out from the cross. Stoicism is one thing. But in the Bible, the cries of the sufferers resound through the pages of the Bible. Even from the cross itself. And here's the first thing. When I've had people say, well, I hear Christians talk about how when you go through suffering, it's like a refining fire and it can strengthen your faith. But all I know is I'm just in pain. Those two things happen together. That's what the fire is, the pain. Huh? It's not either or. When people say to me, I'm just not letting it get to me. Well, you're not even letting yourself go through the fire, I guess. And that's like self-hypnosis. That's not courage. So first principle. When you hurt, hurt. Don't be a stoic. Cry. Secondly, though. The second principle is. Keep a clear conscience. See, go down to chapter 3, verse 16. Keeping a clear conscience so that those who speak maliciously against your good behavior in Christ may be ashamed of their slander. Now, chapter 3 is talking about suffering. But it's now admittedly, it's talking about a particular kind of suffering. Chapter 3 is talking about what happens when you're persecuted for your faith. Maybe you're being thrown in jail. Maybe your goods are taken away from you. It's a very serious kind of suffering, but it's a specific kind. And we could spend time. It's too late now. But we could spend time in a sermon talking about that particular kind of suffering. But I'm not going to do that here tonight. I would like to just draw out the principles for all kinds of suffering. And this principle. Keep a clear conscience in the midst of suffering. So you don't give the opponents ammunition. It's extremely important. See, in this situation, it's saying, let's say you're being wronged. You're being betrayed. You're being attacked. Don't become cruel. Don't become violent. Don't lie. Don't cheat. Don't do bad things. Keep your conscience clear. That means continue to live the Christian life. Obey God. So, but it works across the spectrum. Because when you suffer, this is one of the things that can destroy you in suffering. This is what you have to avoid. Self-pity. Because self-pity enables you to do bad things just to console yourself. And you feel like you deserve it. I remember some years ago talking to a man who had had a great financial reversal. And he was just in such pain. And so he had an affair. He slept with a woman who wasn't his wife. And the reason he did that, even though he had always been a very moral, upright type person, I've been through, I deserve this. See, that's self-pity. I deserve this. And of course, then he not only had his career fall apart, but he had his marriage fall apart. So that didn't make things any better, now did it? No. And see, what this means is, see, these two things don't seem to go together. On the one hand, don't keep a stiff upper lip. Yell and scream and bite the rug, and cry out, and pour out your heart. See? Don't be a stoic, cry. But on the other hand, keep your conscience clear and obey. This is, for example, what Job did. It's the reason, these two things together is what we just don't know how to, we either fall apart and just do whatever we can do to medicate and numb ourselves and console ourselves, or else we keep a stiff upper lip and we stay disciplined. No, no, they go together. Job screamed and cried out in agony. At the same time, he never walked away from God. He continued to pray. See, when I say, keep your conscience clear, I don't just mean don't have an affair, of course, don't have an affair, but just pray every day and read the Bible every day and go to church. A lot of people, because they just feel horrible, everything's so bad, they just stop doing the things you're supposed to do as a Christian. Don't do that. Don't be a stoic, cry. On the other hand, keep your conscience clear and obey God. And thirdly, look at Jesus Christ himself. Because see, down here in verse 18, for Christ also suffered. There it is. Christ also suffered. Once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. We've been talking about furnaces. Let me tell you another story about a furnace you probably may know of. That in the book of Daniel, chapter 3, it tells us about three Jewish young men, exiles, who were in Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. And they had been told that there was, a law was that everyone had to bow down to an idol. They refused to do it. The king of Babylon was furious with them. And so he said to his soldiers, take them and bind them, you know, shackle them and bind them, and throw them into a fiery furnace. And the fiery furnace was heated so hot that when the soldiers threw them into the fiery furnace, the soldiers perished. That the heat was so great that the soldiers died. And they threw them in. So King Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, goes up to this high place to look down and to see that his prisoners, he expected to see them writhing in pain and wreathed in flame. And instead, he can't believe what he sees. And he turns to people next to him and says, didn't we throw three prisoners bound into the furnace? And they said, yes, oh, king. He says, I see four men walking around unbound and unharmed in the fire. And the fourth one looks like a son of the gods. And now in the Old Testament, there's this figure called the angel of the Lord, not an angel of the Lord, the angel of the Lord. And when that figure shows up in the Old Testament, he speaks as God, he embodies God. And most of the Old Testament commentators and theologians believe it's a pre-incarnation manifestation of Jesus himself. And the point is simply this. When Jesus walks with you through the flames, when Jesus goes through your furnace with you, all that comes off are your shackles, your bonds, the things that addicted you, the things that controlled you, the things that drove you, things that were too important to you. If Jesus is walking with you through them, you won't be harmed. You'll come out pure gold, free. Well, you say, well, what does that mean? How do I look to Jesus in my suffering? How do I rely on Jesus? It's simple. For Christ also suffered. We are the only religion that says that God actually came into this world in new suffering. Aristotle says, Aristotle, the philosopher, says it would be impossible for there to be a friendship between a God and a human being. You know why? They don't have anything in common. Speak for yourself, Aristotle, because here's what we know as Christians. God in Jesus Christ took on human likeness and he knows our suffering and he knows death. In fact, on the cross, oh my. learned what it's like to be lost, for he said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? He can be our friend, he can be with us. You know why? When Jesus Christ went to the cross, he went into the ultimate furnace. He suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. That was the ultimate furnace. It was like hell. He was completely abandoned by God. He got everything we deserved. And if you see him going into the furnace for you, the ultimate furnace for you, then you can know that he's in your furnace with you. Then you can rely on him. You can say, if you did that for me, oh Lord Jesus Christ, I can do this for you. If you suffered infinitely for me, then I can suffer finitely for you. I'll obey you. I'll cry out, but I'll obey you. And I'll look for the things in my life that need to be changed. And I'll just hold on to you. And when it's over, I know that you'll bless me. And therefore, friends, remember what Johnny Erickson taught of the Christian lady who's in a wheelchair for many, many years and knows a lot about suffering. She's also a writer and she says this, Jesus is worth trusting, period, end of argument. Why? After all, when they have you hung on a cross like meat on a hook, you have the final word on suffering. Jesus says, trust me in suffering, end of argument, do it, and you'll come out like gold. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us this assurance. Oh Lord, everybody in this room is either on their way into a trouble, a time of trouble, or on their way out of a time of trouble, or they're in it right now. We're all like that. And so we pray, Lord, that the little furnaces, the big furnaces, you would teach us what it means to look to your son, Jesus Christ, to keep our conscience clear, yet to cry out and to hold on to you, knowing that through, by trusting you, Lord Jesus, trusting you because you went into the great furnace for us, we know that this is going to change us more and more into your likeness, giving us a self-knowledge, giving us a strength and joy, giving us a compassion for other people, giving us more intimacy and prayer with you. Give us these things through your son, Jesus Christ, oh Father, for we ask them in his name. Amen.
