TITLE: Out of Egypt
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 2:13-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Savior and Teacher – A Study of Matthew
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/out-of-egypt/

============================================================

The scripture reading is taken from the book of Matthew, chapter 2, verses 13 through 23. When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. Get up, he said. Take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him. So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night, and left for Egypt, where he stayed until the death of Herod. And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet, Out of Egypt I called my son. When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. Then what was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled. A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted because they are no more. After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt and said, Get up, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel, for those who were trying to take the child's life are dead. So he got up, took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in the place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee, and he went and lived in a town called Nazareth. So was fulfilled what was said through the prophets. He will be called a Nazarene. This is the word of the Lord. Now, every year in these weeks leading up to Easter, Christians around the world for centuries have pondered the life and death of Jesus. And we're doing that by looking at incidents in Jesus' life through the book of Matthew. We're taking texts each week from the book of Matthew. Last week we looked at his birth, and that's when God became human. It's called the Incarnation. This week we look at a text that tells us another account out of Christ's childhood, actually his infancy. And it's unique to the book of Matthew. It's extremely well known, so well known that we didn't even have to read the first part. The first 12 verses are very familiar. Here, wise men, sages, the magi from eastern lands come to Jerusalem when Jesus is in infancy, still in Bethlehem. And they come and they go to Jerusalem. They go before King Herod, the political king. And they say, we are looking for the Messiah, king of the Jews, who's been born, we believe. Herod is very disturbed. He gets his own scribes to say that the Messiah is prophesied to be born in Bethlehem. And Herod says, go to Bethlehem, find him, and if you find him, tell me so I can come and worship him. Herod, of course, wants to kill him. The wise men find Christ, but in verse 12, right before the passage that you just heard read, God warns them in a dream not to go to Herod. They go home another way. Herod, realizing he's been tricked, slaughters all children under the age of two in Bethlehem, which would have been about 20 or 30 children, what we know of the populations of the time. But Joseph has been warned by God and goes to Egypt. There was a huge expatriate Jewish community in Egypt, in Alexandria, actually, over a million. It was huge. And anybody who had political problems, who was Jewish, would go there. When Herod dies, even though Joseph would like to go back to Judea, he's nervous about that because Herod the Great's son is there, so he goes to Galilee and goes to Nazareth. So what? Why is this here? It's important to remember that every one of the gospel writers, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, had an enormous amount of material to use and they're very selective. And when they choose to tell us something out of the life of Jesus, it's for two reasons. One is, it happened. But two is, it's revealing. It reveals something about who Jesus really is and what he came to do and what his message and ministry was. So what about this, what does this account or this incident in the life of Christ tell us about Jesus himself? It tells us three things. He's the object. He's the climax of the plan. First of all, he's the object of hate. It's pretty obvious to see that Herod the Great, in his violent reaction, is hostile to Jesus Christ. But this is not just a one-off incident. In the book of Luke, by the way, in the very beginning of Luke, when Jesus is a child, Luke tells a completely different incident that gets across the same basic idea. It's very clear that the gospel writers want us to know this. Remember, old Simeon sees Jesus in the temple when he's being brought by Mary and Joseph for circumcision. And he gets the Holy Spirit comes on him, and he gets a revelation, and he says, This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that it will be spoken against, and a sword will pierce your own soul as well. See, even in the beginning of Luke, here's the teaching. Christ evokes hostility. He evokes hatred. He's offensive. Now, why would that be? For two reasons. And these two go together. These two things together, put together, it's the reason why Jesus Christ, when rightly understood who he is and what he's claiming, evokes such hostility. First of all, is the claims. The first factor, first reason why he evokes hatred is his claim. Now, you can see it, if you actually, well, we didn't read it. If you go to the beginning of chapter 2 of Matthew, this is what verse 1 says. Wise men came from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is the one who has been born king of the Jews? And when Herod heard this, he was disturbed. Yes, why was Herod disturbed? Because Herod's the king. So, if you're king, and you want to stay king, and you hear there's a king coming, you get disturbed. That's the principle. But if you think that that claim about Jesus was enough to evoke hatred, later on, as Jesus grows up and begins to make his own claims, they're even more offensive. They bring about even more fury. Because look at what he says. Jesus does not say, Tell me your needs, and I will meet them. Nor does he even really say, Give me your philosophical questions, and I will answer them. What he actually says is, not I have the truth, but he says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. I am the way, the truth, and the life. All truth resides in me. He doesn't just say, I can show you the way to escape death, or to get divine life. He says, I am the resurrection and the life. I can destroy death. I, in myself, have this kind of power. Jesus makes these astonishing claims, but basically what they are is claims of sovereignty over you and me. He doesn't just claim to be king of the Jews. He claims to be king of every single human being on the face of the earth. Look at what he says. He says, Unless you are willing to take up your cross and deny yourself, you cannot be my disciple. Unless you hate your father and mother, and even your own life, you cannot be not my disciple. And people say, What in the world does that mean? But what it means is, Your love for me and your allegiance for me should be greater than any other allegiance. You should be willing to, quite willing, die for me. He says, You should be willing to pluck your eye out for me. Why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? These are claims of, he's claiming to have absolute unconditional authority over you. And he's demanding absolute unconditional allegiance to himself. And therefore, there's the claim. John Stott, very famously, in his book, Basic Christianity, says, Once you hear Jesus' claims, you are forced to extremes. And there's some place where, this isn't a direct quote, but Stott says, No one who ever really understood what Jesus said did anything other than three things. There are only three possible responses. You either run away from him in fear, you attack him in anger, or you kneel and bow in complete surrender. Terror, anger, or complete surrender. And no other responses have any humanity to them. No other responses have any other intellectual integrity to them. And yet, every Christmas, you can go through stores and malls and things like that, and you hear piped in over the, you know, while people are walking around, you know, blithely, just listening to, Joy to the world, the Lord has come, let earth receive. I believe. because herod understood it jesus christ was constantly they constantly tried to stone him because people understood what he was saying but people walk through the mall let earth receive her king don't you understand what it means no because if you did the natural enmity of the human heart against all claims of sovereignty over it would rise up and that's the second factor the two reasons why we he is the object of so much hate then and now is because of his claims and also because there's something in the human heart that resents those claims and you know what it is basically put it this way in every single person in this room including me in my heart and in your heart there's a little king herod a little king herod because deep inside you want to be the captain of your own fate you want to be the captain of your own soul the master of your own fate every human being wants that and that's the reason why the bible says we're not just indifferent to god the bible says romans 8 7 it says the natural mind the natural heart of human beings is hatred toward god to the degree you understand what god asks to the degree you understand who jesus really is you will see that hostility it's there now that's the end of point one let's apply it that is to say what does that mean i would like you to if this is true and it is that rightly understood that jesus christ claims and when they come in contact with the human heart bring about hostility anger hatred then here's three practical implications number one could i ask you do you react extremely to jesus christ in other words i mean where are you are you see somebody out here saying what are you saying are you saying you want me to be scared of jesus or angry at jesus yes not as good as bowing the knee to jesus but way better than where almost everybody is see the only way you can have a tepid response to jesus you can sort of like him or kind of believe in him or really wish i was a better christian if you play that i'm a christian but i'd really wish i was a better christian or i really believe in him if you're in that that that gray zone which shows you're not thinking and maybe you're not feeling i mean it lacks humanity it lacks in intellectual integrity please i would rather you got off the dime and were afraid of him or angry at him because that's closer to kneeling to him because at least you're seeing what he says and if your response is not extreme if it's the tepid if it's in the middle i urge you to come to grips with who he is by just starting to read the gospels or reading good books that will guide you through the gospels that's point one point two if you're a christian plenty of you are i wish you would take into consideration the residual hostility of your heart to god now i know you know the great thing about being a christian is you're reconciled to god that romans 5 says there's now peace between us there was this hostility but there's peace so he's forgiven us and we're uh you know we're reconciled to him but you still have a heart that's got residual anger and hostility to god it's still there not until we get to the very end and we're glorified and we got our perfect bodies and our perfect souls it's still there you need to take that into consideration why do you think it's so hard to pray why do you think it's so hard just to concentrate on it why do you think that something he answers a prayer and you feel like oh i'll never forget this lord i'll never forget this and just a week later you are forgetting it how many times you said i will never do this again and two weeks later you do it again why romans 7 paul says i do the very thing i hate there's a part of you there's still there's still a little king herod inside you do you not know it so that means you really have got to be way more intentional about christian growth about prayer about accountability other people to overcome your bad habits you know you just you can't just glide through christianity there's still something in you there's still a king herod and you have to take that into consideration and lastly if you don't know what you believe about christianity please take my hands my take my life into my hands here in new york city please don't think you're objective you can't be objective aldous huxley later in his life wrote a um of autobiographical stuff in a book called Ways and Means. He says something so intriguing. He says when he was in college, he said, I realized I didn't want there to be a God. I wanted atheism to be true. I wanted life to be meaningless because then I could do whatever I wanted. And he admits it. Thomas Noggle, philosopher, prominent down here at NYU, now retired, I believe. In one of his books, he says this. Astounding. He says, astoundingly honest. He says, belief in God makes people nervous. It's the fear of religion. In speaking of the fear of religion, I don't mean to refer to the entirely reasonable hostility that he has, by the way, toward established religion and religious institutions. In virtue of their objectionable moral doctrine, social policies, and political influence. In other words, he says, I have a lot of right. I don't like church. I don't like a lot of religion. And I said, I have a right to do it. But then he says, but I'm talking about something deeper in all of us. The fear of religion itself. I'm speaking from experience, being strongly subject to this fear myself. I want atheism to be true. I am made uneasy by the fact that some of the most intelligent and well-informed people I know are religious believers. It isn't just that I don't believe in God. And naturally, I hope that my belief is right. I hope there is no God. I don't want there to be a God. I don't want the universe to be like that. This cosmic authority problem is not rare. And I am doubt, and he says, I doubt that there is anyone who is genuinely indifferent as to whether there is a God. This cosmic authority problem is not rare. He knows a little King Herod in his own heart. He says, nobody's objective. How are you gonna look objectively at the Bible when you know if it's true, you lose control of your life? How could you be objective about that? You can't be. Don't think you're objective if you don't believe in Christianity. Take that into consideration. Question your doubts. Okay, so he's the object of our hate. Number two, he's the agent of grace. The second wonderful thing about this passage is that Mary and Joseph and Jesus end up in Nazareth. It's amazing. Did you notice, look carefully, even though Joseph was from Galilee, right? He's from Galilee and Mary. Notice he tries, if you look carefully, he tries to go back to Judea. He wants to go back to Jerusalem. When Herod the Great dies, verse 21, he got up, took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus, Herod's son, was reigning in Judea in place of his father, so he went to Israel, to Judea. But when he heard that Herod's son was there, he got nervous, and he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he went back to Galilee and settled Nazareth, where they were from. Now, why was it that he was trying to go to Judea, and he didn't want to go to Nazareth or Galilee? And the answer you can find in John chapter one, where Philip has met Jesus and is very impressed with him, and he goes to his friend, Nathanael, and says to Nathanael, Nathanael, I think we may have found the Messiah. And Nathanael says, where is he from? And Philip says, from Nazareth. And Nathanael says, Nazareth? Can anything good come out of Nazareth? Now, everybody in Judea looked down their nose at Galileans, because they were considered hicks from the sticks. So everybody in Judea looked down their nose at Galilee. That's the reason why Joseph wanted to go to Judea. He wanted to come up in the world. Well, of course, the Galileans felt very put upon. When you know there's people looking down at you, what are you going to do? Find somebody else to look down at. So people inside Galilee, in parts of Galilee, looked down their nose at people who were not in other parts of Galilee. So people like Nathanael, who actually lived in Cana, looked down upon anyone from Nazareth. Now, I have no idea why, but the point was, Nazareth was the most backwoods, the most backwater, the most nowhere-ville place of all. And that's how God works. See, in this world, it's pecking order, right? Ivies, look down at the non-ivies. That's obvious. Certain businesses and people with certain size bonuses look down at others. Did you see that article about the young woman who, through a YouTube video, has now got a modeling career? Did you see that? It was in the New York Times this week, a front-page article, and how the people who are actually, you might say, the powers in the fashion world, how they look down at her. And they say, she has such obvious good looks. One person says, she's got the kind of face that any woman could have if they really want it. Nazareth. She's from Nazareth. Or you know the place in, remember that movie, The End? with Michael Douglas as the tycoon, Charlie Sheen as this young upcoming analyst, and Daryl Hannah as the girlfriend of Michael Douglas, at one point Charlie Sheen is looking at this piece of artwork on Michael Douglas' wall and Daryl Hannah says, cost him $400,000, and Charlie Sheen says, $400,000, this is 1987 or something like that, wow, he says, that's enough to buy a beach house, and Daryl Hannah looks at him and says, sure, in Wildwood, New Jersey, Nazareth, now the point is, God does not operate like that, and nobody that has anything to do with God should operate like that. God's approach to salvation is completely, utterly, absolutely the opposite. In ancient times, when the oldest son always got all the wealth, and the second or younger sons were nothing, they had no social status, how does God work? Through Abel, not Cain, through Isaac, not Ishmael, through Jacob, not Esau, through Ephraim, not Manasseh, through David, not his older brothers. At a time in which women who couldn't have children were considered, you know, they were disgraced, right? God could have brought his saviors into the world, his deliverers into the world through all kinds of women. He always chooses the woman who's unloved, the woman who's ashamed. He chooses old Sarah, not young Hagar. He chooses Leah, not Rachel, you know, who's Leah, who Jacob doesn't love. He chooses Rebecca, who can't have children, Hannah, who can't have children, Samson's mother can't have children, Elizabeth, John the Baptist's mother can't have children. Why? Over and over and over again, God says, I will choose Nazareth, not Jerusalem. I will choose the girl nobody wants. I'll choose the boy everybody's forgotten. Why? Is it just that God likes underdogs? How moving? Isn't that moving? No. He's telling us something about salvation itself. Every other religion, every other moral philosophy, every, you know, you're going to see a whole lot of books now by agnostics and atheists saying, we still need to have some, even if we don't believe in God, we still need to have some way of bringing people together and giving them moral values and all that stuff. Every philosophy, every religion is going to say, here's how we can be saved. However they define salvation. Here's how we can be saved. Summons up all of your strength and live like this. And Jesus Christ comes and says, you'll never do it. You'll never do that. I have come not to show you how to summons up your strength so you can find God. I have come as God defined you. And I'm going to, therefore, I'm going to save you. I'm going to save you through what I do, not what you do. I'm going to save you by grace, which means all of the religions appeal to the strong, the people who can pull it together, the people who can summons up the blood. And only Christianity says, Jesus says, I've come for the weak. I've come for those who admit they're weak. And therefore, it's not nuts. That's what Christmas is all about, you know. Now, seek not in courts or palaces, nor royal curtains draw, but search the stable to see your God extended on the straw. Now, how do we end and apply this point like this? Number one, I don't care who you are. I don't care what you've done. I don't care what your background is. I don't care what deep, dark secrets are in your past. I don't care what shameful things you may have ever done. I don't care whether, you know, in New York City, just to be mediocre is considered to be a failure. Okay. I don't care how you feel. It doesn't, God saves and works through anybody's and even nobody's rather than somebody's. And what that means is there's hope. It's freeing. We're all sinners saved by grace. It doesn't matter who you are, what you've done. Jesus' arms are open wide. He went to Nazareth to say that among, there's a lot of other ways he says it. But here's the second thing. We do live in New York City and therefore there are a lot of people of influence, a lot of smart people, a lot of talented people. And we have to be very careful, really careful because this text, not only this text, but all through the Bible, we're being told race, pedigree, wealth, wealth, status. When you come in the doors and we come together, we come together in the Christian community, in the church. We got to leave those things outside as markers in here. It's your identity in Christ. You're the fruit of the spirit, your service to him. You have to leave those things outside. They should not rule us. Those distinctions out in the world mean everything. all the sarcasm. Wildwood, New Jersey, a face that any woman could have. That's got to be left out in every way out of our community. So he's the object of our hate. He's the agent of grace. And lastly, briefly, but maybe most wonderfully, there's something that happens in this text that only the most diligent will discover. You know, when Matthew goes through and he's telling about the story of Jesus, he constantly quotes the Old Testament. So for example, up here, and he does it twice in this passage, up here in verse 15 and 14, he says, so Jesus and Joseph and Mary went to Egypt and then they came out of Egypt after they were in Egypt in exile for a while. And they came out back to Judea and to Galilee. And it says, and so was fulfilled what the Lord had said to the prophet, out of Egypt I called my son. And of course, if you've got a Bible, there'll probably be a little superscript thing there that in a footnote that says, this is Hosea 11.1. Now, some of you are, you know, the more fastidious types. And you actually look up those passages. Oh, really? Hosea 11.1. And you go to Hosea 11.1 to read it, right? I don't know, not many of you. Just a few elite, super spiritual, slightly uptight people who look up everything. And if you do that and you go there, you will be very confused. Because when you go back, you will see it's not a prophecy at all. In fact, in the Old Testament, the Lord calls his people, corporately his people, Israel, my son, just like he also sometimes calls him his bride. You know, the metaphor is he is the Lord, he's the husband, and his people are his bride. He is the father, and the people are his son. And when you go back there, all Hosea is doing is he's talking about the exile and the deliverance from exile of Israel. Israel was in Egypt. Moses led them out to Canaan. And that's what it's talking about. And yet, Matthew can look at something that happened to Israel and say it's fulfilled in Christ. Now, you say, well, that's kind of high theology. Well, it's more than high theology. There's two ways to read the Bible. One is it's a set of stories about what you must do. Sort of a set of Aesop's fables. A set of stories that say, you know, here's Abraham, and he was tested, and he failed, and don't fail like him, or he came through and come through like him. It's a set of Aesop's fables. If you read the Bible like that, it'll crush you. Mark Twain had a recurring nightmare in which he's laying in bed, and this huge Bible is on his chest, pressing down and crushing and suffocating him. All right? And anyone who reads the Bible as a set of stories that you must emulate, basically the Bible's about you, what you must do, how you have to live in order to have God bless you, it'll crush you. There's another way to do it. Yes. David fought Goliath. Good for him. Yes. Adam was thrown out of the garden. Bad for him. Yes. Abraham did some good things good for him. Bad things bad for him. So a bunch of stories, except when we get to the New Testament, if you start to look up the references, you will see that the New Testament writers say, Jesus Christ is the true Israel. He's the true Adam. He's the true Moses. He's the true David. In other words, the Old Testament is not just a set of stories about how you ought to live. It's a plan of salvation that Jesus Christ fulfilled. He's the true Israel. That is to say, he's the one person who did everything that God asked Adam and Abraham and Moses and David and Israel, the Ten Commandments, the tabernacle, the sacrifices. He asked them to do all these things. Nobody ever did them except Jesus Christ, who now is the ultimate sacrifice for sin when he died on the cross. He's the ultimate prophet. He's the ultimate priest. He's the ultimate king. And he does everything that we should have done for us so that when we believe in him, we're saved. When he dies on the cross, he gets the curse that we deserve. When we believe in him, we get the blessing that he deserved. Now, some years ago, I was lecturing at a seminary trying to say, everything in the Bible is about Jesus. And in the end, you've got to leave telling people, not just live like this, but in Christ. this and now once you know once you have that joy and gratitude to know that god loves you anyway you actually have a new incentive to start trying to live like this got that and somebody said explain it so this is what i read them okay and this is the end of the sermon all right jesus is the true and better adam who passed the test in the garden the garden of gethsemane and whose obedience is now imputed to us jesus is the true and better able who though innocently slain has blood that cries out now for our acquittal not for our condemnation jesus is the true and better abraham who answered the call of god to leave all the comfortable and familiar and go into the world not knowing whither he went to create a new people of god jesus is the true isaac who was not just offered up by his father on the mount but was truly sacrificed for us all while god said to abraham now i know you love me because you did not withhold your only son from me now we can say to god now we know that you love us because you did not withhold your son your only son whom you love from us jesus is the true and better jacob who wrestled and took the blow of justice we deserve so we like jacob only receive the wounds of grace to wake us up and discipline us jesus is the true and better joseph who at the right hand of the king forgives those who betrayed him and sold him and uses his new power to save them jesus is the true and better moses who stands in the gap between the people and the lord and mediates a new covenant jesus is the true and better job the truly innocent sufferer who then intercedes for us and saves his stupid friends jesus is the true and better david whose victory becomes his people's victory though they never lifted a stone to accomplish it themselves jesus is the true and better esther who didn't just risk losing an earthly palace but lost the ultimate he lost the ultimate palace and who didn't just risk his life for his people but gave it jesus is the true and better jonah who was cast into the storm so we could be brought in jesus is the real rock of moses who struck by the rod of god's justice gives us water in the desert he is the real passover lamb perfect innocent helpless slain so the angel of death will pass over us he is the true temple the true prophet the real priest the true king the true sacrifice light bread the bible is not about you it's about him let's pray our father we are so grateful that in spite of our hostility your son came and died for us to show us that salvation is by grace and he comes and he fulfills all of our obligations so we can rest in that now we pray that you would help us to work out the implications of that make us a community in which the world's distinctions pride and condescension and and prejudice those things are gone help us also to give ourselves completely to you absolute bowing the knee surrender forgive our tepidness forgive our tepidness forgive our lukewarmness and make us hissingly hot in love with you and willing to live for you and give us the joy that should come in the hearts of any people who know these things are true and we pray all this in jesus name amen
