TITLE: Paradise Lost
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 2:15-17; 3:1-8
TOPICS: Creation The Fall Sin
SERIES: Genesis – The Gospel According to God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/paradise-lost/

============================================================

I'm going to read to you the passage on which the teaching is based. I'm actually going to read all the way to verse 9. I'm going to read Genesis 2, verses 15 to 17, and then 3, verses 1 through 9. The Lord God took the man and put him in the Garden of Eden to work it and take care of it. And the Lord God commanded the man, You are free to eat from any tree in the garden, but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. For when you eat of it, you will surely die. Now the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, Did God really say you must not eat from any tree in the garden? The woman said to the serpent, We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, but God did say you must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden and you must not touch it or you will die. You will not surely die, the serpent said. For God knows that when you eat of it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God, knowing good from evil. And when the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband who was with her and ate it. And then the eyes of both of them were opened and they realized they were naked. So they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves. Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden. But the Lord God called to them, Where are you? Now, why are we looking at the book of Genesis as we are right now, this fall? Stephen Pinker, who is a very prominent public intellectual, I guess you call him, a very prominent professor of psychology at MIT, last week in the New York Times book review section, wrote this, The prevailing wisdom among intellectuals has been that evil has nothing to do with human nature and must be attributed to social political institutions. Any who have dissented from this saccharine view have been picketed and smeared, but distinct patterns of cruelty and callousness come up repeatedly in history, cutting across all times, places, and political systems. Now, the fact that Pinker, a man like Pinker, writing in a place like the New York Times, could actually say what he just said shows that the consensus, what he calls the prevailing wisdom, the idea that human nature is basically good and our evil and our problems comes from the environment, the social and political institutions. The fact that a guy like Stephen Pinker could write that in a place like the New York Times means that this consensus is eroding. And here's the reason why. Notice what he said. History is showing us that distinct patterns of cruelty and evil and violence, they come up repeatedly in history, cutting across times, places, and political systems. In other words, think. Incredible violence and evil in left, you know, left political systems like communism or right political systems like fascism. No difference. Tremendous evil in democracies like the United States with slavery or totalitarian governments like Germany and Nazism. Okay? See? Tremendous evil in European places like, you know, the genocide of the Balkans or in Africa like Rwanda. In other words, what Pinker is saying is, wait a minute. If evil and violence is not inherent in human nature, but it has to do with our social and political institutions, why is it that no matter what environment we bring, whether it's primitive or technologically advanced, whether it's right or left politically, whether it's democratic or totalitarian, whether it's European or non-European, why is it it makes no difference? And therefore, inevitably, what's happening today, kicking and screaming, the Western intellectual world is starting to recognize that the only way that you can account for history and explain the way things have been and the way things continue to be is that there's something inherently evil and violent in us. But you notice what's interesting is Pinker says, and it's pretty clear where he stands, Pinker says, any who have dissented from this saccharine view have been picketed and smeared. Now, he's talking about himself, and here's why. What's going on now, and this is really hot in the intellectual world, Pinker represents evolutionary psychology, which is a major force today, and they say, listen, the evidence is that human beings are inherently evil. It's in us in some way. Evil is in human nature. But why do they say? They say because it's natural. It's evolution. Through the centuries, through the millennia, we've been conditioned... course, evolutionary psychology now is putting out books that say that oppression and violence and even rape is just, that's natural. And the reason Pinker and a lot of his friends who have this view are getting, as he said, smeared and picketed is this. People are desperate. Because, as the smart people in this world, at street level, there's still this saccharine view that human beings are basically good and our problems all come from our environment. But as smart people begin to realize that the evidence is overwhelming, that evil is inherent in human nature, they're scared to death of the only alternative they have besides Genesis, which is that, therefore, it's natural. Which means there's almost no hope. You know? I mean, how are you going to undo a million years of evolution? To get people to stop killing one another, to stop doing racial genocide, to have this strong stop-eating-the-weak. How are you going to do that in ten years? Or, you can look at Genesis, because in Genesis what you have is you've got an account of human nature that fits with the evidence and gives the only hopeful answer to how evil got there. And that is to say, it's not natural. And, therefore, there's something you can do about it. Don't you think we ought to read the book again? Don't you think maybe we ought to go back to it under those circumstances? Now, as we go, right away, the thing that strikes us, if you're a thoughtful person, and lots of you are, this is New York, a lot of thoughtful people here, you're going to say, what is the relationship? I always heard there's all this weird stuff in Christian theology about the relationship between Adam and Eve's sin and me. What is the relationship between Adam and Eve's sin and me? Now, in the grand scheme of things, that's a very important question. To understand Christian theology, very important. But, for our purposes, here's all you need to know today. The Bible says, look at Adam and Eve losing their oneness with God. You can see it all in verse 7 and 8. Losing their oneness with God. Losing their oneness with their true selves, filled with shame. Not knowing who they are. Losing their oneness with each other. Hiding from each other. Look at Adam and Eve losing all this. Look at Adam and Eve falling. And the Bible's saying, the way they did it is the way we do it now. What Adam and Eve did is recapitulated in our lives constantly. We are replaying this tape. However, you know, for whatever reason, let's not talk about genetics or let's not talk about all the possibilities. Let's not talk about all the possibilities. All you need to know is this. Look at this. See how they are screwing up their lives. This is how we do it too. This is repeated in us. And we have to say, the way they lose this oneness, the way their lives break apart is the way our lives break apart. And we have to read this because how are we going to have intervention? The Bible says, this is how we're going to live until the grace of God intervenes and stops it. And the grace of God can intervene and stop it because it's still not, it's not the way we were built originally. So let's see what they did to screw up their lives so we can stop doing it. So how did they lose it? They lost it through three things. The joke. The lie. And the tree. There's an awful lot in here and we're going to be coming back to it for the next two weeks so I can't get everything. But for now, let's look at this. The three ways that Adam and Eve lost things and the three ways, by the way, that we lose things too. The joke, the lie, and the tree. First the joke. Verse 1 of chapter 3. And he said to the woman and the serpent, who's the serpent? We'll look more at that next week but everybody understands him representing Satan, representing the devil, representing evil. And the serpent says, he came to the woman, he said to the woman, did God really say you must not eat from any tree in the garden? Now, this is a hard thing to translate because in Hebrew the word that's translated indeed, you see the word, pardon me, the word really? In some translations it's translated indeed, in some translations it's translated really, but that's a very important word because it's a Hebrew word that means doubtless. Doubtless or certain. And it's a little weird to translate this because it's pretty clear that the serpent is actually trying to cast doubt in Eve's mind and therefore the serpent is using a word contrary to its actual or normal meaning. When you use a word contrary to its normal meaning this is the dictionary definition of irony or sarcasm. So for example, if you come up to somebody and you say, how are you doing today? And they say, great, just great. You know that they mean not great. Well, but they said great, didn't they? Well, yes, if you're confused it's because you're a person without any irony in you. See, because what irony is what sarcasm is is to take a word and use it contrary to its normal meaning as a way of mocking, as a way of getting power for acerbic effect. And actually, what he's doing here, what the serpent is doing, job, this translation is not too bad. The serpent is actually getting across, he's saying like this, he says, he really said that? He really said that? He's mocking. Now, irony and sarcasm as a mode of communication is a very effective and completely legitimate thing to use to prick falsehood, you know, to go after something that's wrong. Jesus uses it, the prophets like Isaiah and Jeremiah use it all the time, but irony as a way of life, irony as a spirit, how do I put this, irony as a way of being cynical about everything, about mocking everything, joking everything, tearing down everything, being ironic and sarcastic about absolutely everything, every truth claim, every normal statement. There's a guy named Jedediah Purdy who wrote a book last year called For Common Things, it was really a hot issue. It's a young guy in his 20s and he wrote a book and I mean it was reviewed everywhere and this is what he says in the book. Ironic detachment today avoids taking anything or anyone seriously. It's a dogmatic skepticism. Today, the highest value is to avoid all parents of naivete, of naive devotion, belief or hope. Nothing must surprise us or inspire us or even horrify us for everything we encounter is a remake, a re-release, a rip-off. There is a refusal to believe in the sincerity of any motivation or the truth of any speech but especially of earnest speech. In the place of the romantic idea that each of us harbors a true self struggling for expression, the ironist offers the suspicion that we are all just quantum selves, all spin, all the way down. Now that's exactly what the serpent's saying here. What he's saying is, oh God, he really said that? Really said that? You're kidding. He said you couldn't eat the trees of your own garden? Now, what do we learn here? This is the beginning. The beginning of everything going wrong is this not a normal and good sense of irony but the spirit of irony that questions everything. It says behind everything is just a power play. Behind everything is really just a rip-off. And what we see here is this. Let me give you some practical reason why it's important to look at this. This is basically how you lose God. It usually starts like this. It doesn't start with an argument. It starts with a sneer. Because the serpent's, what's the purpose of the serpent's question? The serpent's, the purpose of the serpent's question is not to provide information but to create an atmosphere. Not even to provide an argument but to create an atmosphere. Now what's so intriguing, Purdy said in that quote I just gave you, Purdy said that the spirit, ironism, the spirit of being cynical about everything, the spirit about saying there is no truth. All moral claims are really just power plays. Everything, people are trying to sell you something. Everything's a rip-off. What he says is that's actually dogmatic skepticism. Now, you know, cynical people, ironic people, and boy, this is New York and there's no place with more. Cynical people absolutely hate the idea of dogmatism but Purdy's absolutely right in saying here's what a sneer is. A sneer is not an argument. A sneer is a dogmatic statement but because it's a sneer, it looks so sophisticated. So, for example, when you get to college or you get to New York, people don't say, well, let me tell you all the reasons why, you know, the idea of God is untenable. Why the idea of God does not explain history. No, you don't get arguments. You get sneers. You get rolled eyes. You get God. Oh, you believe in God. Great. Which means it's not great. You get a sneer. And see, this is the way it starts and this is the way it usually starts. This is very wise. Very smart of the serpent. He does not give you an argument. It's a dogmatic assertion, you see. But because it's a sneer, it seems so sophisticated. Like, for example, does somebody sit down and say, let me give you the reasons why a miracle like the resurrection just can't happen? The idea of a physical resurrection just can't happen. Let me give you the reason. That's not how people will treat you if you believe that. The way people will treat you is they'll say, you have more than a third grade education and you really believe in the resurrection? You believe in miracles? Now what? That is not an argument. That is just a dogmatic assertion. But because it's a sneer, it seems so sophisticated. And an awful lot of people are in this room, I know, because maybe 15, 20 years ago, I feel like I'm sure we people are allowed to tell that I do because of that. It's not a thing. It seems so sophisticated. And an awful lot of people are in this room, I know, because maybe 15, 20 years ago, you had some idea of faith and some idea that I need to find God, and then you came to college, or maybe you came to New York, it's the same thing. And you were surrounded by the big sneer, the big whatever. And what happened was, it was just an atmosphere, and you lost it. You just moved away from it. You said, oh, of course, you know, smart people, cool people, sophisticated people just can't believe that. And now 20 years later, you're empty. You've got no meaning in life, because a sneer cannot give. A sneer is a parasite. You can only sneer at something, saying, oh, that's the meaning of life. And it gives you temporarily a feeling like you've got meaning in life, which is to debunk everything. But if you actually do debunk everything, it's all negative. It's parasitic. And 20 years later, you've got no meaning in life, because of the sneer. This is how most people tend to lose God. Not through an argument, through a dogmatic assertion, masquerading as sophistication because of the sarcasm, because of the mockery, because of the sneer. And let me, one other thing. Please, friends, don't lose God because of the big sneer. There's one other thing, though, and that is this. It comes from the serpent. It comes from this idea of utter irony, of complete cynicism, of laughing and mocking at every claim. It does come from hell, according to this. And I'll tell you why. Because the big sneer that everything is a rip-off does not just deconstruct faith. It actually, in the long run, deconstructs itself. That's why it creates an un... It can create tremendous destruction in your life. What do I mean by that? Well, back in the summer, I read this, and everybody told me how great it was, so I'm reading it again. You know, if you don't want me to repeat myself, don't respond like that. But C.S. Lewis, at one place in his book, The Abolition of Man, says this, You cannot go on explaining away things forever, or you will find you've explained explanation itself away. You cannot go on seeing through things forever, because the whole point of seeing through something is to see something else through it. It's good that you can see through a window, because the garden beyond is opaque and very beautiful. But what if you could see through everything? What if everything was transparent? A wholly transparent world is an invisible world, so to see through all things is the same not to see at all. Now, what does he mean when he says you explain with explanation? This idea of putting the sneer, the big sneer about everything, about all truth, about all claims, puts you in the judge's seat. It's very arrogant. It's dogmatic. But it refuses to put the razor edge you're putting to every other claim to yourself. And you have the razor edge of the big sneer is so great that if you actually ever do get consistent, if you ever do wake up to your hypocrisy, you're gone. So for example, what does he mean to say to see everything, to see through absolutely everything is not to see? Nietzsche says all truth claims are just power plays. But if all truth claims are just power plays, then his claim is a power play, what are we listening to it for? If Freud says all views of God are really just defense mechanisms to work, you know, deal with your guilt and insecurity, then his view of God is just a defense mechanism to deal with guilt and security? It would have to be, right? So why listen to it? To see through everything is not to see. It comes from hell. Don't lose God because of the sneer, the atmosphere. You know, obviously if you start thinking about it, if you're the big cynic about everything, if you start thinking about it, it doesn't work. That's what I just tried to show you. But people don't think about it. They just drift and drift and drift. And years later, they wake up and there's no meaning in life because a sneer can't give you that, the big sneer. Okay, secondly, that's not all. The second thing that happens after the joke is the lie. You see, the first thing the serpent does is he creates an attitude for the heart. But now, he gives us an outright lie for the mind. And in verse 5, we see it. He said, oh, pardon me. No, yeah, but in verse 5, we see it. God knows when you eat of it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God. God knows when you eat of it, your eyes will be opened and you will be like God. Now, here's what he's saying. Can I paraphrase? He says, you know, says the serpent, I've been watching you for some time and I feel very sorry for you and I felt I just had to come and tell you something. God does not want the best for you. God wants to keep you down. God does not have your best interest in mine. God knows if you go out on your own, you'll be so much more than you are now. See, God knows that if you go out on your own, instead of listening to his prohibitions and listening to his will, you will come up. You will become so much more. He wants you down. He doesn't want you down. He doesn't want you down. He doesn't want you down. He doesn't want you down. you to have this narrow little life. He does not want you to reach your fullest potential. Now, what is he doing here? We say, well, of course that's a lie, and it's obviously a lie, because as soon as they actually do what the serpents suggest, they do not become more than they were, they become less than they were. That's pretty obvious. But what is the lie? Here's the essential nature of the lie. The serpent does not really go after the existence of God. You know, atheism is not the big boogeyman. If you're a Christian, you should never think of atheists as being such bad people. Atheism is such a, he doesn't go after, I mean, in other words, the messenger from hell does not try to make them atheists. He doesn't go after the existence of God. He doesn't go after, he doesn't say there is no law of God. Everything is relative. He doesn't really even do that. He actually, he doesn't even really go after the power of God. What is he going after? What is he saying? If I can destroy this, I've got them. If I can destroy this, I can destroy their relationship with God and with themselves and with each other. This is the key. This is the taproot. What does he go after? He goes after the goodness of God. He says, you can't trust that God really loves you, that God really is gracious. You cannot trust the grace and the love and the good will of God. And when they believed him, it poisoned everything because this is the taproot of all problems. This is the taproot of all misery. This is the thing under everything. You say, how could that be? Look, let me look at the spectrum. Over here is somebody who's very religious. You know, comes to New York and lives this incredibly religious life and goes to church and reads the Bible and is scrupulously moral and, you know, wants to be morally correct and is theologically correct in every way. Condemns people, lives a kind of, you know, a rigid legalistic life. Why? Let's hear the other, other spectrum. Here's somebody who moves to New York and says, finally, I was living with my parents, you know, and I have to, but finally, Christianity is so narrow, so confining. Finally, I can really have a fun life. Finally, I can really, I can really, I can come to New York and really swing. Finally, I can really live the big life I've always wanted. Now, when these two people meet each other, they hate each other. You know, they vote on both sides, different sides of the election, for example. I mean, they hate each other. What, though, is driving them? What is going on? Same thing. Utterly the same thing. Why is this person so incredibly religious? Because this person says, I can't trust in the grace and love of God. What I'm going to have to do is I'm going to have to force God to bless me. I'll do it. I'll make God a life that he cannot refuse. I'll be so good that he'll have to take me into heaven. He'll have to listen to my prayers. He'll have to. The only way that a person gets like that is you just don't believe in the goodness of God. You're going to have to make him, you know, pry the doors of, I'm going to be so good that the doors of heaven will have to open for me. And what makes a person come to New York and say, I'm going to find, you know, born free, finally, you know. Why? Because what they're saying is, if I obey God completely, I'll miss out. If I completely give myself to God, God will say, ha ha, now finally I have you where I want you. Miserable life you will have. I'm very glad you're down on you, submitting totally to me, you know, into a closet, bread and water for 30 days. In other words, what makes you irreligious, and what makes you very religious, same thing. You believe what the serpent wanted you to believe. In fact, let me get really, let me get really practical. This is the taproot of everything. This is a lie that has come into our hearts and this is now a premise for everything we do. Eric Erickson, in his book Childhood and Society, I think it's pretty much a dated book now, but he says something in there I think is fascinating. He believes, Eric Erickson, who is a very, very important child psychologist in the middle part of the 20th century, he says this. He says the main thing a little kid needs is not to be dropped. The main thing a little kid needs is not to be neglected, not to be left. Why? Because the main thing a little kid needs is to trust, basically trust, the big, dominant, powerful figures in his or her life. And if he or she does not learn how to trust in the earliest stages of life, he said, it's the taproot for all the other psychological and emotional and problem disorders that come later. But that's exactly what the serpent decided he was going to do. If you can't trust God, you can believe he exists, you can believe in his power, you can believe in his law. Basically, the serpent was okay on those things. But you can't trust that he really means good for you. Look at yourselves. Why is it some of you are working yourselves into the ground? That's why he came to New York. Because deep inside, you feel like, unless I'm really good in my career, I'm nobody. That's because you believe what the serpent wanted you to believe. He doesn't love you. Why are some of you ready to throw yourself... up? Because you don't believe God delights in you. You believe what the serpent wants you to believe. Why are some of you ready to sink because of the troubles in your life? Just ready to sink, just ready to give up. Why? Because you're saying there couldn't be loving purposes in this in a God. God would not, God could not be loving me and letting me go through this. You believe what the serpent wants you to believe. All of our problems are coming from this. So you see, first the joke. Put yourself in the judge's seat. You know, laugh at everything. Create the atmosphere. Okay? First the joke. Then the lie. But then lastly, the tree. Now, what's the tree? See, notice the last thing that happens is the woman saw the fruit of the tree, was good for food, and she eats it. But now, you know, it's an interesting question. You see, the heart putting, you know, first the heart, then the mind, finally the will, you know? And you have the fall. But here's a question about the tree. What in the world is this tree? You know, a lot of people have been wondering, especially when you go shopping, you know, go to the produce, you say, I wonder which fruit was the fruit. And, you know, Genesis doesn't tell us about it. Most of the commentators are saying, you know, why don't we know, was it a peach? Was it an avocado? I believe that, actually. But was it a, what was it? And the answer is, it doesn't matter. Well, was this, was this, did this tree have some kind of juice in it that when they ate it, they went, oh my gosh, evil, evil. Oh no, evil juice. No, it could have been absolutely any tree at all. It could have been any fruit at all. And here's why. What's the tree show us? Why did God say, don't eat that tree? You know, don't eat of that tree. Why? Why didn't he say, don't hit each other? Why didn't he say, don't lie to each other? Why didn't he say, don't kill each other? You know? Why did he say, I'm going to make a few other couples and don't commit adultery? I mean, why didn't he say something that we all know? Pretty much, I mean, if it's common sense today, you shouldn't hit, you shouldn't kill, you shouldn't lie, surely they would have known it. So why, why, why did he do this? And here's the answer. If God had said, no lie, no adultery, he would have been telling us that the essence of sin is doing bad things, breaking rules. He would have been telling us the essence of sin is doing bad things, bad things, you know, adultery and murder and things like that. But he chooses a tree, which is a good thing. Because you see, the first temptation, you see, the first rule was not, don't lie, but don't eat the tree. The tree is a good thing. The fruit's a good thing. What is the serpent doing? Adam and Eve realized, they know, and the theologians will all tell you, that Adam and Eve did sense that there was a place they needed to go, that they could grow still. They recognized that there was a possibility for growth, for getting more great than they were. That's true. But here's what they did. They took a good thing and used the good thing so they could be their own God. You will be his God. They didn't wait for him to take them. They said, we're going to do it ourselves. And therefore, the essence of sin, if you want to understand the essence of sin, the essence of sin is not seen primarily. The poison of sin is not primarily in doing bad things. It's taking your good things and using them to make yourself your own Savior and Lord. What do I mean by that? Let's go this way. I'll just, let me get real practical. Most of the disappointments in your life, most of the devastations in your life have come not primarily from doing bad things. It's because you've looked to good things, trees. You've looked to good things to be for you what only God should be for you, to be your significance, to be your security. Why are some of you working yourselves into the ground? Why are some of you going nuts because you have to have this great career? Why? Is there anything wrong with work? No. Is there anything wrong with that? No. But what's happened? It's a good thing. But the essence of sin is you're using it for it to be your significance, your security, instead of God. And that will poison you. That will destroy you. That will put you into bondage. That's the essence of sin. And that's the reason why this is such a, this is so brilliant and so remarkable. What devastates the world? Is there anything wrong with being proud of your peoplehood? No. But racial idolatry creates genocide. Is there anything wrong with working and making money? No. But when it becomes the ultimate thing, you have a material, destructive materialism. See? Is there anything wrong with loving your spouse? No. But if you look at your spouse and say, if you love me and you think I'm great, then I know I'm somebody. And if not, I'm nobody. I'm spit. You've turned, you're being your own savior through your spouse. You're not looking to God for that. Most of the devastations, most of the disappointments of your life, most of the things that have ruined you and created misery and have poisoned your life is not so. of sin is being your own savior, your own master, calling the shots in your own life, saying, I know how I'm going to get a good feeling about who I am. And whenever you hitch, you take a good thing like a tree and you say, that's the way I'm going to know I'm okay. That's the way I'm going to be sure. That's the reason why Jesus was always looking at the Pharisees and the prostitutes. He knows it's bad to sell yourself for sex. Why was he always more upset with the Pharisees? They were good. They were obedient. The point is you can sin just as much by keeping the rules as by breaking them and maybe more. Because you take your morality and you take your performance and you say, a good thing, right? A tree, right? And you use it to become a Pharisee. Do you understand the reason for all of our individual problems and the reason for all of the problems of the world? Putting yourself in the judgment seat, that's the joke. Believing that God is not good and is not loving, just belief in the grace of God as an operating premise for your life, that's the lie. And taking the good things and using them as ways of trying to be for yourself what only God should be for you, Savior and Lord. That's where all the genocide comes from. That's where all the problems come from. That's where all the misery comes from. That's why you're unhappy this morning. Now, what can we do about it? Now, here's one good thing. I mean, I don't usually do this, but I'm going to do it to you. Come back next week. Nah. Well, yeah. Come back next week. But it's all in verses 8 and 9. And actually, it's all in a nutshell. In verse 7, 8, and 9, when they sin, here's what happens. Their eyes were opened. They realized they were naked. They sowed fig leaves. When the Lord God showed up, they ran away. Everything's there. They experience a loss of... They're alienated from God. That's spiritual alienation. They're alienated from their true selves. They're feeling shame. That's psychological alienation. They're alienated from each other. They have to hide from each other. That's sociological alienation. Everything is falling apart. And what does God do about it? Well, even though I didn't print it here, I read it to you. Verse 9, but the Lord God called to them, where are you? Now, God knew they were lost. God knew what had happened. But he comes and he says, where are you? He comes to begin to look for them, to find them, to save them. Now, here's the thing. When I start a lot of tasks, when I start a lot of journeys, if you're like me, you often don't know what you're getting into, right? You take a job and you say, after a year, if I had any idea where this job was going to go, I would never have taken it. You start a trip, you know, to get somewhere and you say, if I had any idea it was two hours, I thought it was like 45 minutes, I never would have come. But God never starts a journey without knowing exactly where he's going. And therefore, his first step shows that he's committed to the whole thing. He must. He knows what it's going to cost. What is it going to cost him to simply take a step into that garden? Why did he even go? And why did he call out? Because he shows here the determination to save us, to find us. And he knows what it's going to cost him. And what's it going to cost him? It's going to cost him Jesus. His son voluntarily will come and die on the cross. The father will voluntarily go and put him on the cross. And you know what that means? Jesus Christ is the answer to the tree, to the lie, and to the joke. Let me show you briefly, then come back the next couple of weeks. Number one, he's the answer to the tree. What do I mean? Jesus went to a garden, you know. Jesus Christ was in a garden called the Garden of Gethsemane. And in that garden, God came to him and said the same thing he said to Adam and Eve, obey me about the tree. See, Jonathan Edwards in his great sermon, I'll never get over this, Jonathan Edwards said, when God came to Adam and Eve and said obey me about the tree, what he was really saying is obey me and you will live. And they didn't. But when God came to his son in the garden, the second Adam, in a second garden, he doesn't say obey me about the tree and you will live. He says obey me about the tree, go to the tree, climb the tree, be crucified on the tree. Obey me, he said to Adam and Eve, and you will live. Obey me, he said to the second Adam, and I will crush you to powder. And he did. Obey me, he said, Adam and Eve, and you will live. And they didn't. Obey me, he says to Jesus, and I'll crush you into the ground. And he did. But it was the only way we could be saved. He took the punishment for our sins. We'll get more to that later. But nobody put this better than George Herbert, the great mystical poet of the 17th century. I'll read it slowly. There's a place where he has a poem in which he's depicting Jesus Christ looking down from the cross and speaking. And this is what he says. O all ye who pass by, behold and see. Man stole the fruit, but I must climb the tree. The tree me. Was ever grief like mine? Okay, let me do it again. Oh, all ye who pass by, behold and see, man stole the fruit, but I must climb the tree, a tree of life for all, but only me. The cross became a tree of life for us because it was a tree of death for him. That's what George Herbert is saying. Jesus dealt with a tree, with a new tree, but that's not all. Secondly, Jesus Christ deals with a lie. What do you need to deal with the poison in your spirit? What do you need to be able to handle the suffering that you're going through? What do you need to get over the over-religiosity of your life, the illegalism? What do you need to get over the over-irreligiosity of your life? What do you need to get over your workaholism? What do you need to get over everything? You need to know he loves you. You need to know you can be trusted. You need to know if you go to him, he will by no means cast you out. You need to know what the psalmist says, I walk at large because I follow his precepts. Not narrowness. You have to know that. How do you know that? Look at the cross. Look at the tree. And that is the only antidote to the poison in our hearts. There is no other religion that even says that God came and actually died. How do you know? I've got people who are always saying to me, I will know God loves me if they let me get in to Columbia Law School. No, you won't. Because if you get into Columbia Law School, one week later, it'll be, what have you done for me lately? It won't do it. I've had people come to me and say, I don't really believe, I don't really believe, you know, in a God who pours out wrath on Jesus Christ. I don't believe in the crucifixion. That's the whole idea of dying for our sins. I believe in a God who just loves everybody. And here's what I'm going to say to you. I'm not going to argue with you theologically. I'm going to argue with you practically. Deep in your heart, you do not believe God loves you. You do not believe God delights in you or you wouldn't, you wouldn't have the problem with criticism you do, you wouldn't have the problem with workaholism, you wouldn't have the problem with boredom, you wouldn't have all the problems you do. You do not believe it. And to look at a God who you say is more loving than the Christian God, but who basically has to pay nothing to come and say, where are you? A God who has no cost to bear in order to love you. So that's the God I believe in. That God will never change your life. I'm just telling you. I'm telling you as a pastor. I'm telling you as a friend. I'm telling you as a counselor. I'm just telling you as a sinner. This is the antidote to the lie. Look at him on the tree. Man stole the fruit, but I must climb the tree. The tree of life for all, but only me. And lastly, Jesus deals with a joke. What do I mean by deals with a joke? Well, listen. Really religious people, self-righteous people, never joke. You ever notice that? They don't joke about anything because they're too self-important and everything is so serious. And very irreligious people who turn everything into a joke. They're like the religious people, and I'll tell you why. Religious people turn nothing into a joke because they lack the humility to do it. But irreligious people sometimes turn everything into a joke because they lack the humility to do it. If you joke about everything, you've put yourself in the judges seat, you know? Judging everybody but yourself. But if you believe that Jesus Christ died for you, if you rest in that, if you rejoice in that, if that just changes your life, if you say, I know the lie is a lie. I'm flawed but loved. What that means is there'll be lots of laughter in your life. You know, if you never joke and if you're always joking, if you never can joke and you turn everything into a joke, you don't believe the gospel. You don't believe that you're a sinner saved by grace. You don't have any humility and yet confidence. If Jesus deals with a tree, Jesus deals with a lie, Jesus deals with a joke. The Lord's Supper is a way to make the reality of what Jesus Christ did so real to you. So as the bread, as the cup comes, think of him saying, All ye who pass by, behold and see. Man stole the fruit, but I must climb a tree. Tree of life for all but only me. Let's pray. Give us, Father, the reality that we seek. The reality that shows us the lie is a lie. Help us to see that. Help us to know that. Give it to us. The reality of Jesus Christ in the second garden, at the second tree, being the second Adam, all for us. That will intervene in our lives. That will give us what we need to avoid this same destructive cycle of the joke and the lie in the tree in our own lives. We ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
