TITLE: Patience
SCRIPTURE: James 5:7-12
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Growth in the Spirit
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/patience-4/

============================================================

The scripture reading tonight is from the book of James, chapter 5, verses 7 through 12. Be patient then, brothers and sisters, until the Lord's coming. See how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop, patiently waiting for the autumn and spring rains. You too be patient and stand firm, because the Lord's coming is near. Don't grumble again, sisters, or you will be judged. The judge is standing at the door. Brothers and sisters, as an example of patience in the face of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. As you know, we count as blessed those who have persevered. You have heard of Job's perseverance and have seen what the Lord finally brought about. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy. Above all, my brothers and sisters, do not swear, not by heaven or by earth or by anything else. All you need to say is a simple yes or no, otherwise you will be condemned. The word of the Lord. Now, this summer, we've been looking at the fruit of the Spirit. And the fruit of the Spirit is the term the Bible uses for a set of character traits. The most famous list is in the Galatians chapter 5, where it goes like this. Love, joy, peace, patience. Now, patience is the character trait we're going to look at tonight. We live in a culture that doesn't value patience. It's almost a culture of impatience. You know, if you have a computer, they're making billions of dollars, and it powers up in five seconds. Another computer comes along, does all the same functions, and powers up in three seconds. You realize the first computer will be out of business pretty soon. You know, it'll go bankrupt. If a company can get something to you in three days, another company comes along and can get it to you in two days, the first company will be out of business. Because we, in a sense, the economy cultivates impatience. It encourages impatience. And we punish anyone who can't give us that extra three seconds we desperately need when the, you know, that we lose, you see, when we're powering up the computer. And New York City, by the way, is really the epicenter of impatience. We are very, very hurried. We had a niece of ours lived with us this summer, never lived in New York before, and came home one day saying, New Yorkers run up escalators. I said, yeah. They said, well, that sort of defeats the purpose. The whole idea is the escalator does it for you. And I said, oh, yes, but, yes, escalators are wonderful the world around, but for New Yorkers, they're too slow. They're too slow. I want to be up there faster than the escalator takes me. So up we go. So I heard actually an ad on WNYC, which is a local New York public radio station, and the ad started like this. A woman said, I'm a New Yorker, so I don't like to wait. And then she went on to sell, I forget what the product was, but I was working on a sermon on impatience, and I heard her say, I'm a New Yorker, so I don't like to wait. And I said, there it is. We live in a culture that doesn't value patience, but, of course, all ancient cultures did. All ancient cultures valued patience. Said patience, impatient people were shallow. We haven't taken time to think about things. You're shallow. Impatient people are reckless. Impatient people make stupid choices. Impatient people miss all sorts of opportunities. Isn't that right? And isn't it true that all of us, certainly by the time you get to middle age, almost all of us have some painful memories, a set of painful memories, of places where our impatience really brought about a pretty big loss in our lives. So, yes, patience is important, even though we live in a culture, I'll get back to that, that doesn't very value it. This passage will tell us about how we can get patience. And it's written by James. James was the biological brother of Jesus, and he was the leader of the church in Jerusalem. And he wrote this letter, and in this part of the letter, as you have just heard read, he is exhorting patience. And as we read it, we're going to learn several things. We're going to learn what patience is. We're going to learn why it's so crucial. And we're also going to learn, get some ideas about how you develop it, how you grow it, what it is, why it's so important and crucial, how you develop it. All right, first of all, what it is. Now, you notice it's basically this passage is divided into two small parts. The first two paragraphs each use a different word for patience, and they also use a different illustration. So the first, verses 7 to 9, uses the illustration. farmers plant, and then they don't expect harvest right away, and farmers, of course, also can't reap too soon and so forth. So it's an example of patience. The word that's used, the Greek word used in verse 7 and verse 8 and verse 9 is the Greek word makrothumia, which literally means long-suffering, long-suffering. And an example of the opposite of long-suffering, you might say, an example of the lack of this aspect of patience is immediately mentioned in verse 9, grumbling. Don't grumble against one another, brothers and sisters. You see, grumbling is a lack of patience. Don't grumble. Now, what's grumbling? Well, when people are frustrating to you, when people are disappointing, when people are disillusioning, how do you respond? And grumbling is a response. Sometimes you do it outwardly, but in many cases, you just do it inside. Grumbling is responding to people who disappoint you and frustrate you with resentment, negativity, cynicism. Now, why is that a failure of long-suffering? Why is grumbling a lack of patience? Why is it a failure of long-suffering? Here's the reason why. Because grumbling means you've given up on people. Instead of continuing, even though they frustrate you, to continue to love them, to continue to pull for them, to continue to care for them. Instead, you give up on them. You write them off. You stop pulling for them. And this is really important to see. Grumbling, see, most of us, I think, recognize a real grudge. Most of us recognize when we hate somebody. We're mad at somebody. I mean, it's a terrible thing. And if someone frustrates us and disappoints us and we get angry and we have a grudge, that's one thing. And that's bad, of course. That also, by the way, is a lack of patience. But grumbling is something much broader and much more common and much more subtle and therefore much more dangerous. See, grumbling means that because of the way at which a person has frustrated you, disappointed you, disillusioned you, or infuriated you, you've just written them off. You've just sort of, you've detached. You're not long-suffering. You're not sticking with them. You've just detached. And you're really, you know, and you're cynical about them and you're grumpy about them, right? Listen, is there anybody that when they come into your sight, when they come towards you or you see them again, that you, not outside and not even, you know, you don't even let the people see it in your face. But inside, do you say, them, him, her. What do you think that is? That's a serious lack of patience. You've given up on them. In other words, it's a serious lack of love. That's why impatience is wrong. It's a serious lack of love. So, first of all, patience, this aspect of patience, it's patience with people. Even, patience is when people are frustrating to you and disappointing to you, you don't give up on them. You forgive them and you're gracious to them. But that's not all that patience is. So, there's patience. One aspect of patience is patience with disappointing and difficult people. You're gracious and you're forgiving. But then the second paragraph shows us another aspect of patience. Brothers and sisters, as an example of patience, he says, takes the prophets. Now, this is a different example. And we're not really sure what prophets he's thinking of, but then he gives you one. He says, as you know, we count as blessed those who have persevered. You have heard of Job's perseverance and have seen what the Lord finally brought him. Now, Job is the example here, not the farmer. Job, of course, was a biblical character. And Job's problems were not so much about how he was being treated by people. His problems was how he was being treated by life and God. He didn't experience so much difficult people. He experienced tragic circumstances. And so, there was a disaster that wiped out all of his wealth. And there was another natural disaster that wiped out his children. He lost his children. And then he got a disease, and he lost his health. He lost his wealth. He lost his children. He lost his health. And he's screaming and crying out, that's Job. And this kind of patience is actually a different Greek word that's used here. And notice, the English translators reflect the fact it's a different word by using a different English word. Here, it's talking about perseverance. You have heard, as you know, we count as blessed those who have persevered. You have heard of Job's perseverance. This Greek word is not the word makrof. the word hupomone, which means literally to hyperstand in place. You say hyperstand in place, let me give you an example. It would be like being in a battle, and your commanding officer says, you stand right there, and you occupy this position, and no matter what they throw at you, no matter how fierce the attack, you cannot retreat. You cannot give ground. You cannot even lose a step, because if the enemy gets beyond you, past you, everything is lost. The town is lost. The army is lost. Something like that. You have to stand there, and you have to fight, and you may not give in no matter what. That's hupomone. That's hyperstand. And see, one aspect of patience is patience with difficult people. The other aspect of patience is patience with difficult circumstances. When circumstances are terrible, when life goes wrong, when circumstances are terribly disappointing and infuriating, here's what patience is. It's to unflinchingly live the way you ought to live. Do the things you ought to do. Be the person you ought to be anyway. To hyperstand is stay put and not give up. So here's the two aspects of patience, according to the book of James. Patience includes patience with people, difficult people, responding to difficult people with forgiveness and grace. And patience is also patience with difficult circumstances and the will of God. God responding when circumstances are difficult with courage and trust. That's patience. Those are the two aspects of patience. Now, why is this such a big deal? Why does James make it such a big deal? And it is a big deal. See, I would think that by now, at the common sense level, you would be thinking, and I think most people would be thinking, okay, patience is a good thing. Impatience is a bad thing. Yeah, being impatient, you can make some stupid mistakes. Yeah, at the practical level, I would like to be patient. But James does not just treat this. He doesn't just treat impatience as something that's impractical. He depicts this as a terrible evil and sin. Notice, look, it says, verse 9, don't grumble against one another, brothers and sisters, or you will be judged. The judge is at the door. He brings in judgment day. And he says that we'll be condemned for our impatience. You say, gee whiz, I mean, what is impatience? Is it that bad? Yes, here's why it's so bad. Here's why it's so serious. Okay, using the definition we've already developed, every single day, in fact, almost every hour, you're going to meet frustrating, disappointing, disillusioning, and infuriating people and circumstances. You're going to be very frustrated and disappointed every day with something. And sometimes it happens not only every day, every hour. And when that happens, you have to respond in your heart. It happens in your heart. You respond. And there's only one of two ways to respond when disappointments happen. You can either trust God or you can trust yourself. Now, what does that mean? You can either trust God's timing, God's schedule, God's wisdom, or your assessment, your schedule, your timing, what you think should happen. You can respond to the difficulty either by trusting God or trusting yourself. Now, what does that actually sound like in your heart? Here's what it sounds like. On the one hand, if you trust God when terrible things, really frustrating things, bad stuff happens, you can either speak like this. You actually have to talk about God to yourself. You have to say, the Lord, He knoweth. The Lord, He knoweth. The Lord is wise. The Lord is good. I would never have chosen this for myself, but He is. He knows what He's doing. I don't. Elizabeth Elliott, in one of her books, writes this about what you say to your heart. Now, you're not going to be this eloquent, but this is the basic thing you have to say. Bad things happen, and this is what she says. God is God. If He is God, He is worthy of my worship and my service, and I will find rest nowhere but in His will. And that will is infinitely, immeasurably, unspeakably beyond my largest notions of what He is up to. See, here's what she's saying. Bad things happen to you, and here's what she's saying. Here's what you should say to your heart. If I don't learn to trust God in this, I'll find no rest. Only if I believe God knows what He's doing. He's wiser than me. I don't know. He knows infinitely. I don't know what should happen. huge lack of humility. Only if you humble yourself and say, I don't know, God knows. God is God, and I will find rest nowhere but in his will. And that will is infinitely, immeasurably, unspeakably beyond my largest notions of what he is up to. So you can speak to your heart like that, and you know what will happen? You'll get calm. Peace. Rest. Now, the other thing you could do when bad things happen, instead of trusting God and his assessment and his wisdom, you can trust your own wisdom, what you think should happen, what you think should happen, what everybody deserves. You can trust your wisdom and your schedule rather than God's. And you say, what does that sound like? Well, I'll tell you one thing. You're not going to say, when bad things happen, you don't say internally, I'm going to trust myself. You don't say that. Would you like to know what trusting yourself actually sounds like internally? It sounds like this. Not again. That's not fair. It's not fair. I can't believe it. I deserve better than this. What in the world does he or she think she's doing? That's what it sounds like to trust yourself. You say, wait, that's my normal kind of internal conversation. Yes, of course it is. You know what everybody deserves. You know what should have happened. You know exactly what has to happen. Otherwise, it's just a disaster. It's a lack of that humility. See, in other words, and here's what's going on, every time something bad happens, it happens every day, maybe even every hour, and you have to decide I'm going to respond with trusting God or trusting myself, trusting God's wisdom or trusting my own wisdom. That leads to something. Trusting God leads eventually to rest, calm, peace, the ability to forgive. But if you give in to the self-trust, you know what happens? The more and more you become eaten up with resentment, with self-pity, with cynicism, with anxiety, with restlessness, with ulcers, with heart attacks eventually, yeah. You see, you see why this is so important? Every day, almost every hour, you are being invited, and you have to either start down one path or another to those various end states. And it's invisible. You notice, you see the place here where it says in verse 3, in verse 8, you too be patient and stand firm. This translation uses the word stand firm. Literally, it says, establish your hearts. Literally, he's saying your cardia, your hearts. In other words, this happens in the heart. It doesn't happen out in the world. The grumbling generally doesn't even show on your face. The cynicism, the self-absorption, the self-pity because of all that's going wrong, that generally doesn't happen outside. It happens all inside. And yet, those little decisions every day are pushing you down one way towards more self-absorption and more unhappiness and more self-centeredness and toward what C.S. Lewis calls the hell of eternal autobiography. Constantly looking at yourself and what you're getting and I'm not this and I'm not that and people aren't giving me what I should have and I don't know, maybe I'm a failure. Just always thinking about yourself. Do you see why this is so important? Because the patience or impatience is whether you're going to be patient or impatient with the circumstances of today, it's a battle for your soul and it's happening inside. And I must tell you one other thing. Your heart is not on your side. Your heart is not neutral in this. You say, yes, that's right, I have to be patient or impatient. It's a big battle. Your heart is not neutral. Your heart will naturally go in the direction of self-pity. It'll naturally go in the direction of being sure that you know best what should happen. It'll naturally, your heart doesn't have the humility. It will take you down to this horrible end state. And no one has ever depicted that horrible end state of impatience better than C.S. Lewis in a place in The Great Divorce where The Great Divorce is a fictional book. I refer to it often because there's so many interesting little case studies that are great, certain illustrations. And it's a story about a busload of people from hell who go to the outskirts of heaven. And people who the people from hell knew on earth, who are now in heaven, come out and invite them to come up to heaven. So people who are friends in the world, now some are in heaven, some in hell. A busload of people from hell comes up. People, their friends from heaven come out and try to get them to come up into heaven. And in general, the people from hell don't even want to go. They refuse to go for various reasons. Now, Lewis does not believe this happened or will happen, but it's a wonderful fiction. about the human heart, and they are very penetrating. So you see all these conversations, these two narrator types are going around and they're in the book and they're commenting on the various cases. Here's one case that I think for our purposes tonight is very, very important and very interesting. There's one woman from hell who meets up with another woman from heaven who comes down to try to invite her to go to heaven, but she never even hears the invitation to go to heaven because she won't stop talking. And listen, quote, Oh my dear, I've had such a dreadful time. I don't know how I even ever got here at all. I was coming with that Eleanor Stone and we were supposed to meet at the corner of she was like. And if I told her once, I told her a hundred times, I would not meet her outside that dreadful Marjorie Banks woman's house after all the way she treated me. Now I've been dying to tell you because I felt sure you'd ask, you would tell me I'd acted rightly. No, no, no, wait dear. I'm not, I'm not done. I tried living with her when I first came down there and it was all fixed up. She was going to do the cooking. I was going to look after the house. And I did think I was going to be comfortable after all I've been through, but she turned out to be so absolutely selfish, not a particle of sympathy for anyone but herself. And then she keeps walking out of ear, out of, you know, earshot. And the two commentators heard that conversation and they speak to each other. And the first one says, I am troubled, sir, because that unhappy creature didn't seem to me to be the sort of soul that ought to be in damnation. She isn't wicked. She's only a silly, garrulous old woman who has got into the habit of grumbling. The answer came back, well, the question is whether she's a grumbler or just a grumble. How can there be a grumble without a grumbler? Ah, the answer came back, you've had this experience. It begins with a grumbling mood and yourself still distinct from it, perhaps even criticizing it. You can still repent and come out of it again at that point, but there may come a day when you can do that no longer. And then there will be no you left to criticize the mood or even to enjoy it. But it's just the grumble itself going on and on forever like a machine. You see what he's saying. See, self-pity feeds on itself. Anger feeds on itself. And eventually you get to the place where you can't hear anything other than your own eternal autobiography. And what Lewis is saying is it's bad enough in this life. You can see people getting more and more miserable, more and more locked into the prison of being self-referential and being self-absorbed and self-centered and always unhappy and impatient with everything because I never get the things the way I want them to go. And even in this life, you can become a pretty miserable person. But what if when you die, your soul keeps on going, which is what the Bible says and which is the way it is? Eventually it will be hell. And your heart is already inclined in that direction. It is not on our side. Our hearts are not on our side. There's two things that can happen. Every single time a bad thing happens to you, you can trust God or trust yourself. And the trust in yourself is a path down to this. And your heart is going there unless there's an intervention. So what are we going to do about it? What are we going to do about it? How can we develop patience if it's that important? And here's what we can do about it. I want you to see three things, three hints here on how you can develop patience. The first, you develop patience in the present by looking to the past and looking to the future. You develop patience in the present by looking to the past and looking to the future. Okay, first of all, you develop patience in the present, but where? Well, who's our illustration here? It's Job. Job learned perseverance. Job learned patience. Why? Because he was suffering. And I must say, from what I can tell, that's about the only way to learn patience is when something taxes you, when some suffering, some difficulty comes upon you. But you don't learn patience in suffering just by being stoic, just by keeping a stiff upper lip, just by saying, I'm not going to let it get to me. That's not learning patience. That's just hardening your heart. That's not developing a humble and loving and peaceful heart. It's just, it's just, you know, trying to steel yourself. No, no. If you want to see how patience is developed in present suffering, look at Psalm 77 sometime. Not one of the more famous psalms at all, but a really instructive psalm because the psalmist starts off by talking about all the problems things. will meditate. He's freaking out, you know, everything's, then he says, I will meditate, which means troubles are happening, but he says, I'm going to process them through prayer and meditation. I'm going to think about the truth of God until I get patient. You say, what truth? Okay, let's move on. By thinking of the past and thinking of the future. In particular, I'm talking about the cross. If you want to learn patience, look at Job, yeah, but if you really want to learn patience, look at the ultimate Job, the one to whom Job points, the one to whom Job points. This is our example. Job was an innocent sufferer, sort of. When I say sort of, I mean Job wasn't perfect, right? But he was better than most. And you could put it like this. Job was living a better than average moral life, but he was experiencing a worse than average circumstantial life. In other words, the circumstances of his life were worse than average. The morality, his morality and virtue was better than average. So he had a right to complain. He says, you know, I'm living better than average life, but I'm experiencing a worse than average life. And that's not fair. And it wasn't fair. And he wrestled with that. So you might say he was a relatively innocent sufferer. He did not deserve the life he was having. Okay. But only Jesus Christ is the true Job because only Jesus Christ, Jesus and Jesus alone is the only absolutely perfectly innocent sufferer. Only Jesus lived a perfect life. Only Jesus was totally innocent. Only Jesus loved the Lord with all his heart and soul, strength and mind, loved his neighbor as himself fully and perfectly. So only Jesus Christ deserved a great life. And he got a terrible life. He was misunderstood. He was poor. He was rejected. He was betrayed and denied. And finally, he was arrested and on trumped up charges, tortured and killed. And even his father abandoned him. But through all of that, through all of that agony, through all that pain, he was perfectly patient. He was the only innocent sufferer. See, Jesus is the true Job. He was the only truly innocent sufferer who really deserved a great life and got a terrible life. And during that whole time, he was perfectly patient. Absolutely patient. Why? In fact, I put it this way. You might say that all the forces of darkness and evil and hell were coming down on him and he stood his ground. It's almost like he knew that we were behind him. And if the, if the darkness and evil got past him, we would be lost. And so he obeyed. He said, not my will, but thine be done. There's patience. He was honest. My father let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. There's patience. He stood his ground, hyperstanding. See, all the forces of darkness come down and he didn't flinch an inch. He went to the cross. He obeyed his father. And on the cross, when he cried out, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? That's not, by the way, a defiant complaint. That's just the agony of lost love. So why did he do it? Why was he perfectly patient? See, Job, if you read the book of Job, Job learned patience by the end. But throughout the rest of the book, he's plenty impatient. He's doing a lot. He was railing against God, insulting God. Oh, my word. Job only learned patience at the end. That's the reason why, even though he was blessed, you notice it says he was blessed because the Lord was full of mercy. He didn't get rewarded. He didn't earn that. Oh, no. But why was Job forgiven for his impatience? Why can you and I be forgiven for impatience? Here's why. When Jesus Christ went to the cross, he died for our sins. He took the punishment we deserve, right? That's the general. But let me give it to you more specifically. Jesus Christ, through his perfect patience, atoned for our impatience so that the Father can be endlessly patient with us, never giving up on us, never, ever, ever, ever letting us down or pulling back from us, even when we fail him. Because our sins… See, Jesus Christ, through his perfect patience, atoned for our impatience so that God can be infinitely patient with us. You talk about long suffering, look at Jesus Christ. Oh, my goodness. You talk about holding his ground, even though all the forces of darkness were coming down. Now, take that and meditate on it. When troubles are happening to you, take that, and what you can think is this. If Jesus… abandoning him and he did it for me, then I could be patient in these situations for him. If I know that, look, if you see Jesus Christ atoning for you, saving you through his patience, infinite patience, the undeserved suffering, the true and ultimate Job, that will make you into someone who can be patient and not be afraid, oh, if I'm impatient, I'm going to get thrown away. No, no, no. Jesus, through his perfect patience, atoned for your impatience so God could be infinitely patient with you to the end. No matter how you live, even when you fall down, he will be patient with you because Jesus did that. And if you put that, you meditate on that, that will send you down the right road toward that right end state. You know, I've had people, whenever I say, look, patience means you are forgiving and gracious to difficult people and you are also courageous and trusting of God in difficult circumstances. How do I do that? Somebody says, why should I trust a God who allows such suffering in the world? Why should I trust him? Because that's the instance of patience. Why should I trust him? Johnny Erickson, a Christian writer who is a quadriplegic. She suffered a lot. This is what she says. Jesus is worth trusting. Period. End of argument. After all, when they hang you on a cross, like meat on a hook, you have the final word on suffering. Remember, this God did not stay in heaven and just sort of look down and kind of plan us, you know, our lives. He comes into the world. He's hung on a hook like a piece of meat on the cross. He knows what our suffering is like. He loves us. He cares about us. Don't say you can't trust him. Look at him. Look at Jesus Christ trusting God under infinite pressure for you. That will make it possible for you to trust Jesus Christ when you're under finite pressure. And here's one more thing. You notice, you meditate. Here's how you develop patience. When troubles happen, you meditate and pray. You process them. Meditate, first of all, on what Jesus Christ did in the past, but lastly, what he's doing in the future. He's coming again. Be patient because the Lord is coming. Why is that an encouragement? Huh? Why is that an encouragement? Oh, to know how it ends. Listen, I'm going to make a confession to you, and then I know some of you are going to be mad at me, and then I'm going to defend myself with God. Okay, watch. Nothing up my sleeve. All right. When I'm reading a novel, I like to read the ending before I read the novel. Why? I want to know who's alive, who's dead, you know, how things work out. I don't like the suspense. See, if I know how it ends, then as I read the novel, I can handle it. I don't get upset. I don't, you know, get real nervous. Okay, some of you artist types, you artist types, you know, you're going to say, that's terrible. You know, we work hard to craft these narratives. You need to read it. Okay, here's my defense. God does it too. You say, what do you mean God does it too? He tells you that in the end, he's going to come back, and he's going to heal the whole world. He's going to, resurrection from the dead. He's going to make everything right. You trust in him, all the deepest desires of your heart will be fulfilled on that day. On that day, every injustice will be put right. Now, because you know the ending, he tells you the ending of the novel. What's the novel? I mean, the history of the world. He tells you the ending so that you can handle the suspense of the middle part. Yeah, it's tough. It's difficult. But you know in the end, justice will be done. And you know in the end, you will be fulfilled. And that's the reason why he says, be patient. Why? The Lord is coming. So think of it like this. Do you want to be patient? I'm trying to show you that patience is of the essence. It's a battle for your heart every day. The struggle between patience and impatience. If you want to have a happy life, you need to learn to be patient. How do you get patient? One is, look at God, the creator, and let it humble you because impatience is a lack of humility. Say, I don't know. Secondly, look at God, not as creator, but as redeemer, atoning for you through the cost of the cross. That warms your heart into love for God and others because impatience is also a lack of love. It's a lack of love for God, a lack of love for other people. But thirdly, look forward. Get enough hope. Realize that everything's going to be okay in the end because patience is also a lack of hope. It's a lack of humility. It's a lack of love. It's a lack of hope. But God is creator. God is redeemer. God is coming again, the world healer. Meditate on that when you're in your troubled times and you will to your heart is to, by the way, meditate on a hymn by William Cooper. Memorize it so you can say it to yourself. Let me read you just the last part of it. But judge not the Lord by feeble sense, but trust him for his grace. Behind a frowning providence, he hides a smiling face. His purposes will ripen fast, unfolding every hour. The bud may have a bitter taste, but sweet will be the flower. Blind unbelief is sure to err and scan his work in vain. God is his own interpreter, and he will make it plain. Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take. The clouds you so much dread are big with mercy and shall break in blessings on your head. Let's pray. Our Father, we need patience, but we see that patience is hard. One, it takes fighting. It takes reminding ourself about God the creator, you being the redeemer, you being the world healer. We have to look to the past, Jesus Christ, the true and ultimate Job, the only really innocent sufferer, and whose patience saved us. And we look at that, and we think about the future and our blessed hope, and we know that if we bring all these things to bear in our hearts, we can learn patience, and we can keep ourselves from moving down into the hell of eternal autobiography. We ask that you would help us in all these ways. We ask that you'd make us patient people, looking to the one who was patient for us and with us, Jesus Christ. In his name we pray. Amen.
