TITLE: Patience
SCRIPTURE: James 5:7-12
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Practical Faith: Studies in James
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/patience-5/

============================================================

Our scripture reading this morning is from the book of James, chapter 5. Be patient then, brothers and sisters, until the Lord's coming. See how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop, patiently waiting for the autumn and spring rains? You too be patient and stand firm, because the Lord's coming is near. Don't grumble against one another, brothers and sisters, or you will be judged. The judge is standing at the door. Brothers and sisters, as an example of patience in the face of suffering, take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord. As you know, we count as blessed those who have persevered. You have heard of Job's perseverance and have seen what the Lord finally brought about. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy. Above all, my brothers and sisters, do not swear, not by heaven or by earth or by anything else. All you need to say is a simple yes or no. Otherwise, you will be condemned. This is the word of the Lord. Be patient, then. Our modern culture is probably the least able to produce patience in its members. Why do I say that? Well, take a look at some of the features of our modern culture. Here, consumer capitalism confirms your impatience. If you've got company A gets you a product tomorrow, company B can get you that product at the same price today, company A is out of business. In other words, consumer capitalism does not teach us patience. It conforms to our impatience. It sells us products through our impatience. It confirms it. It affirms it. Or look at democracy. Democracy says don't put up with injustice. Assert yourself. Assert your rights. And technology. A generation ago, if you were really upset, you said, I shot him off a letter. But you know what shot off a letter actually means? It means you had to sit down. You had to get your typewriter out. You had to use the... Do you remember things like that? You had to write... Or maybe you just wrote it out. And then you had to mail it. And by that time, you cooled off. And you probably ripped it up and threw it away and wrote another letter. And today, you just tweet. And you... Or you just... Even an email. In other words, technology does not, in any way, support patience. It actually confirms impatience. Now, I am not against democracy. I am not against technological advance. I love one-click shopping. I can't wait for the day in which anything I want... I can one-click in a taxi and it's there when I get home. And that day is not far off, I don't think. And yet, here's the problem. If we actually have a culture which actually does not in any way create or produce or develop patience in us, the reality is that real life, things like marriages, things like parenting, things like relationships, things like actually the just normal difficulties of life, patience is crucial to getting through life. And yet, we live in a culture that actually undermines the character and quality of patience. So, for example, two quotes. One quote I love to use in that Dr. Paul Brand was a famous orthopedic surgeon. He spent half of his life working in India and in Asia, half of his life in America. And this is what he says about people in modern societies. He says, Here's the people in America far more traumatized, far more upset, far more melting down over the normal kinds of suffering that comes to you physically than the people in India. Far more. Here's a new quote. You may have heard me use that one. Here's a newer one. In September, Psychology Today ran an article and was looking into, was research on the anecdotal evidence that people are saying that on college campuses, there's more students asking for treatment for anxiety and for depression and for addictions and for anger than ever. And they did the research and they concluded, it was absolutely true, that for several decades, young American adults have become much less resilient. And this is what, this is the great quote. It says, For young American adults, there is no psychic middle ground. middle ground. Frustration catapults into crisis. Get that? What it's saying is here's happiness and a little frustration comes along and you catapult into crisis and no one lives in that middle space. What is that psychic middle space? I'll tell you what it is. It used to be called patience. It used to be called not melting down, not giving way, not giving up, bearing up. It used to be called patience. And what the article is saying is that increasingly over the decades is a cultural problem. That young American adults are getting increasingly fragile, increasingly less resilient. So the disappointments, opposition, conflicts, throw them, catapult them into crisis. What are we going to do? If we have a culture, you know, ancient cultures tended to actually cultivate patience in people. I just said that the main features of modern culture don't do that. They undermine it. Yet you still need culture to get through life. What are we going to do? We can't look to our society. We have look, I'm here to show you the resources, the unsurpassed resources of the Christian faith. The unsurpassed resources of the Christian faith for the development of patience. That's what this passage is about mainly. And I'd like to show you, I'd like to concentrate on the first four verses of it to show you what we learn about patience here. What patience is, the kinds of patience we need, and how patience can be developed. What patience is, the kinds of patience we need, and how patience can be developed. So first, what patience is. Now, there's two illustrations of patience in here. One's general, one's specific. The general is be patient, see how the farmer waits for the land to yield its valuable crop, patiently waiting for the autumn and spring rains. Now, in that place, James is writing from a place that is very, very hot and very, very dry. And you can't grow anything unless you wait. There are, for two very narrow seasons in which there are rains. There are rains in the autumn and rains in the spring. And if you try to, you have to plant as soon as the rains happen, it puts moisture in the soil. And the danger, of course, is sometimes the rains don't come when you think they're going to come. And the farmer's saying, I got my seed. I got to get a crop. I got to get a crop. And if you are impatient, you say, I got to plant. And you plant, and you don't wait for the rains, because you're afraid they're not coming this year, but they always do. You're going to lose everything. You're just not willing to be patient with life and the pace that real life takes. The specific illustration is Job and the prophets. And, of course, Job is a famous example of someone who wasn't just having to bear up under the normal kinds of circumstances of life, where things just don't happen at the pace you want them. Job lost all of his health. He lost all of his wealth. He lost most of his family. And yet, as it says here, he persevered. And we will get back to him. But frankly, if you really want to take a look at the definition of patience, you should look at two Greek words that are in this passage. They're the two Greek words in the rest of the New Testament that are the main words for patience, and they're both here. In verse seven and a couple other places, where you see the word patience in English, it's a Greek word macrothumia, which means literally long-suffering. But then there's another word for patience, and that's translated down here where it uses in verse 10 and 11 the word perseverance. And that is the word hupomeno, which literally means to hyperstand. Patience is to hyperstand. You say, what does that mean? Best illustration I can give you is a movie, a great movie came out last year called Bridge of Spies. Do you see that movie? And Mark Rylands plays a Russian who's been arrested for spying. And Tom Hanks plays the American lawyer who's defending him. And Tom Hanks is being very dogged and being very enduring. And at one point, the Russian character says to the Tom Hanks character, you remind me of somebody. And then he tells him why, tells him who. He tells a story. He says, when I was a child, we were overrun by partisan border guards. My father was beaten. My mother was beaten. And this man, my father's friend, he was beaten. But every time they hit him, he stood back up again. So they hit him harder. Still, he got back up to his feet. beating and let him live. Stoiki music, I remember them saying, which sort of means standing man. The standing man. That's awfully close to what the Bible, how the Bible defines patience. You don't give up. You don't give in. You don't melt down. Standing man or standing woman. So what is patience? Be careful because even that illustration and those words seem to mean stoicism. You just don't let it get to you. But that's not what it says. If you look at verse 11, where you have the word perseverance showing up a couple times, it says, you know, we count as blessed those who persevered. You've heard of Joe's perseverance. You know that story. We're going to get back to that in a second. And you know what the Lord finally brought about. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy. In the New Testament, patience is almost always linked to inner peace. Galatians chapter 5 says, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience. Peace, patience. Peace, patience. That's not stoicism. That is an inner conviction that no matter how it looks, God is compassionate. No matter what the appearance is, his wise love is working. And so patience comes from an inner peace that knows, that grasps that God is compassionate and merciful. No matter what it looks like. And therefore, here's what patience is. Patience is graciousness and steadiness in the face of delayed gratification. Patience is graciousness and steadiness in the face of delayed gratification. And what's the opposite of patience? You know, what are the marks of a lack of patience? Irritability. Self-pity. Grumbling. Complaining. That's patience. Graciousness and steadiness in the face of disappointment, delayed gratification, delayed on your hopes. However, if you read this carefully, you'll see there's patience and there's patience. You know, it's true that we want to be patient and we say, well, what does it mean to be patient? It means to be, you know, not grumpy. It means to be not complaining, not self-pitying all the time. Not always calling people out, not melting down, not giving up, not giving away. But that's pretty general. What kinds of patience do we need? And we need at least four kinds. They're all in here. We need to be patient with life, patient with people, patient in suffering, and patient with God. And all of those patience is you've got to have. So, first of all, we need to be patient with life. Now, that kind of came out in the illustration of the farmer, don't you think? We need to be patient with life. But as I said, you know, consumer capitalism, which is a major feature of our society, does everything it possibly can to work with your impatience. To say, we're going to get it faster. We're going to get it now. We're going to get the kind you want. We're not going to make you put up with something generic. We're going to get you, we're going to customize. So, everything, everything is working against patience. It's basically, they're catering to our impatience. And yet, the fact of the matter is, nothing really worth anything is one click. Nothing really worth anything is one click. I'll give you just three things real quick. But first of all, no relationship really worth anything is one click. Oh, there's lots of relationships that are one click. They tend to be, it's called networking. And you have a brief conversation and you can tell that, wow, I'm glad I know you and you know me because, you know, we could do things together. So, you get into the contacts and all that sort of thing. That's one click. It is literally one click. However, any relationship that's going to sustain you, any relationship that's going to change you, any relationship that's worth something is going to take enormous amounts of time. Enormous amounts of time. It's also true, by the way, that not only no relationship worth anything is one click, but no skill, by the way, worth anything is one click. Nobody gets a gold medal through one click. It's years and years and years of delayed gratification. Okay, admittedly, that's an extreme. No skill that you develop that makes you able to. even is one click. And, of course, major accomplishments aren't one click. So the point is we have desires, and we want those desires to be gratified now. And Psychology Today article and what we know about capitalism and we know about everything about our society is, you know, you don't wait, you don't pull back, you demand, but all the things that really matter take patience. Real life, the stuff that's really worth something takes an enormous amount of patience. So first of all, you're going to have to have patience with life. Secondly, though, you have to have patience with people. Now, I know I already just touched on that, but no, no, no. Let's go a little further. Psychology Today said one of the reasons why people are having so much trouble maintaining relationships is there's actually a relational middle space, too. It's true that if someone is treating you unjustly, it is true that if someone has really sinned against you, the Bible says and our culture says you should assert your rights. You should speak up. You shouldn't just let injustice go. You shouldn't just let people sin against you. Right. But there's an enormous amount of space here that 1 Peter 4 and Proverbs chapter 10 speaks to when it says love covers a multitude of sins, slights, insensitivities. People are going to let you down. And if you call them out every time, see, if you assert yourself every time, if you never overlook it, you're going to have, community is going to break down and you're just going to have a hard life and you're going to be lonely. You're going to be really lonely. Because if you call out anybody who ever sins against you every single time, you're going to have nobody. You're going to have nobody. Because they're just like you. They've got all the same fears and all the same problems and all the same distractions. And that's the reason why a person who knows how to cover a multitude of sins, someone who just learns how to be patient with people, you learn the discipline. What's that? Not grumbling, you see? It says don't grumble against one another. That's patience with people. It means grumble outside, always calling them out. I cannot tell you how, I mean, this is, generally speaking, you know, one letter out of ten years ago, you kind of wish you hadn't written. But more like one email out of three, you wish you hadn't written. You say, well, I should have done, I should have thought about it. No, no, look, instead of grumbling inside or outside, you learn, what, you learn not to dwell on things when people have wronged you? You learn not to, you say, wait a minute, what about me? I'm not perfect. And you also say, who knows what that person's going through? See, those are little habits of mine. I don't know what that person's going through. I don't know what's on their plate. I know that I often have been insensitive to, and so you get piet. And unless you know how love covers a multitude of sins, unless you learn how to be patient with people, our society's going to break down and you're going to be unhappy. So that's important, okay? So you have to be patient with, one kind of patience is with life. Second kind of patience is with people. Third kind of patience is in suffering. See, suffering isn't just the little slights. And it's not just, you know, being unhappy because people are not really giving you, things aren't coming along just exactly the way you want. It's real losses. It's real griefs. And it's interesting that the two examples we have here of people who really suffered but persevered in suffering are the prophets and Job. See? Take the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord and remember Job. Now, here's what it means to be patient in suffering. Again, it doesn't mean stoicism. If you read the book of Job, some people say, well, what does it mean to be patient in suffering? It means I'm not going to let it get to me at all. You read the book of Job and you'll see Job was not stoic. Job is screaming. He is, you know, he is kicking and screaming and chewing the rug. And he is upset. But here's what we know about the prophets. Read Jeremiah and see what he went through. He wasn't just, oh, everything's fine. Lord, I'm just trusting you. Read Jeremiah. He's a prophet. Read Job. Oh, Lord, everything's fine. I'm just trusting you. No, no, no. They lamented. They exploded. But the prophets never stopped preaching. And Job never stopped praying. And see, what that means is, patience in suffering means you just don't get self-absorbed. into yourself. I can't pray. I can't help people. I can't get out. I can't do anything. I can't do these things. I've just, I'm just, now what happens? You're not being patient and suffering. Patience and suffering does not mean, you know, some incredible inner poise. Patience and suffering means you don't let it turn you into a self-absorbed being. You love God, and you talk to him, and you love your neighbor, and you talk to them. And that's going forward. That's being a standing man or a standing woman, someone who's not been knocked down by it. So you need patience for life. You need patience with people. You need patience in suffering. But lastly, and this is the patience under all the other patients, or put it this way, this impatience creates all the other impatience. And that is, you need to be patient with God. Notice how often it says, the Lord will be coming back. See, twice it says, be patient until the Lord's coming. And it says, you too stand patient because the Lord's coming is near. Now, the Greek word translated coming, both of those places, is the Greek word parousia. And it's a word in the New Testament that means the second coming of Jesus Christ. And here's what Paul is saying. Pardon me, here's what James is saying, excuse me. What he's trying to say is, someday God will make everything okay. Right now, you have a disease, someday God will heal all diseases. There's injustice, someday God is going to put it all right. Right. Someone's mistreating you, someday God's going to right all wrongs. Bad things are happening, someday God's going to wipe away every tear. But he's not doing it now. See, that's the problem. The real problem is, okay, I know God could do all that. I know he could stop all that, but why isn't he? And when you get impatience with God, when you say, God, I know what has to happen, and you're not doing it. I know what has to happen, it has to happen, and you're not doing it. See, it's the impatience with God that leads to all the other impatiences. And it's patience with God that leads to all the other patiences. And what this means is, frankly, not only every day, but almost every hour, something comes along that really you bristle at. It could just be a real disappointment in your schedule. It could be somebody mistreating you. You know, it could be something worse. But when that happens, you're at a fork in the road. You can either say, I trust God, I'm going to be patient with what God is doing right now. Or you can say, I trust my insight. I trust my understanding of what things need to happen. And then you can go get an ulcer. It's your choice. Patience with God is the patience that leads to all the other patiences. Impatience with God is the impatience that leads to all the other impatiences. And you can't live without patience. So lastly, let's ask this question. How can patience be developed? And by the way, up to now, I would hope that no matter who you are, probably much of the things I'm saying are common sense. They're from the scripture, but I think you're going to say, yeah, I agree. It seems it doesn't make sense. This last point will only work for you if you're a Christian. All right. Here's what Christians can do to develop patience in their lives. Practicing, there's practices in the present, there's remembering the past, and there's looking to the future. Practices in the present, remembering the past, and looking to the future. So the first way to develop patience is practices in the past. And there I got three. Oh boy, three sub points under three points. Okay, there we go. You know, you can count them. And here's three practices. The first one is you have to process your disappointments through prayer. If you've read the Bible through and really, and you paid attention to what you're reading, if you're reading the Bible through the first time and paying attention to what you're reading, and you get to this verse, as you know, you've heard of Job's perseverance and have seen what the Lord finally brought about. You've heard of Job's perseverance. So Job is being lifted up as a good example. And if you've read the Bible through, it's going to make you think. Because if you've read the book of Job, which is rather long, but if you read the book of Job, you're not going to come away thinking he was a good example. And this is the reason why he's such an encouraging example to me. Here's the New Testament saying Job is a good example. And it's true. At the very end of the book of Job, God declares him vindicated. God says, you have won through. You know, you won through. Why? Well, what's interesting about the book of Job is the only thing But I think it's a good example. I think it's the only thing, just for you. It was like an old universe of art and things like a crazy example. And this is was interesting. Yeah! It's always interesting. And it's tough. It doesn't mean it's vindicated. God says, you have won through. You know, you won through. Why? Well, what's interesting about the book of Job is the only thing Job does right, I mean, he does a lot of things wrong. The only thing he does right is he never stops praying. He never stops talking to God. Oh, yeah, he complains, but he complains to God. He experiences self-pity, but he actually takes that to God. He has all kinds of doubts, but he takes them to God. He expresses them all, but he never stops taking them to God. And what encourages me so much is that when I look at all my, whenever I have a trial, whenever there's a difficulty in front of me, and I'm saying, oh, my gosh, my attitude's wrong, and this is wrong, and that's wrong, then I remember I just have to pray. If I don't stop, if I stop that, everything is lost. But if I keep that going, that's the foundation for everything else. So, first of all, you have to process your disappointments with prayer. No matter how down you get, you cannot stop it. You can't stop saying, I just don't feel like it today. Of course you don't feel like it today. You want to be a standing man? You want to be a standing woman? Pray. I don't care how you feel. Right? That's the very, very, very most rudimentary kind of patience there is. Secondly, though, we have to process our disappointments with prayer. Secondly, we have to commit a deliberate act of humility. We have to commit a deliberate act of humility. Now, to get to this one, I have to go to the rest of the book of James. James as a whole, you know, that James is a whole book. And in chapter four of James, this is what James says. James four says this, quote, listen, you who say, today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, and make money. But you don't know what will happen tomorrow. Instead, say, if it is the Lord's will, we will do this or that, unquote. Hear that? Listen, you who say, tomorrow or today or tomorrow we will go to this city and we'll do this and we'll make this. But you don't know what will happen. So what James is saying is anxiety, impatience, anger, all the things that are just ripping you up inside because of the way things are going in your life comes because of an assumed omniscience. See? See, James in chapter four is actually talking about anxiety. James in chapter five is talking about impatience. But in both cases, what he's saying is this, your anxiety, your impatience, all the things that are just churning you up come because you think you know. You think you know exactly what has to happen. It is necessary that this is happening and it's not happening. John Newton says everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing can be necessary if he withholds it. See, a deliberate act of humility, commit this deliberate act of humility and say, I don't know. I do not have the vantage point to know what is really necessary. And oh my goodness, do you realize how that's going to change things? Can you do that? I mean, you aren't omniscient. You just feel you are. So the second practice is commit that deliberate act. When you're just getting impatient, when you're getting frustrated, you're getting irritated, you're getting scared, commit a deliberate act of humility and say, I'm not omniscient. God is omniscient. I don't know. And thirdly, the third practice is, remember the three practices? Processing your disappointments through prayer. Secondly, committing a deliberate act of humility. And thirdly, voting for your own growth. What do you mean voting for your own growth? Again, this is the book of James. Listen, this is a little earlier in the book, chapter one. He says, consider it joy when you face trials of many kinds. Because the testing of your faith can produce patience. And if it produces patience, the patience will finish its work. So when you are complete, you will lack nothing. This is very similar to what Paul says in Romans 5, 3. Listen, he says, we rejoice in, he didn't say for, we rejoice in our tribulations. He didn't say we rejoice for them. Of course not. We rejoice in our tribulations knowing that they produce patience. And then patience produces character and character hope. And that hope will not disappoint us for it brings the love of God shed into our hearts. Now, what is this saying? When troubles hit, it's saying that's an opportunity for you to develop patience. You'll never become a patient person unless you have problems. You know that. So you don't rejoice for the problems. You rejoice in the problems and you say, this can drive me into the love of God. and more able to help other people. Because exercising patience can bring me into, can lead to all sorts of other growth. You know, in the book of Job, chapter 28, verses 8 to 10, Job brings these two things together. He brings together this idea that a deliberate act of humility, I don't know, and votes for his own growth. It's a great passage. Listen. He says, if I go to the east, he is not there. If I go to the west, I do not find him. When he is working the north, I do not see him. When he turns south, I catch no glimpse of him. But he knows the way I take. And when he has tested me, I will come forth as gold. Isn't that something? He's saying, I have no idea what he's doing. I do not know what he's up to. I look there. I can't find him. I have no idea what he's up to. I do not. But he knows what I'm up to. I do not. I can't understand him, but he understands me. And when he's done testing me, making me patient, I'll be someone great. Vote for your own growth. Commit a deliberate act of humility and do that in prayer. And those are the practices. But the practices in the present won't work unless you know how to remember the past. Remember what? Remember his patience for you and with you. Now, here's his patience for you. In Hebrews chapter 12, it says, Jesus Christ endured the cross and despised its shame. The word endured is hupomeno, hyperstanding. He saw the cross. He knew it would cost. It would cost. He laughed at the shame. He laughed at the pain. And he went to the cross for you. And if you want the ultimate, I mean, Bridge of Spies, by the way, is a great movie about patience. Watch it and think about patience. But the ultimate, the ultimate story of patience is Jesus Christ going to the cross. They beat him with their fist, it says in Mark chapter 14, Matthew 26, they beat him and they beat him and he, they jeered at him and he, standing man. He was patient with people. He didn't explode. How dare you? Do you know who I am? No. He said, Father, forgive them. They don't know what they're doing. Patient with people. His love covering all their sins. Oh, covering all their sins. He was patient with God. Let this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. He was patient with God. He was patient with people. He was patient with, why did he do it? For us. He did it for us. Jesus Christ saved us through his infinite, costly patience. So that now that our sins are forgiven because he died for us and took the penalty we deserve, now that our sins are forgiven, the Father can be infinitely, unconditionally patient with us in spite of our flaws forever. So why should we trust him, huh? Remember that fork in the road comes every day, every hour? And you can either go down toward ulcers and toward anger and toward bitterness and cynicism and calling people out, or you can trust God. Well, why would you really trust him? Look at him doing this for you. Why wouldn't you trust him? Look at him being patient for you at the cost of his life. Why wouldn't you want to be patient for him when all it's going to do for you is turn you to gold? And finally, look to the future. You know, it says he's coming back. He's going to put everything right. All your hopes eventually will be fulfilled. But Romans 8 says, if you know he's coming back, you'll wait for it with patience. One more time, hmm? One more time. I catch no glimpse of him, but he knows the way I take. And when he has tested me, I will come forth as gold. Let's pray. Our Father, we want, we need to develop patience. We're nothing without patience. No relationship, no accomplishment, no skill, nothing in this life worth anything can be had without patience. And yet we do live in a society in which is being accentuated and aggravated. What are we going to do? We need to believe, oh Father, that your Son, Jesus Christ, went to the cross and through his costly, infinite patience, and patience with us, as Paul says, I am the worst of sinners, but Jesus Christ saved me to show his patience. And Lord, every one of us who has ever known you can look back on our lives and see places where you were incredibly patient with us. How can we not be patient with you? And that patience will lead to all other patience. Please, Father, make us standing men and women. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
