TITLE: People of God
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:9-10
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Identity
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/people-of-god/

============================================================

You might want to turn in your bulletins right now to the passage from 1 Peter that we're going to be looking at. It's printed there. It's the same passage we looked at last week. And it's 1 Peter chapter 2 verses 9 to 12. This year we're going through this book and we are looking at this particular section. And I'll just read it though. We're going to be really looking strictly at the very, very first set of phrases in the first sentence. Let me read it. But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light. Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God. Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. Dear friends, I urge you as aliens and strangers in the world to abstain from sinful desires which war against your souls. Live such good lives among the pagans that though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us. And that's God's word. Now, we've been looking at this description of the church, this description of the people who believe. You, he says, are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. Now, every one of these, every single one of these phrases is just very, very pregnant with quadruplets in each case. And they, we've been looking at each one of them, and I'd like to just try to finish out what we talked about last week. We were looking at what it means to be a royal priesthood and get into the others what it means to be a chosen people and a holy nation. And so, let's go back to the idea of being a priesthood. Let's be as practical as we possibly can. We were talking about that. I won't do any recapitulation for the sake of time tonight. But it says here, and this is something that the Reformation of the 1500s and 1600s, the Reformation got a grip on again, the idea that all Christians, according to the Bible, are priests. Now, we took a long look at what that meant. We said that every one of us has this deep sense that we're on the outside, and we need to get inside. We want to get in the inner rings. We always feel marginalized. Priests are the ones who get in, and we have come into God. We've been given access through Christ, and we've talked all about that. But what does a priest do, and how does this imagery of being a priest, how does this actually apply to us? And we looked at some of those, but I'd just like to remind you of two others, or bring two others to your attention and think about it. First of all, a priest prays for friends and neighbors and brothers and sisters. A priest prays. If you think about what a priest does, Jesus, for example, we're told in Hebrews 7, is our great high priest. And we're told in Hebrews chapter 7, he's a great high priest. Why? For he ever lives to intercede for us. A priest is an advocate. A priest is somebody who goes on behalf of someone else. And therefore, a priest is somebody who prays. Christ stands before the Father and lifts us up. And there's beautiful illustrations. We've talked a little bit about some of them before. You know, in the Old Testament, the priest had an ephod. It was a breastplate. And the high priest had, in the ephod, it had 12 precious stones, beautiful stones, big stones. And they represented the 12 tribes and the clans and the families of Israel. And the names of the tribes were written on the stones. And you say, what does it mean when the Bible says, oh, Jesus is a great high priest? It means that Jesus Christ, if you belong to him, Jesus Christ stands before the Father and your name is inscribed over his heart. And just as anyone who was standing before the high priest would look at the high priest and see the names of the children of Israel written on beautiful stones, you see, and just be dazzled by it, when the Father looks at your name, engraved over the heart of Jesus, he sees an absolute beauty. Because the Son is a priest, meaning the Son intercedes. And you take a look at the place where Jesus says to Simon Peter, on the night before, or you might say the night of the worst moment in Peter's life, the worst night, the darkest moment in Peter's life, Jesus says, Peter, you're going to betray me. Oh, no, you're going to deny me. Oh, no, I'm not. He says, Simon, Simon, Satan wanted to have you. He wanted to sift you like wheat. But what does Jesus say? I know you've got what it takes. Is that what he said? I know you've got, you know, I can just tell you've got the leadership ability, and I know that you're going to come through this. Is that what he said? Simon, Simon, when you do that, when you finally see how weak you are, when you see what a schnook you are, when you see what a coward you are, you have no idea, the test will come, the situation will come, and you will be revealed to yourself as the weak coward you are. And when that happens, Satan will be in a position to be able to just make mincemeat of you. He's ready to sift you like wheat. Once you see your weakness, once your conscience turns into a roaring lion, he will have his way with you. But, he says, Simon, he wanted to sift you like wheat, but what? What does Jesus say? I prayed for you. So when you turn, strengthen the brethren. I prayed for you, and therefore you will come through. You will not fall and not get up. You will come back. You will be all right. Because I prayed for you. That's what a priest does. The priest goes and offers up, takes the weak person, and says, on behalf of this person, I ask for this and for this and for this. That's what a priest does. What does it mean that you're priests? It means you pray your heads off for each other. That's what it means. I was just talking to some people yesterday about this. In Samuel chapter 12, 1 Samuel 12, 23, Samuel, as we'll see in a minute, was a tremendous prayer warrior. Samuel says, and I quote, So, you know, turn to some of your Christian friends tonight, and in your hearts, look at them and say, far be it for me to sin against the Lord by failing to pray for you. Samuel was one of the all-time great interceders. There's this weird place that I discovered, I was reading through the other day, in Jeremiah 15, chapter 15, verse 1, and God is speaking to his people, and he says, he says, If Moses or Samuel themselves were standing before me, my heart would not go out to you. Now, without getting distracted into what the setting was for that statement and so on, look at that amazing, do you realize what a tremendous tribute that is? He says, You've made me pretty mad. You see, I'm really mad at you. And he said, I would be mad at you even if Moses and Samuel themselves were here. Now, what is God saying? He is saying, It's possible to make yourself such a priest. It's possible to be such a great person at prayer for people, that you actually affect the Almighty God. Look, I know I'm walking a tightrope here, but look what he said. Look what he said. Do you have an understanding of God that makes it impossible for you to believe that you can have a major impact on the lives of the people around you if you pray like Samuel? See, God said Samuel had an impact on these people. Samuel had an effect. If Samuel himself was here, what does that mean? He says, There are some people that are so good at this that they have made an unbelievable impact on their friends and their neighbors and the people around them. How are you doing? Do you know that all kinds of people... Do you know you're a priest? Do you realize that all kinds of people around you are not reaching and receiving what they could because you are failing to be a priest? Priests pray. And of course, you see, our priesthood is based on Christ's priesthood. Just one more story before we go on. And a friend of mine who some of you have heard of before, his name is Ed Clowney, and he used to be a teacher at the seminary where I used to teach. When he was a young man on the faculty, there was a much older man there, a man named John Murray. And John Murray was an old Scotsman, and he was very, very severe, intense, sort of strict. And there's a picture of him up in the cafeteria, or there used to be a cafeteria, a picture up at the seminary. And, you know, he's looking like this. And, you know, he lost one eye. And the joke, of course, was, you see the eye that doesn't look real severe and intense? That's the glass one, you know. And yet, one day, Ed Clowney came... know, I've got some needs, would you pray for me? And they sat down, and John Murray, with his great seriousness and his amazing Scottish brogue, began to pray. And Ed said, as he prayed, I felt so cared for, I felt so lifted up, I felt that my needs were going through this man to God, sort of like through a loudspeaker or something. I felt lifted up, I felt prayed for, I felt cared for. What was going on? John Murray was being his priest. He came out of that prayer time transformed, and afterwards he thought, boy, if this is what a human being can do, what must Jesus be able to do for me if I would have recourse? But I'm using this illustration to say, what could you beat other people? Far be it from you that you should sin against the Lord by failing to pray for the people around you. Are you a royal priesthood? Okay, one more thing. A priest is holy. Now, we just did touch on that last week, but what does it mean to be holy? Holiness, among many other things, is a comprehensive word. You know, the word holy, the English word holy, of course, comes from the same root of that we get our word whole from, W-H-O-L-E. And a couple of, a number of weeks ago, we talked about, we preached on the place where, 2 Corinthians, where Paul says that we have to bring every thought captive to Jesus Christ. Now, here's what I mean. If you want to be a priest, that means if you want to have access to the Father the way we talked about last week, if you want to be effective in the lives of the people around you, the way I just said it's possible for a priest to be, an advocate for the people around you, someone who lifts them up. On the other, if that's true, then you need to be holy because priests are holy. And what does holiness mean? It means, all it means in this case, just tonight, I just want to say at this point, it means for you to be fastidious and conscientious, look your life over. What does it mean to bring every thought captive to Christ? It means you look at those areas that you have really been overlooking. There's a sense in which we're never symmetrical. We work real hard at the areas of our lives that are visible. We're very, very careful, usually, about what people see. If you're a Christian, especially, you're very careful what people see, but there may be parts of your life that people don't see and that you just sort of let slide. You know they're not right. Thought life, maybe. But you see, if you want to be a priest, holiness means to look at every part of your life, is to look at your life holistically and to say, is every part of it submitted? That's all. Well, I was reading this poem by George Herbert. It's an amazing poem, and you have to listen carefully because it has a punchline that suddenly grabs you. In fact, unless you listen to the punchline, you can't figure out what he's talking about, so listen, listen carefully. He says, Lord, with what care hast thou begirt us around? Oh, Lord, how you've taken care of us. Look at all the ways in which you watch out for us. And then it goes on. Parents first season us, then schoolmasters deliver us to laws. They send us bound to rules of reason, holy messengers. Pulpits and Sundays, sorrow, dogging sin. Affliction sordid, anguish of all sizes. Fine nets and stratagems to catch us in. Bibles laid open millions of surprises. Blessings beforehand, ties of gratefulness. The sound of glory ringing in our ears, without our shame, within our consciences. Angels and grace, eternal hopes and fears. Yet all these fences and their whole array, one cunning bosom sin blows quite away. You see what he's saying? He says, you know, there's all kinds of ways to keep us, all kinds of ways to keep us on the straight and narrow. He says, parents, schoolmasters, rules of reason, holy messengers, pulpits and Sundays, sorrow, dogging sin. Affliction sordid, anguish of all sizes. I love this one. Bibles laid open millions of surprises. You never know what the Bible will say. They're everywhere. Blessings beforehand, ties of gratefulness. The sound of glory ringing in our ears. Outside our shame, inside our consciences. But all these fences and their whole array, one cunning bosom sin blows them all away. If you just let one area, one room in your house that you know, this isn't what God wants for me to do, this isn't what Christ wants for me to do, but you allow it. There it is. It could be a grudge that you're nursing. It could be fantasies that you go to as ways of dealing with stress. It could be a particular practice. here it is. Bibles laid open, millions of surprises, parents, schoolmasters, the sound of glory ringing in our ears. All these fences and their whole array, one cunning bosom sin, can blow away. Look at those bosom sins, those cunning bosom sins. You deal with them or they will blow you away. Priests are holy. Priests look at themselves holistically. Priests are wholly his. Are you? That's what it means to be a priest. If you do that, you can't believe the usefulness that you will have in people's lives, how useful you'll be to others. All right, royal priesthood. Now, let's move on to this next one. Chosen race. Let's be brief on this. And yet, a chosen race. What's really interesting here is Peter uses a term that describes Israel in the Old Testament, a people that was related by blood of the same racial stock. And now he turns around and he's writing to people of all kinds of racial backgrounds and all kinds of blood, you see, backgrounds and all sorts of ethnic groups and racial groups, and yet he calls them a race. Now, that might be stunning, but it was predicted in the Old Testament. For example, there's an amazing passage. I really have never, I'd love to get some Jewish scholar off in a corner somewhere and ask him or her, what do you think of this thing? Isaiah 19, verse 24 and 25, it says, the days are coming. In that day, Israel will be the third, along with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing on the earth. The Lord Almighty will bless them all and say, blessed be Egypt, my people, and Assyria, my handiwork, and Israel, my inheritance. Let me tell you something, friends. If you know anything about the Old Testament, that is one of the most stunning verses anywhere. On that day, he will bless them and he will say, blessed be Egypt, my people, and Assyria, my handiwork. Wait a minute, weren't they the enemies? Weren't the people of God Israel? What the Old Testament is telling us is there is a day in which there will be the people of God, a race related by blood? Oh, no. Peter's talking about people who are not related by blood. Oh, yes, they are. They are related by blood, not their blood. They're related by the blood of their Savior. They're justified by his blood. And Peter is here saying that the church of Jesus Christ is the fulfillment of this unbelievable, unbelievable statement. And there's a lot of other statements in the Old Testament that say that what makes you a member of this new race is not your bloodlines and not your pedigree and not your family and not your racial stock, but God's choice. Let me put it this way. This phrase is saying that God's people, a people are being formed now, a new race is being formed now, based on God's choice, which means his unmerited favor, his unmerited love. Well, let me put it this way. Even if you go back to the Old Testament, you'll find in a place like Deuteronomy 7, where God says to Israel, I chose you. He's talking racial Israel now, you know. Physical Israel. He says, I chose you. And you know why I chose you? I didn't choose to love you because you were the greatest of nations, because actually you're one of the least of nations. But rather, I chose you because I loved you. And if you read the passage carefully, you'll see what God is actually saying is one of the most wonderful circular statements that's ever been made. He says, I didn't love you because you were great. I loved you because I loved you. I just put my love on you. I didn't love you because you're greater. I didn't love you because you're better. I didn't love you for any of those reasons. I love you simply because I loved you. My love is free. It's unmerited. And you see, that very principle shows that what it really means to be part of his people is to accept his unmerited love. What you have in, you know, a Christian is somebody who knows that on the basis of the unmerited love of God, on the basis of the blood of Christ, not on the basis of my blood and my relationship to you by my blood and your blood, but on the basis of Christ's blood and on the basis of his unmerited favor, I'm now part of a new race. Now, somebody says, and we're going to explain what it means to be part of a new race here, but somebody says, first of all, phrase I've never liked in the Bible. It sounds so elitist. What do you mean you're chosen? A chosen race. It sounds tremendously elitist, but friends, don't you see, if you understand what it's teaching, it's actually the only and final remedy to elitism. This is not saying you are a choice people. It's saying you are a chosen people. That's totally different. A choice people means, ah, you know, what is, you know, USDA choice. What's that mean? Well, here's all this meat up there, you know, and some of it has little worms in it, and some of it's, you know, this, and some of it's that, but this is the best, the pick of the lot, and so this is the only, what does USDA stand for? I don't remember, but anyway, USDA, this is the choice meat, and when you see the word chosen, you might think it means choice. It doesn't mean that. It means that you, if you are a Christian, if you are in the people of God, whether you're Egyptian or Assyrian, whether you're Jewish, whether you're Italian, no matter what you are, you can be part of the people of God, all related by the same blood of Jesus, if you come to understand that the love of God is unmerited, it's free. It says in 1 Corinthians, great verse, it says, God chose the foolish things to shame the wise, God chose the weak things to shame the strong, and then, let me just give you a little translation, it says, God chose the lowly things, even the things which are nothing, to bring to nothing the things which are, and when he says he chose the nothing, he literally says he chose the zeros. Anybody who's a Christian knows that if I'm a Christian, it's because Jesus died for me, and he shed his blood for me, and I can receive that, and be received not on the basis of anything about me, not a thing about me, has nothing to do with my pedigree, nothing to do with me being better in any way, I am chosen, therefore, not choice. It's strictly because God has sent me his unmerited favor, God has sent me his unmerited love. That's the reason, in other words, a Christian knows that hymn, which we've never sung, and one of these days I'm going to pull it out and put it to some kind of tune that we can sing, it goes, tis not that I did choose thee, remember, for Lord that could not be, this heart would still refuse thee, hast thou not chosen me? My heart owns none before thee, for thy rich grace I thirst, this knowing, if I love thee, thou must have loved me first. Do you believe that? Do you say, is that the most thrilling thing that you've ever heard? Does your heart leap when you hear it? Do you say, that's what my life is based on, the knowledge that if I love thee, thou must have loved me first, not because of anything I have done, you see? If you understand that, you're in the people of God. That's the basis of the people of God. It's the eschewing of elitism of any kind, the thought that you can possibly earn your salvation in any way that makes you eligible for the people of God. You're not choice, you are a chosen people. And the reason you become sort of, there's a solidarity here, is because once you understand that, that you're saved sheerly by grace, it creates a psychology that unites us, regardless of whether here's, you're Jewish and you're Egyptian and you're Assyrian, you're Italian and so on. Do you know that you're saved sheerly by grace? That's what makes us different than everybody else. We know that we're chosen, not choice. We know that the love of God is completely free. Everybody else either thinks there's no God or thinks that if you're going to make it, you're going to do it through hard work and being good and being decent and, you know, and working hard to be a nice person and so on. We know it's different. That immediately gives you a whole new psychology and we become part, in a sense, of a whole new culture, a whole new mindset, a whole new way of thinking. We have a whole new and radically different self-image. Do you have it? Do you understand it? It's all part of what it means to say we are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, and then, look, a holy nation. Now, a holy nation, boy, is a pretty remarkable statement and it's so comprehensive and there's no way we can unpack it all now, but here's what it means. First of all, the word here is the word ethnic. I don't know if I've told you this one before, but here in 1 Peter 2, 9, it says, Christians, you are a holy ethnic. Now, what does that mean? First of all, it means we are a people with a common culture. What's an ethnic group? What is a nation? It's a people with a common culture. Big difference here. Now, listen, listen, my kids used to like the bowl. to take them bowling, you know, there's a sort of bowling subculture. You know, they all have these, they all, I mean, I don't want to make fun of anything at all. I mean, if any of you are bowlers, but it's a whole different world, you know. I mean, it's a subculture. And they have their own jargon, and they have their own uniforms, and they have their own places that they go to buy their accoutrements and so on, and they have their own events, and it's a subculture. Fine. Recently, in the last couple of years, I've taken a couple of my kids to a place out in Queens where there's archery. It's an archery range. And I found out, hey, that's a different subculture. They have their own videos. They have their own uniforms. They have their own jargon. They have their own events and so on. And there are subcultures. But let me tell you, the difference between moving from a bowling league into an archery league, that's a change. But that's not quite the same thing as looking at the difference between a West Indian culture and a Chinese culture. Why? We're not talking about subcultures here when we say you are a holy nation. We're talking about cultures. A culture is much more comprehensive than a subculture. Two cultures are two different visions of life. They are absolutely comprehensive. Two whole different ways of looking at the world and reality. Cultures differ on how you do education, how men and women relate, what to do if you're depressed, what is kind behavior, how to relate to other races, what is good music, what is art, economic relationships, your sense of humor. In other words, cultures are absolutely comprehensive. And when the Bible says, when Peter here says that Christianity, that Christians are a holy nation. This does not, frankly, what it means is when you become a Christian, it's not like you were in the bowling league and now you're going to the archery league. Christianity affects literally everything. Everything. The way you do business, the way you think of yourself as a man or a woman, the way you relate to other races, the way you do art and see art, the way in which you spend your money, the way in which you think about money, everything. Socially, economically, spiritually, culturally, emotionally, everything is affected because you are a holy nation. It's absolutely comprehensive because the church is a colony of heaven. Our citizenship is in heaven and therefore our values, our way of thinking comes down and mixes in with what we are and transforms us in every single area. So when it says you are a holy nation, it's making an unbelievably comprehensive claim. What are the implications of that? What are the implications of that? These. Let me just give you a couple. First of all, instead of thinking of Christianity as a kind of self-improvement thing, kind of like joining a health club. I'm going to get myself together spiritually now. I'm going to come to church and I'm going to kind of work out spiritually. And I set aside this amount of time. And a lot of you are very good. I can see that you're good at it because you've done it in other ways. You know how to do a makeover. You know how to lose 20 pounds in six months. You know how to learn Spanish in your spare time. You know how to become computer literate. You know, you're good at these things. This is the way Manhattanites are in particular. You know, what are your New Year's resolutions? I'm really going to develop myself in this area, in this area. I'm going to learn a new language. I'm going to figure out. I'm going to master Lotus. You know, I'm going to do it. So you say, okay, I'm going to be a Christian. I need that. And I'm going to work out. And so it's like, you know, you were in the bowling league and now you're also going to add archery to it. No. No. It's considerably more comprehensive. It's absolutely comprehensive. It means, how do I put it, Christianity can't just be one more file, you know, in the crowded drawer of your life. It's a new drawer. In other words, thinking, here's your, if you think of your life as a drawer and here's all the files, all right? Christianity is not a new file. I'm sorry. You take all your files out and Christianity is not a file in your drawer. Christianity is a new drawer in which, into which all your files go. And you're going to find that they don't fit quite the same way they did before. Things are going to have to shift around. Things are going to have to change. And the way we do business, the way we think of ourselves, our gender identities, the way we relate to our parents, the way we understand culture, the way we understand our material possessions, everything, everything. Let me ask you a question. Redeemer, are we a social club or are we a colony, a pilot plant of a new humanity? What are we? Are we a weekly show, Christian show, or are we a counterculture? Now, how are we going to become that? That takes a lot. But I'll tell you at least this. It means two things. even live in a place, where all the technology and all the trends are to teach you how to screen people out of your lives. What do you think answer machines are for? What do you think doormen are for? In other words, we have learned how to screen people out. We have learned how to create our own personal cultures. That's where we're heading, that you are able to pick and choose and create your own personal culture. You cocoon yourself, you see. That's the whole way that we're going. Christians have to realize that we can't do it that way. We have got to make ourselves open to other people. We've got to make ourselves visible to other Christian brothers and sisters, visible. We've got to make ourselves somewhat vulnerable. We have to get into each other's lives. It has to be done. Your relationships to somebody else that you work with, your relationships to the, if you're a bowler, the relationship to the other bowler is single-dimensional, one-dimensional. You know, you go to the bowling events together. That's it. You're on the teams together. You may see each other pretty often, but if you're members of a family, your relationships are multiplex, you see. You eat together, you work together, you play together, you weep together, you know, you laugh together. That's what it means to become a Christian and to be in the church, and that's what it means to be a holy nation, you see. Oh, are you ready for that? It's tough. You know, for example, I don't mind the fact that many of you know that Redeemer is good at certain things, and this other church is good at certain things, this other church is good at things. One of the things Redeemer has always stood for is the unity of the body of Christ. We're not turf conscious. We don't say, why don't you just come to our church? Don't go over there. They don't teach the same things as we do. You never hear that from us, but let me ask you something. Where are you vulnerable? Where are you connected? Where do the people see what's going on in your life? Where's the multiplex relationships? Where are you part of a holy nation? Hmm? Are you sort of a walking answering machine? Screening every call in, only answering when you want to. So we have to be able to get into each other's lives. We have to remember we're called to something much greater, but more than that, it's also going to take some really hard thinking. You know, what does it mean to be a Christian and to be a successful businesswoman? What does it mean? What does it mean to be a Christian and to be an actor? What does it mean? The real problems are that people like me, who've never been actors, know all about the Bible and all theology, and people like you, who are actors, don't know as much about the Bible as you ought to. We're going to have to partner. Not in large groups like this. We're going to have to partner together, and we're going to have to work it out and say, what does it mean for us to be part of a holy nation, a counterculture? What does it mean for us to show the world what real art is, what real justice is? What does it mean for us to do that? What does it mean for me to carry out the principles of my heavenly citizenship in the way in which I do my job? What does it mean to do that? You see? One of the problems, being a Christian takes far more thinking. A lot of people like to say, ah, Christians, yeah, yeah, you know, you're intellectually lazy. You want somebody to tell you all the answers. Are you kidding? Look, you guys are all into professions. Look at what's happening to professions. Professions now, in order to create a profession, you have to create a set of technical jargon. You have to set, you create a sort of a little culture. You have certain uniforms you have to wear. I mean, if you're a certain kind of profession, you've got to dress a certain way, or people don't know. You know, even if you say, no, I'm part of a radically, we'll see, if you're radically individualistic and you can dress any old way, that's a uniform, and everybody else who's in your particular crowd does the same thing. You see? You're all completely uniform, radical, radical, radically individualistic people. And so what happens is, there are little cultures full of common values, all sorts of things that you have to toe the line on in order to be part of that profession, and Christians must examine every single one of them. There's all kinds of assumptions, implicit and explicit, and all of that. Christians can't say, oh, so this is what it means, you know, to get into law. This is what it means to get into music in New York. You have to look at everything, everything. Being a Christian is not being lazy intellectually. Other people just sort of say, oh, this is what it means, so you do it. You adopt it. You adopt the values. You adopt the jargon. You do what everybody else does. Christians never can do that. Christians say there are assumptions underneath all of these things, assumptions about human nature, assumptions about the nature of God, assumptions about right and wrong, assumptions about the nature of truth, and I've got to examine every single one of them. How do I do this with distinctiveness? How do I do this with kingdom values? How do I get my heavenly citizenship in? That's what it means to be part of a holy nation. Are you? Or are you just a Christian consumer? Hey, there's one more thing. One more thing. really watch bringing the world's values in, in this sense. Old distinctions between race and class, money and no money, all the things that tear the world apart must not follow us into here. Now, look, that's what Paul means when he says, henceforth we know no one after the flesh. We are the real circumcision, Paul says, who worship in spirit and put no confidence in the flesh. What it means is, we no longer, look, here's a person raised in money and here's a person raised on the other side of the tracks and you're both Christians. You know, two Christian sisters sitting alongside of each other. You are crazy if you don't think it's not going to take work and a stretch for you to really be sisters. It's going to be a stretch. There's going to be all kinds of assumptions and all kinds of old animosities and all kinds of little triggers and when that person does that, you're going to say, oh gosh, one of those, I can't believe it. These are the kind of people we used to make fun of back in my neighborhood all the time. You don't think it's going to be a stretch? It's going to be a stretch, but you must not let those same things that tear the rest of the world apart follow us into here. You better watch it. The world should be coming to us to find out how justice is done. Is it? No, of course not. So what does that mean? We must repent that we're not a holy nation, that we're not being a holy nation. Anything less than this. Christians have to work at these things. Anything less means we're failing to be a holy nation. Okay, one last thing. It says we're a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, and then lastly, a people belonging to God. Now, unfortunately, and we'll close with this, this is, what a shame, this is such a lousy translation. The trouble is, there is no good translation. In the old King James, it says, a peculiar people, which is really bad. You know, it's a peculiar people. The point is, a people, it means literally God's own people, God's special possession. Think of your possessions. Is there anything in your life that's irreplaceable, absolutely irreplaceable? In my life, I've got about a thousand sermons that I wrote from about 1975 to 1985 that are all written on paper, hard copy, there's no, they're not on any disc, they're all there. That's it. You know, I spend 15, you know, 10 to 20 hours on each one of those things and they're all in one basic long file drawer and I look at that and I shudder sometimes. I say, what would happen? I've done a few things about it, you know, I've had made some copies. I keep saying, imagine, you know, in other words, here I go, the house is burning down, there's my children, there's the file drawer, you know, what am I going to do? In other words, irreplaceable. Have you got anything like that? Can you imagine if 99% of all your net worth was bound up in some beautiful and irreplaceable possession? How would you regard it? How would you look at it? That, the Bible says, is how God regards you. If you have received Christ as your Lord and Savior, you are his own people, a people belonging to God. What a weak translation. We can't do. It means you're his, you're his special possession, you're his prized possession. God dotes on you. God is ravished with the very sight of you. I don't know, how else can we put it? What does it mean? The psychiatrists and the psychologists are always talking about low self-esteem. I remember some years ago when I was in seminary and I got depressed. I went to see a counselor and the counselor said, he knew I played a trumpet at the time, he said, the counselor said, I want you to imagine, whenever you get depressed, I want you to sit down, close your eyes and imagine yourself playing a trumpet solo before a huge crowd bringing the house down. Let me just tell you something. Why should I imagine something that only might happen instead of putting all of my imaginative powers into imagining something that has happened if I'm a Christian and that is that God has clothed me in the righteousness of Jesus Christ and I am the apple of his eye that I'm his peculiar people? See, I'm his own possession. I'm his irreplaceable treasure. He's ravished with me. Now let me tell you something. Do you believe that about yourself if you're a Christian? Don't you see how much imagining it's going to take? Don't you see how much you've got to think about that? You know why? You have to do it. Why go imagining things? And a lot of you are, even without a counselor telling you. A lot of people are, you're trying to get a sense of self-worth by imagining things that might happen. Why not imagine something that has happened? Why imagine something that once it happens will pass? that has happened? that has happened? Why not imagine something that has happened? Why not imagine something Thank you. You're trying to get a sense of self-worth by imagining things that might happen. Why not imagine something that has happened? Why imagine something that once it happens will pass? Why not put your time into imagining something that is permanent? And if you understand it, you see what he says? God's own people, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the excellencies of him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. What he's saying here is if you get a grip of your identity, if you learn who you are, if you learn to see that you're a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, but above all, God's special possession, there will be a power and a boldness about you. But remember when Isaiah finally understood that God loved him? He said, woe is me. I am undone. I'm an unclean man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. And the angel came and took an altar off the altar, put it on his lips, and he was forgiven. And he saw the sacrifice, and he saw how much God loved him. And then God comes to him and says, I've got a job for somebody. It's a very hard job because you never will succeed at it. You'll be persecuted and vilified and attacked all of your life. So I need somebody who's willing to go off and do a job in which you will continually go down to utter defeat. And what is Isaiah said? Here am I, send me. In other words, if you understand that you are God's precious possession, irreplaceable treasure, there will be a send-me-ness about you. Is there? Send-me-ness no matter what. Is there? Ready to declare the excellencies of him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous light. Let me just close by asking you, you know, kind of a simple question. Do you know what I'm talking about? Do you have any idea what I'm talking about? If you don't, I just beg you, please don't stop coming here, reading, talking to Christian friends. Please don't stop until you've figured out what it means. Because, you see, to be the people of God is the ultimate. And it's something that's yours freely if you'll humble yourself, if you'll admit that you can't merit a salvation. See, if you don't understand it, don't stop until you do. And if you do understand it, but you don't grasp it, you don't appropriate it, you don't act it out, don't stop imagining what you are in him until you do. Let him dazzle your imagination. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you would help us to understand what it means to be your people. Help us to live it out in our relationships, live it out in our lifestyles, live it out in our business life, live it out in our inner psyche, live it out in our self-image, live it out everywhere. We thank you that you've given us such a comprehensive and thorough faith. And we thank you for it and ask that everybody here would receive it through Jesus. It's in his name that we pray. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Thank you.
