TITLE: Personal Prayer
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Prayer (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/personal-prayer/

============================================================

We're going to do one more month on the subject of prayer. And if you look at your first page, I can show you September, October, and December very quickly. I mean, September, October, and November very quickly. Number one, in September, we looked at the fact that the one factor always present in every major revival of Christianity in a century or a decade or a place or a time has always been intense corporate prayer. Not so much prayer for personal needs, intense corporate prayer for the glory of God, prayer for the kingdom of God. That was September. In October, number two, we said that this kind of prayer is extraordinary and prevailing. Extraordinary prayer is to say when people begin not just to pray privately, not just to pray in worship or in small groups, but they begin prayer groups, prayer walks, prayer vigils, new prayer meetings, something extraordinary, something out of the ordinary. That's extraordinary prayer. And then we talked about prevailing prayer, repeated, sustained, intense. You know, Lloyd-Jones' little quote, give him no rest, give yourself no rest, keep on, bombard God, bombard heaven until the answers come. That sounds strong. It comes right out of the book of Isaiah as we were looking at. And that's what we talked about in October. In November, we talked about what do you pray for in corporate, intense, kingdom-centered prayer. And we talked about these three things, God's spirit in our hearts, God's presence among his people, and the glory of God in the city. So there it is, September, October, November. And some of you are saying, well, why did you take so long? Why did it take all that time? There it is. Why were you so long-winded? I don't know. But it's clearer in my mind now, perhaps, than it was then. However, having talked about corporate prayer, I just wanted, I didn't think we should finish the series, and this is what I want to do here in December. I didn't want to finish the series without talking about the fact that you do have to have a personal prayer life that supports corporate prayer. And I would like to lay out some of the principles of what that personal prayer life ought to be. There's a kind of personal prayer life that fits you for kingdom-centered corporate prayer, the kind of prayer that we've been talking about for the last, you know, three months. Let's talk about the personal prayer that can be the basis for revival in our church. And so here near the bottom of the first page, this very, very, very famous passage I'll read to you from what Jesus says in the Sermon on the Mount. This is Matthew 6. And when you pray, you shall not be like those who love to pray in order that they may be seen by men. But you, whenever you are praying, go into your room, and when you have shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you. And when you are praying, do not babble like the Gentiles do, for they think they will be heard for their many words. Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask him. You then pray like this, our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy, may your kingdom come, may your will be done as in heaven also on earth. Give us today our daily bread and forgive us our debts as we have forgiven our debtors. Do not bring us into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Now, what are we going to say about this passage? Obviously, there's a lot of places where you can write a week of sermons on every word, and there's a lot of people in the past who have done that. But I'd like to just point out a few principles from what this says for personal prayer. First of all, Jesus is saying you have got to have a strong personal prayer life. I think today, this is a little bit surprising, today when corporate praise is so popular, praise nights, corporate worship is so popular, it can happen that people who enjoy corporate prayer and corporate praise don't have a secret prayer closet prayer life. Jesus is very concerned about that here. In fact, he actually says, I don't want you only to be people who pray where other people see you, that is, out in public. Public prayer is not enough. There's got to be a private prayer life. And when he says, go into your room, this is one of those places where learning the Greek does work. This is a Greek word not just for room in general, but for a storeroom. In homes in those days, the storeroom was in the center of the house. In order to keep food, there were no windows. It wasn't a room that had a wall that abutted on the outside. There were no windows. It was a way of making sure it was dry. It was a way of making sure it was not too hot or not too cold. he's using a word that had no windows. And what he's after here is motivation. He says, of all the spiritual disciplines, the one that nobody really can see whether you're doing it or not is secret prayer. Now, do you, when you are all by yourself and you don't really have something you've got to do, like if you're waiting around for a bus or something, do you pray naturally? Do you regularly go to find God in prayer? When Jesus says, go into your room, and he says, don't be like those who want to be seen, he's after motivation. The sign that you have got a really growing, intimate life with him is that you want to pray, that you do pray, that you regularly pray. There is peer pressure that can get you to come to corporate prayer, and there's a certain excitement, there's a certain thrill to having everybody together. But how good are you at your own individual prayer life? Group prayers, prayer walks, you know, prayer in your small group, all that, there's a certain amount of peer pressure, there's a certain amount of peer attraction. But what about, just how much time do you really spend in prayer, all by yourself? And Jesus is saying, that will tell you a lot about the index of your heart. Because there's nobody really cracking the whip over you. There's nobody who really knows. They certainly don't know how often you're actually praying as you're walking around during the day, how quickly your heart goes to him. Now, that's what this paragraph's about. I'm not going to try to read through it. Importance of private prayer. Turn over to page two. Very important. In that top paragraph, though, this is one of my favorite quotes. Archbishop William Temple went a bit deeper on this subject when he said, your religion is what you do with your solitude. Some of you may have heard me use that before. It's one of my favorite quotes. Religion is what you do with your solitude. And what he means is that when you're totally alone and you don't have to think about anything, what do you think about? Do you worry about money? Do you fantasize about the house that you wish, you know, you'd like to have? Do you, in other words, what do you, where does your mind naturally go? Where does your imagination tend to go? Is it to adoration of God? Is it to prayer? And what Temple is trying to say is, your real God is what you most effortlessly think about. So it's really kind of a way of, it's one of his ways of talking about idolatry. You know, secret prayer is crucial. The regularity of it, the comprehensiveness of it, it's crucial. A crucial index of whether or not you love God for who he is in himself or whether you're basically using him. Now, that's number one. Number two, I would like, there's so many things I could say about personal prayer, but what I'd like to do for the rest of this time is to say, here's something that you may not have heard me talk about before, because it's, to me, it's a little bit more of a recent discovery on my part, as I think I've indicated. In the last five to ten years, I feel like I've been taught more about prayer than I have about a lot of other subjects, and I've learned more about prayer than I have about a lot of other subjects. And one of the things that I've come to recognize is a certain active, passive rhythm to petitionary prayer. I'm not going to talk to you about so much adoration or repentance. I want to talk to you about asking God for things, petition, talking about the things that you want to see happen in the world. There's a rhythm to it. And I learned a lot of this from Eugene Peterson, by the way. Eugene Peterson is a pretty well-known writer, but you may not have heard of this book. He wrote a book called Answering God, and it's on how to pray the Psalms. It's not all that well-known a book, but it's really worth getting. And in there, he talks about the fact that in the early stages of the Psalter, when you get to Psalm 4 and 5, Psalm 4 is an evening prayer, and Psalm 5 is a morning prayer. Not morning, then evening. Evening, then morning. And in this book, Peterson comes out and says, evening and morning prayer in Psalm 4 and 5, bring out a rhythm that you've got to have if your personal prayer life is going to prepare you for life as it is. You can see it, he says, in these two aspects in the Lord's Prayer itself. Thy kingdom come, thy will be done. Thy kingdom come is praying to put the world right. Thy will be done is praying to put your heart at rest about the world. They're both forms of petitionary prayer. There's a kind of prayer in which you say, Lord, I'm going to pray, I'm going to put these... to accept that you are taking care of them. That's a kind of passive petitionary prayer. That's evening prayer I want to show you. That's the prayer of Psalm 4. And you've got to do that to put your heart at rest so you don't worry anymore. It's petitionary, but it's sort of passive, reflective. It's praying your worries into God's hands and realizing he's going to take care of them now. Psalm 5, not thy will be done, but thy kingdom come. Psalm 5, morning prayer, is active. It's going after things in the world that aren't right. It's laying out petitions. It's prevailing. It's bombarding God, as it were. It's expecting to see changes. And Peterson says he thinks that Psalm 4 and Psalm 5 come in the order that they do because he believes that we ought to be doing evening and morning prayer. Now, this is something maybe you haven't heard me talk about, but it's something that's been very important to me, though I must admit because I find evening prayer much harder to do than morning prayer. I know everybody's different, but I find that I'm much more tired at night to do evening prayer, and I'm very alert in the morning, no matter how early I get up, to each his or her own problems with prayer. Nevertheless, I think he's right. He believes there should be a rhythm of evening and morning prayer. The evening prayer is passive petitionary. The morning prayer is active petitionary. Let me show you what I mean by this. Let's take a look at Psalm 4. This is heart at rest prayer. He thinks this comes first. You're not ready to go after the world and actively pray and seek changes until, first of all, you've put your heart at rest. He thinks you really need to do the heart at rest prayer in the evening, and he thinks it prepares you for the act of get out there and change the world prayer in the morning. Psalm 4. This is not the whole psalm, but most of it. In your anger, do not sin. When you are on your bed, search your hearts and be silent. Offer right sacrifices and trust in the Lord. Many are asking, who can show us any good? Let the light of your face shine upon us, O Lord. You have filled my heart with greater joy than when their grain and new wine abound. I will lie down and sleep in peace. For you alone, O Lord, make me dwell in safety. Now, the point of this psalm, the point of this kind of prayer, is to go to bed and sleep in peace. It's not that hard to lay down at night and sleep because, you know, you get tired and you're going to sleep. But it's one thing to put your body down. It's nothing to put your soul down. There's a kind of prayer that puts the soul at rest about how things are happening in the world. Psalm 4 says you need to pray yourself out of the worry and the anxiety at night or you're not going to sleep well and you're not actually going to have a healthy life. Now, how do you do that? Now, this regular evening, I have found, I think he's right. I think he's right. I think 15 minutes at night, 20 minutes or something like that, laid aside, sometimes taking out Psalm 4 and thinking through the things that are on your heart, the things that are worrying you, the things that are bothering you, the things that are stressing you out, and actually doing what he says you should do here until you put your heart at rest. It doesn't mean you simply don't, you're petitioning. You're saying, Lord, I need this. I give this to you. Lord, I'm concerned about this. Please take care of it. You know what's going on. So, look here over the page to give you some idea about it. Page 3. How does David get his heart at rest? Hmm? How does David get his heart at rest? If you read through this passage, you'll see that he does a little bit of talking to himself. He does meditation. He's working on his heart. But at a certain point, and go to the third paragraph, here's David's ultimate counsel to himself. In verse 6b, David says, the light of your face is upon us. And then he says in verse 7, in a remarkably powerful statement, if I have the privileges of the gospel assurance of an access to the love and grace and friendship of God, then everything else is gravy. See, I'm going back to the…if you go back to Psalm 4, it's where he's saying, when you're on your bed, search your hearts, be silent. You know, he's not talking to God at this point. He's talking to himself. He's talking to his friends who are listening to the psalm. Offer right sacrifice and trust in the Lord. Many are asking, who can show us any good? Let the light of your face shine upon us, O Lord. That's an amazing statement. We have the light of his countenance. We have access. We have fellowship with him. So you have filled my heart with greater joy, the light of your countenance, than when their grain and new wine abound. What is that saying? What that is saying is circumstances are not as important. I would like to have my new wine and my grain abound. In fact, I'm worried about it. I'm worried that we're not going to have a good harvest. But I've got your face. Now, that's the essence of evening prayer. Another way to put it is this. When Jonathan Edwards was 18 years old… and we have the manuscript of it, and it's called Christian Happiness. And the thesis of the sermon is Christians should be happy. He's 18, all right, you know? You know, how profound could he be? You say, gosh, you mean you're going to preach a sermon that Christians should be happy? But then these are the three points of the sermon which showed that we had a budding genius here, 18 years old. Here's the three points of the sermon. Why should Christians be happy? Number one, our bad things will turn out for good, Romans 8, 28. Number two, our good things can never be taken away from us, the light of his countenance, pardon for sin, assurance of grace, you know, the inheritance of eternal life. Our bad things will turn out for good, our good things can never be taken away from us, and the best things are yet to come. That's his sermon. That's the perfect sermon outline, by the way. I don't know if you...it's hard to beat something like that. And that's what David's doing on his bed. He's putting these things up in front of God, and he's saying, I've got the light of your countenance, and therefore, I want my grain to be...come in. I want my new wine to come in. I'm worried about money. I'm worried about the harvest, but ultimately, I've got you. And therefore, in summary, look at this summary...see the paragraph here in summary? If, as we lay our request to God, we find ourselves sinking deeper into despondency, anger, or self-pity, if when you pray for things, you don't find the burden lifting off of you, then we must, A, be sure that the things we're asking for aren't idols, or else our petition will make us only more discouraged. You know, if there's things that are more important to you than God, then you're not...no matter how much you petition God for, it's for them...it's just going to make you feel worse and worse. B, be sure the things we're asking for are not enhancing our anger and sense of superiority over others, or else our petition will make us only more bitter. And C, be sure that when we ask for things, we're also spending time rejoicing and thanking God for what we've already...already have and cannot lose in the gospel. Some years ago, I was studying Romans 8, 28, and I was trying to...in the old days, when I was in InterVarsity Fellowship, they used to always say, paraphrase, paraphrase, paraphrase. And I was trying to paraphrase a part of Romans 8, and I came up with this paraphrase, and I've never forgotten it, so I think it was just something that God was giving me. What...here's...here's what I think God is saying. God will always give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything he knows. Go ahead, pray your heart off. Pray your head off. Pray your heart out. But just realize that God will give you what you would have asked for. He may not give you what you asked for, but he will give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything he knows, because he loves you. Our bad things will turn out for good. Our good things will...cannot be taken away from us, and the best things are yet to come. Do you know how to do that kind of evening prayer? Do you know how to put your soul down for rest at night, as well as your body? That's Psalm 4. Then, Psalm 5, okay, at the bottom of page 3, here's Psalm 5. I think this is the whole psalm. Give ear to my words, O Lord. Consider my sighing. Listen to my cry for help, my King and my God, for to you I pray. In the morning, O Lord, you hear my voice. In the morning, I lay my request before you and wait in expectation. You are not a God who takes pleasure in evil. With you, the wicked cannot dwell. But I, by your great mercy, will come into your house. In reverence will I bow down toward your holy temple. Lead me, O Lord, in your righteousness because of my enemies. Make straight your way before me. Let all who take refuge in me be glad. Let in you be glad. And let them ever sing for joy. Spread your protection over them, that those who love your name may rejoice in you. Now, this is the next psalm in the Psalter, Psalm 5. And this has got a very different feel to it. At night, you put your heart at rest. In the morning, you get up and you go after the world. And prayer is rebellion against the status quo. Prayer is rebellion against the status quo. Now, what do we see about this kind of active prayer? First of all, as I put down here at the bottom of page three, it's both spontaneous and disciplined. I think this is, here's something that's really helped me when I studied Psalm 5. Give ear to my words, O Lord. Consider my sighing. Listen, listen very carefully to your sighs. Anything in your heart that is making you sigh needs to be turned into a prayer or your duck soup for the devil. Everything that you sigh about has got to be turned into a prayer or you're going to be a frustrated, unhappy person. Or if you can't pray for it. it then you need to stop sighing about it you need to just take yourself in hand so there's a spontaneity you have to find the deepest urges of your heart and you have to turn them into prayer and have them have to be prayed all the time on the other hand the discipline is that that he waits in expectation he's laying out certain things he's got certain things he's working on you know you know for example I probably shouldn't be saying this too much I like for example my wife and I have got oh a list of three or four major things that we pray for our sons about and some of them are character flaws you know things that we think that we've seen ever since they were little and they could rise up and bite them anytime and that we pray you know a couple ways one is we pray sort of negatively that these character flaws won't won't actually blow up on them and they won't be some kind of big disaster in their life because they they won't make some great mistake but on the other hand we pray that God will replace them with with certain virtues and we work on these things for years and years and years and years you you know you and you wait an expectation and then when you see changes you rejoice in them this is the discipline of petitionary prayer but at the same time it's spontaneous that is that is you you you find the deepest signs of your heart and when you find yourself as you're walking around sighing after things yearning for things being you know kind of mourning after something you've got to turn that into a prayer give ear to my signs but here's the most important thing you're spontaneous and it's disciplined but last of all in the in here in the middle of page four it's expectant oh lord i wait in expectation it's expectant how can david be sure god's going to hear his prayer a lot of there's a lot of us that are just not certain enough that god will answer our prayers so we're not very aggressive in the way in which we pray uh i don't completely know why david did i guess and and also by the way some parts of these psalms are pretty scary because whenever david says i know you will answer me because of my righteousness we sit there and we say okay maybe david felt that way but i can't pray like that well you don't have to here's how we know god will answer our prayers here's how you can get more a better better more confidence and more expectancy than david did look at this uh middle paragraph where it says we know we know that god will answer us when we call as david said in verse one because one terrible day he did not answer jesus when he called the reason why we know god will answer our prayers always answer our prayers oh maybe not in the way we want but he will not he may not give us exactly what we want but he will give us whatever we would have asked for if we knew everything he knew the reason we know that god will answer our prayers is because of that one giant ultimate cosmic unanswered prayer jesus said let this cap pass from me jesus called out to my god but he was forsaken jesus suffering and rejection was done as our substitute we deserve to be forsaken we deserve to have our prayers rejected because he's a righteous god you know without jesus verse one you know hear me because of my righteousness is completely unnerving to call a righteous god for an answer when we ourselves are so flawed as a mistake see there's one other place where jesus or david says or some psalmist says psalm 66 if i cherish iniquity in my heart the lord will not listen to me huh if i cherish iniquity in my heart well who in the world has never cherished iniquity in their heart who who has never nursed a grudge who's never cherished iniquity in their heart so how what hope is there the hope is jesus was given the prayer rejection we deserve so that we could have the prayer reception he deserved and that is the ultimate way that petition unburdens the heart when you remember that god is going to answer your prayer all things work together for good he's going to do it he's not going to he's not just going to say well you haven't lived a very good life this week and therefore i'm not going to listen to your prayers you know god certainly can give you a tough time because as a father he thinks it's the best way to bring you to your senses but you have to realize that in the long run he's going to answer our prayers because jesus prayer wasn't answered because jesus prayer wasn't answered and so we can have more expectancy than david did now turn over here to page five so summary try this out try evening prayer and morning prayer i mean if you only have x amount of minutes give a third of them at night and two-thirds of them in the morning that's what i like to do or maybe you're the other way around but you have to do a kind of passive petitionary prayer at night in which you really pray things into god's hands so you can go to sleep remembering that all the important things that you really need you've got you can't lose remembering he knows best remembering that he's our father and we're just children so we can't always know what's best but because he's our forth. That's passive prayer at night and active prayer during the day where we really storm, you know, the heavens, we really, you know, rebel against the status quo. So summary, the qualities of petitionary prayer are, A, boldness and specificity, ardor, discipline, yet submission to God's will and wisdom. You need to have accompanying prayers with petition. There has to be repentance for idols or we may be too despondent to pray. Sometimes you're so upset because God's not answering your prayer, you've got to repent for idols so that you can get over how unhappy you are that he's not answering your prayer so that you can actually get at rest. So I'm not saying petition doesn't have to come along with, you know, repentance and all these other things. And the basic assurance for petitionary prayer is we get the prayer reception he deserved because we get the prayer rejection he deserved. Now, the one last thing I'd like to just give you, and I don't know, friends, brothers, sisters, leaders, at this point, I don't know a book I... I don't really, I don't want you to think that this is the only way to do it, but in case you actually don't know what to do, and I bet you there's some of you who would embarrassedly said, you know, when I, if you had me sit down to do 40 minutes of prayer, I'm not really sure what to do. I suggest this. Here it is. I suggest doing three things for sure and a fourth thing if God blesses. Three things for sure and a fourth thing if God blesses. Bible reading, meditation, prayer, and then if God blesses, contemplation. Let me go back through it. Bible reading, then meditation, prayer, then contemplation. I'll be real fast on this because I've actually got to leave, and I want you guys to get to prayer. But first of all, Bible reading. Take a passage, a paragraph, and do exactly what I say here. Try this out sometime. It probably only takes about 10 minutes. Read the paragraph three, three or four times, and then answer these questions. These are simple, old-fashioned, inductive Bible study kinds of questions. Make a list of everything the passage tells you about God or Christ. Secondly, list everything it tells you about yourself, anything that it puts a finger on in you. And thirdly, look for examples to follow or avoid, commands to obey or do, promises to claim. So if you have a couple of God and Christ things, a couple of you things, and a couple of example, a command or promise, then after you've done that, which is just a way of making you really look at what's there, choose one or two things that you learn that were probably the best things you learn. Then, instead of moving on to prayer, meditate on it. And there are two ways to meditate. There's a shorter and a longer way. The shorter way I meditate on something. Now, meditate is not praying, and it's not studying. It's self-communing. It's talking to yourself about God. It's talking to yourself before God. It's very important. It's not prayer, and it's not Bible study. It's a kind of in-between discipline. And if you want an example of it, read Psalm 103. Who's Psalm 103? The psalmist in Psalm 103 is not speaking to God. He says, bless the Lord, what? Oh, my soul. He's talking to himself. It's not schizophrenia. It's meditation. And here's how I would do it. You would say, how would I be different if this truth was explosively alive in my innermost being? You look at the thing you've written down, one of the two things you've written down, one or two things, and say, if I really, really, really, really, really believe this at the bottom of my being, would I be different? How? And the second question you might say is, why is God showing me this today? What's going on in my life today? What's going on in my life now? What's going on in my life this week? Those are two meditation questions. Write down the answer. But if you want to go a little deeper, I suggest this. Adoration, confession, thanksgiving, supplication, A-C-T-S, acts. Ask yourself, what can I praise God or Christ for what I see in this little verse? Secondly, what wrong behavior, harmful emotions, false attitudes result in me when I forget about what's here? Thirdly, how is Jesus Christ, or the grace I have in Jesus Christ, the key to help me overcome the sin that I just confessed? And lastly, what do I need to do or become in light of this? Now, when you do this meditation before you pray, this might sound like it's hard at first, but I can tell you I've actually trained people over the years in this. It's the sort of thing that you can learn to do just like this, but it takes time. And Martin Luther used to pray like this. He would take the word, Our Father who art in heaven, he'd meditate. Our, what's the teaching? Oh, that we should pray together. Our, what does it tell me about God? God bless you. God bless you. Father who art in heaven, our Father who art in heaven. How can I confess a sin? I don't pray with other people like I should. I don't do corporate prayer, okay? How can I thank for Jesus? Thank you, Lord Jesus, that through Jesus Christ, I actually have brothers and sisters and I can let my hair down because I'm a sinner, but I'm saved. Therefore, I'm an accepted sinner and therefore these barriers come down. So I should be able to pray very openly through Jesus Christ with other people. I shouldn't be afraid to have other people hear me pray. Supplication, O Lord, give me two other people that I can start to pray with every week for, you know, vision things. In other words, I just went through our, now we can do Father. Adoration, confession, thanksgiving, supplication. Then we can do our Father who art in heaven. Now, Martin Luther would say, you read a text, then you meditate on it until the Holy Spirit begins to preach to you. Do you know what he means by that? Sometimes as you're meditating, your heart just catches fire. And then you can contemplate and praise God and just go wherever your heart is going. If that doesn't happen, and for me that only happens, say, one out of four times, I conclude by just praying through my meditations. And that's what I suggest you do. This is the sort of thing that can be done in 10 minutes or 20 minutes or an hour or two hours. And I suggest that you try it because I've taken my sons through it over the years when they went off to college. And my sons are not, you know, they're all very, very different from each other, incredibly different. They all like this. They all found this helpful. And their temperaments are so different. They're so different. The fact that they all found this incredibly helpful gives me some confidence that you would too.
