TITLE: Persuading the King
SCRIPTURE: Acts 26:15-27
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Acts: The Gospel in the City
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/persuading-the-king/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture comes from the book of Acts, chapter 26, verses 15 through 32. Then I asked, Who are you, Lord? I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting, the Lord replied. Now get up and stand on your feet. I have appeared to you to appoint you as a servant and as a witness of what you have seen and will see of me. I will rescue you from your own people and from the Gentiles. I am sending you to them to open their eyes and turn them from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God so that they may receive forgiveness of sins and a place among those who are sanctified by faith in me. So then, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the vision from heaven. First to those in Damascus, then to those in Jerusalem and in all Judea, and then to the Gentiles, I preached that they should repent and turn to God and demonstrate their repentance by their deeds. That is why some Jews seized me in the temple courts and tried to kill me. But God has helped me to this very day. So I stand here and testify to small and great alike. I am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen, that the Messiah would suffer and, as the first to rise from the dead, would bring the message of light to his own people and to the Gentiles. At this point, Festus interrupted Paul's defense. You are out of your mind, Paul, he shouted. Your great learning is driving you insane. I am not insane, most excellent Festus, Paul replied. What I am saying is true and reasonable. The king is familiar with these things and I can speak freely to him. I am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice because it was not done in a corner. King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know you do. Then Agrippa said to Paul, do you think that in such a short time you can persuade me to be a Christian? Paul replied, short time or long, I pray to God that not only you but all who are listening to me today may become what I am except for these chains. The king rose and with him the governor and Bernice and those sitting with them. After they left the room, they began saying to one another, this man is not doing anything that deserves death or imprisonment. Agrippa said to Festus, this man could have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar. This is the word of the Lord. Now, we began looking at this passage last week. This is from the book of Acts, which is the history of earliest Christianity. And what we have here is Paul on trial in front of all the great elites in front of King Herod Agrippa, who was a member of the dynasty of the Herodians. It was a client dynasty. That is to say, these were client kings under the Roman emperor. He was a king over Judea. And Festus, who was the imperial administrative governor. And Paul was in prison and he had been charged with a number of things. He'd been charged with sedition, causing a riot, undermining the public peace. He'd been charged with heresy. Now, Festus, because he was a Gentile, he was new as the imperial governor, didn't understand many of these things, Jewish theology, Jewish politics. He asked King Agrippa, whose family had lived for generations in Judea, to come and listen to Paul so he could help Festus write a case because Paul had appealed to Rome. He was in prison. He'd been charged, but he didn't believe he could get a fair trial in Judea. So he appealed to Rome. And now Festus' job is to write up, to pass up to Rome a case statement of the issues. And he was really out of his depth. So he asked Agrippa to come in and listen to Paul. And they all did it together. And there was all the entourage of Agrippa. All the cultural elites were there. Last week, we saw, it starts, by the way, at the very top of chapter 26. Paul gives a defense, tells the story of his conversion, meeting Jesus on the road to Damascus. But it's here at the end that Paul shows the real goal of his speech, what he's really after. And it's surprising, especially Agrippa is surprised when he sees the goal of the speech. He's not really out to defend himself. Because if he was truly, if his primary goal was to get himself off the hook, he would never have made the bold move he makes. He would have played it safe, but he doesn't. What was Paul's goal? How does he get to that goal? And where does he get the power to do that, to try that? What is Paul's goal? How does he try to get to that goal? And where does he get the power and the poise and the boldness to try that? First, what's the goal? Now, this is actually a pretty simple answer and maybe a short good point. But if he rubbed it out when he was retched and if he took on it, I think a good point. ... to get the power and the poise and the boldness to try that. First, what's the goal? Now, this is actually a pretty simple answer and maybe a short point, but if you want to know the goal, that it wasn't really defense, you can look at it at the top of the second page, verse 24 and 25. Then Agrippa said to Paul, do you think that in such a short time you can persuade me to be a Christian? And Paul replied, short time or long, I pray to God that not only you, but all who are listening to me today may become what I am except for these chains. See, Agrippa suddenly realizes, and he's kind of amazed, he realizes what Paul's actually doing. And he says, are you trying to convert me? You know what Paul says? Not just you. Yes, I'm trying to convert you, but not just you, everybody in my hearing. In other words, Agrippa sees that Paul's actually using the trial as an occasion to try to persuade. Do you think that in such a short time that right here and now you could persuade me on the spot to become a Christian? Do you really believe your powers of persuasion are that strong? Do you really expect me to become a Christian on the spot? And Paul says, yeah, if I can get there, if he says short or long, I don't care, but I pray to God that not only you, but everybody hearing me would be persuaded as well. So Paul's goal is persuasion. And now, as soon as I say that's the goal, how does he get to the goal? And let me say a couple words introducing the second point. How does anybody get persuaded of anything at all? And the answer is, it's complicated. Very complicated. You know, you can go, in fact, to ask the question, how does a person become persuaded that something is true? The answer to that question can almost give you a history of Western intellectual thought over the last 300 years. Because 300 years ago, we began what's called the Enlightenment Project. And the Enlightenment Project, which is unprecedented in the history of humanity, was the idea that you could come to certainty, you could be persuaded of something only if you could prove it. Reason alone, you didn't need God, you didn't need religion, revelation, tradition, no, no, no. He says, the only way we can be absolutely persuaded that something is true is if it's proven, rationally or empirically. That was how it was 300 years ago. And there's still people that say that. There's still people who think that. There's no doubt about it. People say to me, I can't believe in Christianity unless you can prove it for me. I can believe in God only if you prove it to me. You need to know, however, that that is no longer the consensus. There's a lot of reasons why. Part of it is the last 200 years in which Western societies are deeply divided. And they're deeply divided over things that, over viewpoints that all claim to be based on reason. The original idea of the Enlightenment was if we can just put aside our beliefs and faith and religion and tradition and just all use empirical reason, all use rationality, we can come to consensus and we'll stop fighting all the time. It has not happened. You know, let me give you two examples. Adam Smith, who wrote The Wealth of Nations, Karl Marx wrote Das Kapital. Okay, Karl Marx says that the way for a good society to run and be just and to function well is, you know, centralized economy, centralized government. Adam Smith wrote The Wealth of Nations, unhindered capitalism. The market, the unseen hand of the market, that's what we need. Now, both Adam Smith and Karl Marx, they didn't appeal to the Bible. They didn't appeal to revelation or tradition. They both said, I'm going to make a rational case. And they're utterly different. In fact, those two views are still clashing in the world, all over the place. And see, the original promise that as long as you use reason alone, you should never believe something, you should never be persuaded unless it's been proven. Most people, rightly so, say, uh-uh. You get persuaded by a lot of different things, but reason alone, it doesn't work, frankly, because the reason people are persuaded is always reason plus other things. Now, actually, for example, well, let me just tell you what the opposite is. The opposite, the pendulum has swung. So today, more and more people say, nobody's rational. Everybody basically believes what their culture tells them. All knowledge is socially conditioned. The reason why you believe the things you believe is because it's what your family told you or what your culture told you. And actually, think about this. There's a whole area called sociology of knowledge. Studies have shown that people tend to find plausible. like, or especially they find plausible the arguments of people that they want to like them. So, for example, you grow up in a little traditional community. You go to church or synagogue or something, and everybody believes X, Y, Z is right and wrong, and it makes sense to you. Then you go off to college, and there people roll their eyes at people that had the beliefs that you were raised with, and people snort about them and laugh at them, and the professors make fun of them, and these are the hip people. These are the cool people. These are all the smartest people, and now suddenly everything they say makes sense to you, doesn't it? Why? Sociology of knowledge says because we tend not to believe things because they're rational, but because they include us in a particular community, and therefore the idea there is that our beliefs tend to be socially conditioned. They tend to be the products not of reasoning, but of social conditions. Now, if you go to either extreme, either extreme, and say you must never believe anything unless it's empirically proven, one of the questions is, how would you empirically prove that statement? How would you empirically prove that you should never believe anything unless it's empirically proven, which means it fails on its own criteria? On the other hand, let's go to the other extreme, the people who say never believe anything unless it's proven. The other extreme is, well, there's no way to know what truth is. Everybody believes whatever their culture tells them. There are no universals. There are no moral truths. There's no way to judge between right and wrong. What did you just say? You just made a statement about everybody, didn't you? That nobody can decide what is right or wrong, because all statements of truth are really products of social conditions, which means what you just said must be the product of a social condition, which means, therefore, I don't have to believe it. It's just the product of your little social circle. And you get to the place where, if you say you must prove things to know, to believe them, that fails on its own merits, its own premises. It can't live up to its own standards. But if you say everything is relative, then that statement is relative, and therefore, I don't have to believe it, which means the extremes are demonstrably wrong. Well, how do you get persuaded? It's always a mixture. You know why? We are people. We're not just brains floating around. We're not just rational. On the other hand, we're not just, you know, feelings floating around either. We're rational. We're emotional. We're social. And therefore, persuasion is a many-splendored thing. Wouldn't that be a great name for a movie? No, I don't know. What would the movie be about? But anyway, the fact of the matter is, if you believe something or if you believe Christianity or if you doubt Christianity, it's always the result of a number of things. There should be some reasons. You should not believe something just because you feel it. If you just want, if you want, listen, if somebody says to me, I know God exists. Well, how do you know God exists? Well, I just feel it. I feel his presence and he's answered my prayers and I just know he's there. Well, give it a couple of years. Your feelings will change. Some of those prayers won't be answered. And when your feelings change, will that be it? See, if you're a whole person, you need to use your mind. There needs to be reasons you believe something, but you need your person of heart and you're, and of course, there's people around you. And what they say and how credible their lives are is going to have an impact on what you believe. Of course, put it like this. What if you were an employer and you're trying to hire somebody and you want to be absolutely, completely sure that this is the right person before you hire them? You want empirical proof that this is the right person for the job before you hire them. Good luck. You'll never hire anybody because you can use your reason to get yourself to the place where you can look at a candidate and say, this is probably the right person. Your reason can get you to probability, but you're going to have to commit your life. That is to say, you're going to have to hire the person. You're going to have to risk. You're going to have to personally commit to the person, bring them on, you know, and two years from now, maybe you'll be certain or maybe you won't be certain. But the point is it takes reason to get you to probability. If you don't use your reason, the hiring process would be, you know, crazy. You can't just go eeny, meeny, miny, moe. You use your reason, but you can only get to probability, but you have to commit your whole self to get to certainty. You've got to try it. You've got to get in there. And therefore, persuasion is always a many-splendored thing. And this is exactly what we see. Paul's outside who hear, and those of us who are reading, that Christianity is true. How does he do it? He gives you three arguments. There's another way to put it. There's three ways that Christianity can make sense. Three ways that Christianity makes sense. The first is a rational argument. Christianity makes sense rationally. And this is one of my favorite parts of the Bible, actually. It's down here, and it's actually hilarious. It's down here at the bottom of the first page, verse 24. Now, Paul's talking about the fact that he's met Jesus Christ personally on the road to Damascus, and he's heard, you know, Jesus speak to him, and Jesus has been raised from the dead. Okay, now, remember this Festus is an outsider. He's a Gentile, he's a pagan, and he's come from outside. And when he hears Paul talking about all this, he interrupts. See this? At this point, Festus interrupts Paul's defense. You are out of your mind, Paul, he shouted. Your great learning is driving you insane. Now, you know, translation is a hard thing to do because the English translation makes this sound pretty dignified. You are out of your mind, Paul. Your great learning has driven you insane. It's actually a very ironic statement and not a very nice statement. Basically, can I paraphrase? Can I do a little more accurate translation? Felix says, you are nuts. Wait a minute, wait a minute. What? You are nuts. Yeah, you've got a bunch of PhDs, but you've flipped. You've read, you know, you've gone nuts. This is crazy. You expect us to believe this? So, that's my paraphrase. Yeah, my translation will be out soon of the whole Bible. But notice what he says, and this is extremely interesting. He says, I am not insane, most excellent Festus, Paul replied. What I am saying is true and reasonable. Now, notice, Paul does not immediately point to his insides. He doesn't say, well, Festus, I know this is true because I feel it to be true. I know Christianity is true because I just feel it so much in my heart. He doesn't go to the emotion. He doesn't do that. He goes to publicly available evidence. He says, this is reasonable, what I'm telling you. And then he turns to Agrippa, basically. He says, the king is familiar with these things, all the statements about Jesus' life and his death and his resurrection. And I can speak freely to him. So, he turns and he says, I am convinced that none of this has escaped his notice because these things were not done in a corner. Isn't that a vivid phrase? And let me tell you how confident this is. See, Paul says to Festus, you never lived here. And you're a Gentile, and I can understand why this sounds absolutely crazy. But see, Agrippa is different. Herod Agrippa was, as I mentioned, he was part of a dynasty. His family had lived in Judea for generations. Herod Agrippa would have been about eight years old when Jesus died, but he grew up in the aftermath. And isn't this amazing how confident Paul is? Paul looks at King Agrippa, and he can say this, basically. He says, anyone, and I mean anyone, Paul could assume that anyone who lived in Jerusalem for the last 20 years could not laugh off what he was saying, that there was too much evidence for it. He was able to look at Agrippa and say, look, you've been living here, and you know these things did not happen privately. They happened publicly, and you know there's a lot of evidence for what I'm saying. You know it. Isn't that amazing? Well, you say, well, what was he talking about? Think about it. First of all, let's think of Jesus' miracles for a minute. When you read the Gospels, there's just dozens of miracles, miracles, public miracles, brilliant, astounding miracles. And yet, the number of miracles in the Bible would just be a slice of what he actually must have done. In fact, the Gospel writer John at the end says that Jesus did so many things he couldn't possibly stick it in one, you know, in one work. So let's just say that there were really hundreds and hundreds, not just a couple of dozen miracles, but hundreds of these miracles that were going on all through Judea for three years. Do you realize what that would mean? It meant there were thousands of people that were still alive who had seen the miracles, thousands of people. See, that's one of the reasons why Paul could say, look, when I'm talking about Jesus Christ, if you lived here, you know what I'm talking about. You can't laugh this off. For example, maybe this sort of thing must have happened. Maybe Agrippa heard this. Two people are sitting there talking and saying, oh, these Christians, my word, they're blasphemous. I don't like them. So the other guy says, yeah, yeah, yeah, I agree with you. I agree with you. But you know, you know, I was there and Lazarus stank. I think... He wasn't just swooning. He was stinking. He got up. I mean, he really got up. He was raised in the dead. I don't know how you explain that. I don't know. See, there would have been thousands of people around who saw stuff like that. And that's the reason why Paul could very confidently say, if you've lived here, you know that you can't. You may not believe it. Of course, you don't have to believe it. People believe what they want. But you know, there's a lot of evidence for what I'm saying. You cannot laugh this off. This is not nuts. Also, there was the empty tomb. And there were hundreds and hundreds of people who had claimed that they'd seen Jesus Christ alive. You know, Paul says in 1 Corinthians 15, he says, 500 people at once saw the risen Jesus Christ. 500 people at once. You know, people can have hallucinations, but you don't have group hallucinations. All right? 500 people don't accidentally have the same hallucination at once. And many of these people had lived transformed lives. And by now, many had died for their faith. And you don't die for a hoax. You don't die for a hoax. And so, do you see what's interesting for even us today reading this? When you see that Paul was able at that time, 20, 25 years after the events, to look at a man and say, you know I'm not crazy. You know there's a lot of evidence for what I'm talking about. You may not believe it, but you know that you can't laugh this off because these things were not done in private. They were done in public and thousands of people saw them. And what does Agrippa do? Does Agrippa say, you are mad? No. Oh, no. Notice what he says? He says, are you trying to go all the way and persuade me? What is that? That's actually a concession, is it not? Agrippa does not say, yes, you are nuts. He says, well, if you're trying to get me all the way to being a Christian, you know, that can't be done. And at the very end, what's the last thing he says? This man should be, this man doesn't belong in prison. Agrippa knows he's not nuts. He's not going to, he's not going to, see, he's dodging the question. He doesn't want to become a Christian. But he is not saying, this guy is crazy. There's nothing to what he's saying. So, Paul makes a rational case. And I want you to know that you may not, if you have doubts about Christianity, you may not simply reject it because you don't like it. You know, Paul didn't like Christianity either. He was more, if there's some part of Christianity that offends you, so what? Because the Christianity claims to be a fact. It claims to have really happened. It claims that Jesus Christ rose from the dead. If you say, well, I don't really like Christianity because it teaches this or that. Hey, Paul was more offended by Christian teaching than you. He was very upset that the Bible said, that Christians were saying, you don't need a temple. You don't need priests anymore. You don't need sacrifices. He was furious. But he, why did he become a Christian? Not because he liked it, because the facts. He said, these things were not done in a corner. I actually met Jesus. He was raised in the dead. I wished it wasn't true, but it was. And so Christianity has a lot of evidence and you've got to look at that. It can make a lot of rational evidence, but that, a lot of rational sense, that's not all it says. That's not all Paul tries to say here. He doesn't make a strictly rational case because, as I said, nobody ever gets all the way into faith simply by reason, nor does anybody doubt Christianity simply by reason. You usually have bad experiences. Nobody rejects God and Christianity just because of reason. Nobody, you know, embraces it either. And so what does Paul also do is he shows that this makes personal sense. Christianity doesn't just make rational sense. It makes personal. I'll go so far as to say it makes emotional sense. Now, for me to make this point is a little difficult since I really ought to read you the whole passage, and we didn't have it all printed out. We spent some time on it last week. But if you look at the entire discourse, it starts up at the chapter 26, verse 1. Here's the basic point that Paul makes. Paul says, I was a Pharisee. I was the strictest of strict Jews. I lived to honor the law of God. That was his meaning in life. That was the theme of his life. I want to honor the law of God. But at a certain point, Romans chapter 7 tells us, Paul talks a little bit about something that went on inside his heart before he became a Christian. Romans 7 says that he was studying the Ten Commandments, and he got to the Tenth Commandment, which says, thou shalt not covet. And he says, that commandment came home to me, and it killed me. He actually says, it slew me. What is he talking about? I think this is probably what he means. When you read the Ten Commandments, and you say, I want to honor the law of God, it's easy to read the other commandments. It's easy to read the other commandments. anybody. Thou shalt not steal. I haven't stolen anything. Thou shalt not commit adultery. You shall not steal. You shall not bow down to idols. Well, I haven't done any of those things. I want to honor the law of God. I'm going down the list. I think I'm doing pretty good. Thou shalt not covet. Uh-oh. See, this is a totally internal commandment that cannot be understood behaviorally. It has to do with the heart. And Paul sat around and thought about it. You know what it means? He says, it probably means this, that I should love God so much. I should trust God so much. I should love God so much that I'm so satisfied. I should trust God so much that his disposal of the circumstances of my life would be something I would so trust. I should love and trust God so much that I'm content. I'm always content no matter what my situation. I don't covet. I'm content. I should love God so much to always be content. And then he realized, I can't do that. Nobody can do that. And it was a crisis. Jesus, the main thing he wanted in life was to honor God's law. He wanted to be a moral person. And he came, by studying the very moral law, which was the thing he was going to accomplish in life, he came to see that he wasn't even close to being what he should be. And this is the reason why, if you're reading this entire passage, this entire section, it's only here where Paul tells us that when Jesus appeared to him and says, out of the light on the Damascus road, Saul, Saul, why have you been persecuting me? And then Jesus says, it's hard for you to kick against the goads. That's an amazing verse. The goad was a sharp stick that shepherds used to get sheep to go in the right direction. Sheep would be stupid. Sheep would go over cliffs. Sheep would fall down cliffs into water and drown. And so shepherds never did anything to sheep that wasn't for their own good. But very often, the only way to get the sheep to do the right thing was to stick them. And God, Jesus has the audacity to say, I want you to know that the tremendous pain you've been going through inside your heart has been from me. What was that pain? See, on the outside, he was confident. He was killing people. He was persecuting the Christians. He seemed, he was so fiercely religious, and he seemed so absolutely moral. But on the inside, on the outside, superiority, condescension, self-righteousness. On the inside, inferiority, fear, insecurity, guilt, shame. He was eaten up on the inside. And then the gospel is revealed to him. Now, what is the gospel? Well, he gives it to you in pieces. The gospel is that the Messiah would suffer and be the first to rise from the dead, that those who believe in him might receive forgiveness of sin. See, here's what he realized. It was only when the gospel dawned on him that he realized that the very thing he wanted all his life he could never have except through Jesus. He wanted to honor the law of God. But Jesus Christ came and was the only human being who ever completely lived the life we should live. Totally obeyed the law. Jesus lived the life he should have lived and then died the death that Paul should have died, took the penalty for his law of breaking. And now Paul suddenly realizes after all this time that the thing he most wanted in life, which is to obey the law of God, could only happen. He could only honor it. He could only fulfill it if he believed the gospel. The gospel helped him understand for the first time why he was so eaten up on the inside. The gospel explained him and then resolved him. It explained why he was such a mess and what was wrong with him. And then it resolved the basic plot line of his life. The plot line of his life was, I want to honor the law of God, but only through Jesus will I be able to do it. Now, what am I telling you? Most of you probably are not Orthodox Jews or Pharisees. How does this apply to you? Like this. You need not only to see that Christianity makes rational sense, it has to learn. You know you're encountering Jesus personally when it begins, the gospel begins to make emotional sense. You know you're beginning to experience Jesus personally. You're meeting him on the road. The Holy Spirit is illuminating you. You're moving beyond reason into personal existential encounter when the gospel starts to make emotional sense. That is, when you start to hear the gospel. You may have heard it for years. Who knows? You might have been raised in some church and people told you about the gospel. But the gospel, that you're a sinner, that you need salvation, that we take the gospel. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. And that we need salvation. in some church, and people told you about the gospel. But the gospel, that you're a sinner, that you need salvation, that we tend to look to things besides God to be our Savior, that in Jesus Christ, our salvation is given to us as a free gift. When, on the one hand, the gospel starts to explain what's wrong with you, and you start to say, oh, so that's what's wrong with me, and also starts to resolve you. Oh, most people are not living like Paul to honor the law of God. Most people are living for love, or they're living for beauty, or they're living for justice, or they're living for something. But when you start to see that it's only in Jesus Christ will the plot lines of my life resolve and have a happy ending. Only in Jesus will I get the thing I've been after all my life. When you start to see that, guess what? Christianity is making emotional sense, not just rational sense, and it has to happen for you to believe and be persuaded. Now, let me just say one other thing. Paul does not simply say Christianity makes rational sense and emotional sense. He actually also says it makes biblical sense. Do you notice how often he talks about this? In verse 22, he says, I am saying nothing beyond what the prophets and Moses said would happen. And at the very end, his final appeal to King Agrippa, King Agrippa, do you not believe the prophets? That's the Bible. I know you do. Now, what Paul is saying here is easy to miss. He's actually saying not only does the gospel make rational sense, there's evidence for it in history. Secondly, not only does the gospel make sense of my life, but thirdly, he's actually saying that the gospel makes sense of the Bible, that the Bible actually comes alive when you read it as about Jesus Christ. He said, I thought I believed the Bible understood the Bible, but actually when I began to say, okay, if Jesus is this, if he's done this and this and this, I go to the Bible and the Bible comes alive. I don't know how many times it's happened to me, by the way, how many times I've had people say, you know, I've read the Bible all my life, but something has happened. The lights have been changed. And what I'm trying to say is the place that the rational and the personal tends to come together to really, really persuade you is in the biblical. The rational and the personal come together in the biblical. It's as you read the Bible, especially about Jesus, as you read the gospel accounts and you see him saying things and doing things, it's both a rational and existential experience. On the one hand, it's beautiful. It's amazing. It's breathtaking. On the other hand, you say, this couldn't have been made up. I mean, it's rational and personal all at once, which it should be. It should be. Dick Lucas, who was an Anglican priest, Anglican pastor some years ago, preacher, I once heard him say that a friend of his came to him once and said, Dick, you know, I don't believe I'm a skeptic, but if you could give me a watertight argument for the existence of God and the truth of Christianity, if you could give me a watertight argument, then I could believe. And Dick Lucas says, well, what if God didn't send a watertight argument, but he sent a watertight person against whom, in the end, there can be no argument? And the guy said, what do I, what do you mean? I said, I challenge you, he said, to read the gospel of Mark with somebody or read the gospel of John and just really, really get to see what Jesus said, what Jesus did, and you're going to have a lot of trouble rationally explaining him unless you come to believe he is who he said he is. When you look at his claims, when you look at his character, when you look at the things he's done, you're going to say, wait a minute, wait a minute, who could have made this up? And what could this person be like? It'll be both rational, it'll be both existential. God did not give you a watertight argument. He sent a watertight person against whom, in the end, there can be no argument. And where do you find him in the Bible? And therefore, just reading, especially about Jesus Christ, so often for people, has brought the rational and the personal together. And when the Bible comes alive, you know you're meeting Jesus, you're meeting God, you're encountering him, your heart and your mind are being persuaded. Let's close with this question. Where did Paul get the chutzpah? Where did he get the boldness? Where did he get the poise? Where did he get to do this? When you read this and you see how bold he is, King Agrippa, yes, I'm trying to convert you. I sure am. You know what I'm talking about. You've seen the evidence. You believe the prophets. Go read them. Good night. Now, on the one hand, you don't see Paul really being over the top. He's not arrogant. You know, he's not swaggering. That's a person who, on the inside… See, Paul's been there. When on the inside you feel inferior, on the outside you get… you're wisecracking, you're laughing, you know, ha ha, you know, that's, you know, you're so incredibly self-confident. That's proof that you're not. When you're that self-confident, it's proof that you're not. Paul's not like that. Look at, he says, I am not insane, most excellent Festus. He's respectful. He's poised, but he is not afraid. He is absolutely not afraid. Where did he get this boldness? Actually, I think, and I could, now I can tell you after speaking on this a few times today and having studied it in the past, there's a whole lot, there's a very, very pregnant statement that Paul makes in verse 18 where he's describing the fruits of salvation. Jesus Christ gives us free salvation. What does that salvation consist of? In verse 18 it says, so that they may receive. Receive means getting as a gift. Forgiveness of sins and a place. Place. And a place. Listen. The word place actually means a home, but it means more than that. I mean, it's, a place is more than just a place to eat and sleep. It's a place where you belong. It's a place where you really, really, really finally fit. And, uh, what Paul says is you receive it. You don't achieve it. You receive it. In fact, that word receive looks, in the English translation, it looks like it's, it means receive forgiveness of sins. Actually, the grammar of the sentence in the original is really, it's the place that's received. And this place means a home. It means a spot. It means the minute you become a Christian, you no longer are just forgiven. You're not just like out of jail, so now you're on your own. You're not only forgiven, that's negative. You're given a place. You're adopted. You're accepted. You're accepted. You're loved. You've got a place. You know, the best place I know that talks about this is C.S. Lewis in The Weight of Glory. Listen to how he describes it. The sense that in this universe we are strangers, that we have no place here. He's talking about the fact that if there is no God, then we are strangers here. We're going to be here for a little while, then we're going to die, and that's it. We're going to be gone. He says, the sense that in this universe we are strangers, the longing to feel acknowledged, to meet some response, to bridge some chasm that yawns between us and reality, is part of our inconsolable secret. So he's talking about a feeling like we're homeless. We don't really have a place. You know, there's this big universe, and it's just going to, it's going to eat us up. We're going to be consumed. We're going to just what the gospel tells us. Because of what, in the gospel, we are accepted by God. We get response, acknowledgement, and welcome into the heart of things. And welcome into the heart of things. The door upon which we've been knocking all our lives will open at last. What's he talking about? What Lewis is talking about is this. The minute you become a Christian, you're not just forgiven of your sins. The door on which you're open. God says, you have a home with me. You have a home with me. You have a place with me. Remember, Jesus says, I go to prepare a place for you. In my Father's house, there are many mansions. This means acceptance with God, acknowledgement, welcome into the heart of things, a place you fit, a place you belong. And it's a gift. It's not something you achieve. It's received. And here's what this means. Paul knows that he has the love and the high regard and the delight of the ultimate king of the universe. And so what does he care about any other king? If I've got that king's love, if I've got a place in that king's bosom, if I've got a place in that king's home, if he loves me, then I don't care what anybody else thinks. I can spit in their eye. See, he's seen this before in Stephen. Remember? When he wasn't a Christian, he was amazed at Stephen, the first Christian martyr who was about to be executed for his faith. And he didn't care. His face was like the face of an angel. And now Paul. Paul's okay. Why? He's bold. Why? If you believe the gospel and that you have a place with God forever and it's received by faith, and once you become a Christian, it's yours. You can spit in the eye of the world. There is nothing that will cow you. There will be nothing that will overaw you. Nothing that will shock you. overaw you. No. If you want to be persuasive, you must be persuaded of the truth of the gospel. And to the degree that you are, to that degree, you will have the same kind of boldness and the same kind of poise. Don't you want it? Believe the gospel. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have provided for us this wonderful example of Paul, who years before had seen a man, Stephen, who because he knew that he had the love of the ultimate king, was not afraid of any earthly king or any earthly court or any earthly situation or peril or danger. He had a courage. He had a boldness. He had a joy. And now Paul's got the same thing. And Lord, we want it too. But we see the way to get it is to be persuaded of the truth of Christianity. And that is a many-splendored thing. So we pray that in your word, you would meet us. First of all, you'd persuade those of us who already believe more deeply about the truth of these things that we might have more of that spirit that Paul had, that spirit of greatness and of courage. But we also pray that anyone hearing these words will be like Paul, that they will embrace the gospel, they'll be persuaded of its truth. Whether it's short or long, I pray that everyone here might believe the gospel, everyone hearing might believe the gospel. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
