TITLE: Politics of the King
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 2:19-22
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: The King and the Kingdom
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/politics-of-the-king/

============================================================

Scripture reading for tonight is Ephesians chapter 2, verses 13 to 22. Ephesians chapter 2, verses 13 to 22. But now in Christ Jesus you, who once were far away, have been brought near through the blood of Christ. For he himself is our peace, who has made the two one, and has destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility, by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, making peace, and in this one body to reconcile both of them to God through the cross, by which he put to death their hostility. He came and preached peace to you who are far away, and peace to those who are near. For through him we both have access to the Father by one Spirit. Consequently, you are no longer foreigners and aliens, but fellow citizens with God's people and members of God's household. Build on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, with Christ Jesus himself as the chief cornerstone. In him the whole building is joined together and rises to become a holy temple to the Lord. And in him you too are being built together to become a dwelling in which God lives by his Spirit. The Word of the Lord. Just before I begin the message tonight, my wife by ESP, and not really, by a glance, reminded me I need to officially announce for three weeks in a row that on September 10th, those of you who are interested probably in being part of the new church when it begins, I need to have a meeting to incorporate, you see, so that we are incorporated in the city, county, and state of New York. And I need to have that meeting at six o'clock right before the evening service. We don't need many people, don't worry, but we need some, otherwise we can't be incorporated. Coming does not obligate you to be a member. It just shows that you intend to be, and you could even be in the probable state. But we need to have enough people here so that we can incorporate and officially draw up some documents, and we really would appreciate you being here today. Were you trying to remind me to say that? No? You'd forgotten too, hadn't you? Yeah. Gee, I give you more credit than I should. No, thank you. It was subliminal, dear. All right. Ephesians 2, 13 to 22. What we're doing these last few weeks of the summer in these messages is envisioning the church, getting a clear picture of what the Bible says the church ought to be. And I want that picture to be so clear and bright that it burns a hole in your mind and ignites a passion in the core of your beings to see that picture realized. Recently, I read two different accounts of two individuals who lived in two different centuries and two different continents, and yet the same thing happened to them both. They had lived all their lives in abject poverty. And for one reason or another, both of them found that someone died and left them a fortune. Millions. And they were addressed and it was brought to their attention that now there were millions of dollars in the bank in their name. And each one of them said, ah, that's great. Fine. I'll get it when I need it. And never drew a cent for the rest of their lives. And continued to live in abject poverty. Interesting stories. Maybe you've heard one of them. And probably there's more cases than that. The reason that that happened was not that the people didn't disbelieve, not that they disbelieved it, but I believe because after years and years of living on nickels and dimes and quarters, their imaginations couldn't comprehend those figures. They knew there was something in there that they could draw on when they had a need, but they really couldn't get their imagination around it. We're exactly like that when it comes to the church. Because the things that the Bible says about the nature of the church are so magnificent that they beggar the imagination. And without God's help, our puny, shriveled little imaginations cannot get around it. So, over the next three weeks, we're going to take a look at Ephesians 2, these verses. We're going to look at, for three weeks, these verses that I just read. And many of you, those of you especially with a church background, have heard these things before. The church is a holy temple. man, which means a new humanity. The church is a colony of heaven. We're citizens of heaven, and we're a colony of heaven. You've probably heard these things, right? They're in the bank. They're there to be drawn on. And we sit there and we go, uh-huh. And we live like beggars. Aren't you tired of going around in rags yet? Now, Ephesians 2, verses 13 to 22, is a bank account for a Christian. And all we're going to look at this particular evening is the first few verses, verses especially 14 through 17, where it talks about the peace of the church. One of the things that the church has is peace. It comes up three times, see. He himself is our peace in verse 14. In this one body, he reconciled both of them, and he made peace in verse 15. And in verse 17, he comes and preached peace to you who are far away, and peace to those of you who are near. The teaching of this passage, in summary, is that the church is a place of supernatural unity and solidarity. And that supernatural unity and solidarity is craved by the world. They're dying for it, but only the church can realize it. That is what the teaching is. Now, let's break it down. In these verses, Paul, first of all, explains that there's a major problem that mankind has with peace. A major problem, and then he gives the solution. The problem, he talks about by giving us a case. He's a casuist here. He's giving us case study. And what he's doing is he gives us one particular case of the great hostility that exists between man and man, between men and women, between labor and management, between races and races, you see. In this one case, he gives the example of the hostility between Jew and Gentile. And he talks about how that has been solved by the church. So, let's take a look at that. The problem that Paul gives us, he gives us a good analysis of the problem. His hostility, you see, in verse 14, he says he's destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility. And then secondly, what Paul says is the answer, what brings peace. And that is, he destroys the hostility through what? Verse 16, through the cross. Let's look at the problem, then the solution. The problem. Paul points out the hostility. And you could make a great case that the problem of the human condition is the lack of peace. We live in a world of great strife and enmity. We pay billions of dollars to diplomats. Now, I know there's some of these in the room. Policemen. Lawyers. Social workers. Arbitrators. Mediators. What are you all out there to do? To keep us from killing each other. And guess what? You're failing. You're failing. Now, the only reason that there is some peace in the world is because of what's termed enlightened self-interest. Now, the Bible gives us a great analysis of the cause of the hostility and the continual strife. Why is there war? Why is there terrorism? Why is there litigation? Why is there divorce? And the Bible says, the reason for the lack of peace in the world is the inherent selfishness and pride of every human being. Now, the only way that the world is able to go about getting peace, it can get it in a partial way, in a sort of way. There's a sort of peace that can be developed. When selfish people find that they can work for peace because working for peace helps them toward their goals. Enlightened self-interest. It's a partial, and it keeps the world from being an absolutely unlivable place. When somebody sees that it's beneficial to their goals to work and live at peace with their people, then they'll do it. And so we do everything we can to set that up. And I'm glad we do. Did you notice, for example, this week that Arco came out with a new gasoline, which is far more pollution-free than has ever been produced? And it was right on the front page of the New York Times. The Arco spokesman admitted freely that years ago they could have been doing this, but it was not. They said, did you read that? It said they had no incentive. Well, you know what the incentive is. California's passed certain laws about emission control, and now they're going to be penalized, a terrific amount of money. If they don't produce the gas. And so suddenly, isn't this incredible? They're working for peace. the environmentalists. Why? Because they said now we have incentives. Well, what that means is our selfishness has been coordinated, you see. Your selfishness and my selfishness, now we can work together. Because by working together, we can both get what we want. Enlighten self-interest. Some years ago, do you remember a really, really great ad campaign for why people should not drive recklessly, why people should drive cautiously and soberly? The life you save may be your own. And why is it that the ad people didn't put up there on the billboards, the life you save may be somebody else's? Well, because it's just not as, what? It's not as powerful an argument. The life you save might be some other poor slob. Okay. The life you save may be your own. Ah, well, all right, woo, well, okay. Don't you see? That's the only way the world can create peace. It's doomed in the end. It has to be, because it's only temporary. Eventually, it's not in your best interest to work for peace. At some point, if you're trying to reach your goals, the most beneficial thing for your self-interest will be to push somebody aside, to cheat, to stab, or just to walk away. Because, you know, it's the selfishness which creates the strife and the enmity and the conflict. And you can only harness it so far. It's the selfishness and the pride that creates it. Now, Paul, I said, gives us a case study of how that works. He could have chosen all sorts of conflicts we have, but he chose one, which is very, very well known, and one, of course, which we have plenty of still in the world today, the conflict between Jew and Gentile. And he says something pretty interesting. He says, he destroyed the barrier, the dividing wall of hostility by abolishing in his flesh the law with its commandments and its regulations. What's that mean? One thing we do know is that Jesus Christ never abolished the Ten Commandments. We know that because the Sermon on the Mount is all about the Ten Commandments. You know, Jesus says, you've heard it said, thou shalt not kill. But I say unto you, if you hate your brother, that you have killed him. And if you ignore and are cold to your brother, you have killed him. And what is Jesus doing? Is he saying, ah, you don't need to follow the Ten Commandments anymore? He's saying, oh, my friends, the Ten Commandments are far more broad in their ramifications than you ever thought. It's critical that we live according to the commandments. So Jesus did not abolish the Ten Commandments, no. The key is that Paul is thinking of something else. He is thinking, I think, literally of a partition, a real wall, a literal wall. Yes, there are figurative walls between labor and management, and there's figurative walls between male and female, and between black and white. But there was a real wall between the Jews and the Gentiles. It was a wall, it was a partition in the temple. And the people inside were the Jews who had not just the commandments, but the regulations, the ceremonial laws, the clean and the unclean laws. You see, all the regulations by which they kept themselves separate from the world. And the Gentiles, who did not have all those laws, who were uncircumcised, who ate unclean meat, and so on, they were on the outside. What Paul points out is the commandments and the regulations created hostility. Now, that's not the reason that God gave the regulations. Why did God make Israel a separate people? Why did he set them apart with all those regulations? Not to create enmity, not to create separation, but to make Israel a holy nation who would attract the Gentiles to God. That's why, you know, so many of the calls to worship that we do here, the first thing, when I call you to worship, very often I read it from the Psalms. These were the calls to worship at the temple. And you see, it doesn't, very often in the Psalms, you see calls to worship from the temple that don't just go, come worship all ye people. What does it say? Come worship all ye peoples. God expected Israel to be drawing all peoples to the worship of God. But what happened was, the regulations were distorted and twisted by the pride and selfishness in our hearts. And the Jewish people began to take those regulations, which were a gift. And instead of being humbled by them, they became proud and they said, look at these Gentile dogs who eat the wrong food. Look at these unwashed pagans. Why should we have anything to do with them? And their gift became a source of pride and instead of serving the Gentiles with their gift, they scorn them and look down their nose at them. And the Gentiles they became a dividing wall of hostility. Now, listen. Let me say very clearly, this is only one case. We are not tonight picking on Jewish people, because this is a universal principle. People, every person who receives a gift, every strength you've got, everything that is good about you, sin will twist it and turn it around, and turn it into something that makes you look down your nose at other people. I remember, for example, the school district in my hometown came up with this brilliant idea. They said, let's take the smartest kids from all the different parts of the school district together, and we'll put them in one class, because they can really, really study, and we can get them three and four years ahead in math, and three and four years ahead in all these things. They put them all together, and they didn't say, you are the gifted class, but they, you know, everybody in that class knew that they were pretty intelligent. And 12 years later, they evaluated the program, and they stopped it. I remember reading the evaluation, and the reason for that was there was tremendous hostility created between that class and everybody else. The class developed a sense of, oh, we know who we are. We are the smart kids, and we know who you are. You're the ones who couldn't cut it and get into this class. And of course, everybody else says, they're the snobby smart kids, and we want nothing to do with them. And there was tremendous, there was violence because of that. I've counseled, and I sure hope I don't do a whole lot more of it, but I did a lot of marriage counseling when I was in Virginia, because the nearest therapist was about 300 miles away from my town, and I did it. One of the things I found was in this little blue-collar town was that the women were more adaptable than the men, by and large. Everybody got married at the age of 16 or 17. And then as time went on, the women were more adaptable. They learned. They grew. They took courses, even though most of them were just high school graduates. They would take other courses and work on it, and they changed and grew, and their husbands didn't. 10, 15 years later, here's what would happen. For whatever, and I can't document this, for whatever, the women were more adaptable to their environment. They were more responsive. They were more receptive. And the husbands were, it was harder for them to admit when they were wrong. This was a gift that these women had. I don't know if it's inherent, you know, to the female brain. I don't know. I haven't read that, but I do know this. These women, almost all of them, would get together and talk about it, and they turned it into a tremendous source of pride, and they would constantly scorn their husbands about their male ego. The male ego who can't admit when he's wrong. The male ego is rigid. And what happened was, their gift, they turned into pride. Everybody does it. All of us do it. The gifts God gives us become walls of hostility, barriers. Don't you see? What does God do about it? What does Jesus say is the solution? The solution is this. Verse 16 and 15. He abolished in his flesh the law with its commandments and regulations. His purpose was to create in himself one new man out of the two, thus making peace, and in this one body, to reconcile both of them to God through the cross. And the answer to the problem, the inveterate problem, the problem that cannot be solved any other way, is that here were two people, two groups, Jew and Gentile, at each other's throats. God reconciled them to, Jesus reconciled them to God and thus to each other through the cross. Now, how does the cross do that? Here we go. The cross does it because it eliminates, and only the cross eliminates, boasting. Have you seen that? One of the problems with the new translations is it gets rid of that word boasting. There's a lot of places where Paul says, that no one will boast, you see, or I will boast in nothing. In fact, my favorite verse, and the verse I need to read you right now, is Galatians 6.14. Very important verse. He says, May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me and I to the world. Neither Jew nor Gentile means anything but a new creation. Peace to all who follow this rule. Did you hear that? He says, I boast in nothing but the cross. Therefore, Jew and Gentile mean nothing to me. I look at everyone differently, and peace comes to those who follow this rule. The cross eliminates boasting. Now, the trouble with the word boast is what? When you think of boasting, what do you think of? You think of a bragger. You think of a bragger. You think I can't remember what the commercial is. It's a great commercial. I see it on TV often. The place where the lady says, now darling, enough about me. What do you think of my dress? You remember that one? Yeah. Anyway, you think of bragging. You think of somebody who's always talking about their accomplishments? No, it's a much deeper word than that. Many times, this word boast is translated glory. I will glory in nothing else but the cross. You see, the word glory in the Bible means something of weight. And what Paul says here is, there were many things I used to glory in. Now, what does that mean? I used to boast in them. I used to glory. Does it mean I bragged about them at parties? No. Here's what it means. To glory in something means to say, this is what gives me weight. This thing is what makes me count. This thing is what gives me substance. It's because of this that I am not chaff blown into the wind. I'm not smoke. I'm not an illusion. I'm not a holograph. It's this thing that makes me real. It's this thing that defines me. It's this thing that makes me count. And Paul says, that is eliminated by the cross. And only the cross can eliminate that. And he goes into more detail in another incredibly important passage where he gives virtually his life story in a few verses. And it's in Philippians 3. And it reads like this. Now, listen. Listen. If any man has reasons to boast, I have more. Of the people of Israel, he's talking about himself. I was of the people of Israel, a Hebrew of the Hebrews. In regard to the law, a Pharisee. As for zeal, persecuting the church. As for illegal righteousness, faultless. But whatever was to my profit, I now consider debit for the sake of Christ. I consider them all as rubbish. That I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from obeying the law, but a righteousness that comes from God through faith. I want to know Christ and the power of his resurrection. He makes a list. He says, if anybody's got things to glory in, I have more. That list. He says, I was a Hebrew of the Hebrews. He's talking about his family, pedigree, his social status. Then he says, I was a Pharisee. He was a scholar. As to knowledge, a Pharisee. He was a scholar. His education was impeccable. All right? Ivy League, see. Then thirdly, he says, as to zeal, I persecuted the church. That's professional success as a rabbi. All right? Social status, educational excellence, professional success. And then he says, as to legal righteousness, faultless. He says, in every way, my moral record, all these things, I could glory in them. I looked at them, and they gave me weight. They made me feel like I count. I know who I am. I'm somebody. They gave him his identity. And he says here, in order to become a Christian, I had to stop glorying in any of them. He didn't just say it happened when I became a Christian. He says, that I might know Christ. I had to count them all as rubbish. By the way, that is a euphemism. Okay? That's a euphemism because the Greek word means dung, excrement, urine, all those things, you see, that got the art band in Washington, D.C. He says, I had to count them as refuse. I stopped looking at them as being things that I got my identity from. Does that mean he threw his books away and stopped being a scholar? No, he enjoyed the fact that he was a scholar. Did that mean he stopped being moral? No, of course not. Did that mean he stopped being a member of his family? Stopped being a member of the tribe of Benjamin, that he didn't go to the Benjamin family reunions anymore? What did that mean? It meant they no longer were foundational to his identity. He no longer gloried in them. Now, my friends, when that happened, as a Jew, all the things he boasted were knocked out. And that meant suddenly there was no difference between he and the Gentiles. It's not just Jewish people that do that. Friends, every religion other than evangelical Christianity does the same thing. It says, here's what you have to do. Go out and get it. Do it. And when you succeed, then you know you count. I got an interesting little brochure. I won't mention the church just in case, you know, this is, you know, New York and who knows, I might get sued, you know. But, you know, there's a place full of conflict. There's not much peace here, you know, strife and litigation. And here's how the religion works. In the brochure it says, Come take our purification rundown. The rundown will return your energy and alertness to its natural, sparkling, clear, fresh state. The program is a strenuous one, but you can complete it by following the rules. The purification rundown is not concerned with the body. The aim of the purification rundown is freeing the individual spiritually. There are no medical recommendations or claims made for the program. The only claim is future spiritual improvement. And on the back there's a testimony. And this person said, After completing the rundown, I became vice president of marketing for an international cable company. I was able to complete all, you know, hold your applause, please. I was able to complete all my work in just a few hours with my new energy level. And for the first time in years, I had evenings and weekends free. Now, what the... I'm not... Listen, don't you realize that's crass? Of course it's crass. Come. It'll be hard work, but if you follow our religion, you'll reach all of your goals. And then you'll feel so good about yourself. Of course that's crass. But, friends, every religion, every philosophy outside of evangelical Christianity, whether you get an old one that's been around for thousands of years, or you make up your own, does the same thing. Can I give you a little more subtle, personal example? When I was in college, I was very depressed at a period, and I went to a counselor. And the counselor said to me, he said, One of the things we've got to do to help you in your depression is help your sense of self-esteem. Which, in other words, well, he says, you're not glorying in anything. Now, he didn't put it like that, of course, but that's what he meant. And he said, what are you good at? Now, at the time, and I shudder to tell you this because it's a long time ago, at the time I was a trumpet player. And I said, I'm a pretty good trumpet player. And he said, now, I want you to do this. When you start to get depressed, I want you to imagine yourself playing a solo that brings down the house. Do that whenever, whenever you are feeling depressed. And I tried it. Now, I can give you this testimony. In the short run, it does make you feel better. But there's only, then you're on a treadmill, and there's only two things that can happen to you. Either you achieve what you imagine, and you build your identity on your gift. And next thing you know, you're starting to look down your nose, just like Paul says here, at every other unartistic Philistine. Every other boorish person that's not like you, you see. And if you really get successful, you can put yourself in a power bubble, surrounded just by people that tell you how great things are. And the only other alternative is you fail. And then what happens to you is you're eaten up with envy and resentment all the rest of your life. And in either sense, in either situation, peace is gone. You see, you're either eaten up with pride, or you're eaten up with envy and resentment. Listen, I'm speaking personally. Paul says, the gospel and the gospel alone, the cross and the cross alone changes all that. Because what the cross does is it takes you and shows you that all these things that you're glorying in, though good in themselves, are nothing before God. They cannot make you in even one iota acceptable to Him. They are nothing before God, and compared to the surpassing worth of knowing Christ, they're less than nothing. Years ago, I'll use him as an illustration, there was a man named David Martin Lloyd-Jones, one of my heroes, and I'll quote him as often as I possibly can. He and C.S. Lewis, you'll hear quotes all the time. Why not? They're both dead, but they're like my tutors, my friends, when I read them. And Lloyd-Jones was a surgeon in London in the 20s, and he was a man of great standing and distinction. The trouble was, after he became a Christian, he discovered, to his consternation and everybody else's, that he was an incredibly good speaker, a tremendous preacher. And even though one of the best things you can do if you're a Christian and a doctor is to be a great Christian doctor, and one of the worst things most Christian doctors could do would be to go out and try to preach, this man was clearly called to the ministry. And he had to do it, and he did. He left being a surgeon, he went into the ministry. At that time, he took a 90% cut in salary. His salary as a minister was one-tenth of what it was as a surgeon. And some years after that happened, a reporter came to him. He said it was a Law School, at the night... Actually, what he died? He said he wanted to do it. He said it was perfect. He's got help. I wanted to make a whole really crazy boy decision. You know, make a father's back cover for his birthday STM. But he's a consultant. a tenth of what it was as a surgeon. And some years after that happened, a reporter came to him. And a reporter said this, he says, Dr. Lloyd-Jones, many people were intrigued when you made this choice, and I've come because you gave up so much. There were so many things in your life that you had to give up. And I'm sure that there's been a great deal of enjoyment and satisfaction doing what you've done, but I've come here to find out, on balance, after reflecting and weighing everything up, was it worth it? And Lloyd-Jones growled at him in Welsh, because he was Welsh. And he says, and I quote, I gave up nothing, and I gained everything. In other words, let me translate. He says, my dear man, you don't even understand the basic nature of Christianity. Christianity is not one way among many that can help you be happy. It's not just a way that you have to weigh up to say, well, this helped me really reach my goals in life. It's a total reorientation. And see, what Lloyd-Jones said is just what Paul said. He said, all those things I used to glory in, all those things that used to be sources of pride for me, things through which I got my identity, I saw that compared to what I needed to be acceptable before God, they were nothing, and compared to the surpassing worth of knowing Christ, they were less than nothing. And so I gave them all up. I gave up nothing. I gained everything. And by the way, if there's anybody here tonight that has been thinking about committing your life fully to Jesus Christ, I'll bet you some of you are sitting around saying, ah, but will it be worth it? I might have to give up so much. Oh, you will have to give up some things. Of course you have to give up some things. And you're weighing it up. My dear friends, you know what you're weighing up? Good things in themselves, many of them, but compared to the surpassing worth of Jesus Christ, dust balls. Friends, listen, you are like a person, you won't know this until you do it, until you give yourself to Him. You are like a person sitting around saying, I've got millions in the bank, but I'm agonizing. Do I want to spend 25 cents on that stamp to send in my withdrawal request? Oh, I hate to do that. And you know, maybe a 25 cent stamp represents your life savings up to this point, but you've got all that in the bank. I gave up nothing. And I gained everything. The Bible says that when a person is like that, and when a person does that, there's a fundamental change in their relationships to all other believers. Don't you see why? Because now you have an identity which is deeper than your family identity. That doesn't mean you stay out of your family, but now you have an identity deeper than your family, an identity deeper than your gender, your identity deeper than your race, identity deeper than your culture. Why do you think Jesus Christ can say, you must hate your mother and father and love me? He doesn't mean that you literally write poison pen letters to your parents as soon as you become a Christian. But what he does mean is he says, now, compared to what you feel about me, compared to your commitment to me, your commitment to your family is smaller. Or put it this way, the Hatfields and the McCoys, remember them? They were fighting and shooting each other and killing each other for years and years back in the hinterland of West Virginia. And as a result, anybody who was a Hatfield, that defined them. If you were a Hatfield, you didn't shoot at another Hatfield. And if you were a Hatfield, you shot at a McCoy. And that's how your life was run. But if a Hatfield and a McCoy both became Christians, then those two people had far more in common than they did with each other than they did with their own families. That is the nature of the gospel. Because that's how radically different your identity is in Christ. That's the reason why we were able to say last week, and in a sense, everything I'm doing now, this passage is a commentary on the claim I made last week. If you are a Christian first, if you're a Christian, you are a Christian first and you're an American second. If you're a Christian, you're a Christian first and you're a white person or a black person second. If you're a Christian, you're a Christian first and you're a ruling class or a poor person second. Don't you see that? Because the relationship you have in Christ is much more fundamental than any other relationship that you have. That is absolutely the nature of the gospel. And as a result, the unity and solidarity that Christians can have is the sort of thing the world's been trying to get for years. It can't get there because it doesn't embrace the cross. The cross knocks down the sources of pride, the things that divide us and unites us. Unites us completely. And that's the reason why some of you have heard commentary. He lived in the 1700s. It's a very old commentary and a very good favorite. His father and mother, his father's name was Philip Henry, his father and mother were courting. They were dating. And unfortunately, Philip Henry was from the wrong side of the tracks. And the girl he was dating, who was going to be Matthew Henry's mother, was from Society Hill. And at one point, the parents of Matthew Henry's mother came to her and said, this Philip Henry that you're dating, we're concerned. We don't know where he's from. We don't know whose parents are. We don't know what part of the city he's really from. We don't know where he's from. And she looked at him and said, I don't know where he's from either, but I know where he's going. And so that's all that matters. That's why Paul can say, we henceforth know no man according to the flesh. Which means I no longer think of people the same way. Christians will find that there's more solidarity with other Christians of other races than they have with non-Christians of their own race. Christians will find that there's more solidarity between themselves and Christians of other families than they have with non-Christians of their own family, and so on and so on. Because the church, the Greek word for church is ekklesia, called out. And you're not called out of involvement with the world, you're called out of the identity, you see. And that's the reason why we can say you're a Christian first and you're white or you're black second. You're a Christian first and you're this family or that family second. You're a Christian first and you're rich and poor second. And that's the reason why the solidarity Christians can have should be, can be unsurpassed. We're a new humanity. That's what it means when it says the two have become one man. What's that mean? It means there's a new humanity, a new race, you see. A new race. Okay. In conclusion, I want to just ask, what are the implications of this? I'll give you two. Just two. Number one, if this is true, don't you see that the church is not a nice place just to drop in on every so often? Don't you see that the church is not a club? Do you begin to understand why that there are these commands in the Bible that almost no one in this room, including me because I'm new here, are obeying? And I'm not sure I was obeying them in Philadelphia. Confess your sins to one another, the Bible says. Here's another one. Exhort one another daily lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Do you have relationships that are so strong there's somebody that understands you well enough to know day to day when you're falling down on the job? So that person can encourage you and exhort you so you're not hardened. Are you obeying that verse? Are you making provision to obey that verse? Exhort one another daily lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Confess your sins to one another. Welcome one another. Bear one another's burdens. Submit to one another. The reason for this is the church is a place where you forge relationships that are full of accountability. And you know what real worldliness is, friends? To be conformed into the image of the world right now means that you, as Christians, bring your Americanism in. And Americanism is this. I'm responsible for my own life. My problems are nobody else's business. My sins are nobody else's business, you see. Because there is no relationship in which I can't walk out if my needs aren't being met. That's the American way today. That flies right in the face of everything that we've been looking at. And an awful lot of Christians will come into the church. In fact, some of you might be considering, well, you're coming to listen to me. Because you want to know whether if you have the need, you'd be willing to confess your sins to me. Only if you have the need, you know. Whether you would come and let me exhort you weekly, lest you be hardened by deceitfulness of sin. You're trying to figure out whether you want to be even in, you know, just come to the place where you have one person that you're doing that for occasionally. The Bible says you are still holding the church at arm's length. You're still refusing to come into the church. You're still refusing to be truly committed. Because you're not making provision for other believers to exhort you daily, lest you be hardened by deceitfulness of sin. And if you don't obey that verse, you will be hard. You have to be. It's not good enough just to come and to say, okay, the guy up front, I'll listen to him. I'll try to develop a relationship with him. It's not good enough. It's not good enough. We've got to be a church. And my friends, it's a church where people can walk up to you and say, excuse me, I've been praying about this for several weeks. I haven't talked to anybody else about this. You can hit me, maybe you will hit me later on. Possibly we can still talk about it. But I'm trying my very best to do it right. Do you realize that your temper is the talk of the whole office? Now you have to get ready. You duck, you know. If you and that other person are a Christian, that's the nature of the unity you've got to have. That other person might hit you and later on come back and say thank you. Later on you may find out the person hits you and you find out they're right, that you exaggerated, you didn't act on proper information. But a church, that's the church, you see. A church where you're forging ties that are as deep as the family. What else does it mean when it says hate your father and mother and love me? It can't mean you really hate your father and mother. It must mean that you forge tremendously strong bonds with other believers in the church. Don't forget, Jesus died on the cross to put you into the body. He didn't die just to save little individual people to run around and go wherever they get blessed the most. He saved you to put you into the body, make you a new person with other people. Okay? By the way, if I was in New York, I'd probably be doing what a lot of you have been doing for years. But I'm trying to see. Once you see what the Scripture says and once you have opportunities, you need to make provision. You need to make provision. And the other thing I just want to say is keep this in mind. In Ephesians 1, Paul writes the Ephesians, who he's never met. And he says, I know, I've heard that you are true believers because of your, one, faith in Jesus Christ, and two, your love for all the saints. Now, those were the tests. He said, your love for all the saints. Don't you see, some of you may say, I know I'm a believer because I believe all the doctrines, you know, I believe all the right things. I have faith in Jesus Christ. But don't forget the other test of whether you're really a Christian. Do you love all the saints? All the saints. David Martin Lloyd-Jones used to say that one of the reasons he realized he had changed, after he became a Christian, he would sometimes wonder, have I really changed? And he suddenly realized something really weird had happened. You've got to remember that England, those of you from Britain, realize it's a lot more of a class-conscious society than we've got here, though we've got classes. Silly to say we don't have classes, but Britain has got that class consciousness. And he began to realize, as he got into a church in a little mining community in Wales, and he used to spend a lot of time visiting with what he called old Welsh fisherwomen, women with no formal schooling at all, but who were godly women. And he would sit down and he would talk with them for hours by their hearth. And then he would go and spend time with his old friends, the people he went to Oxford with, the people he went to medical school with, and he suddenly realized one day, he says, I enjoy more hours of fellowship with another Christian who is as opposite as these fisherwomen are to me than I do talking with my peers, the people that are of the same ilk, the same education with me. And he suddenly realized, he realized, what could take a British ruling class person and do that? Only the gospel. Your love for all the saints. There may be people in here who come in here and because of your gifts and your talents, you've always scorned the hoi polloi. Some of you may come in here, you're respectable types and you're not sure how you like to deal with these street types. And other people might come in here who have a kind of disrespectful background and you're afraid that the respectable types won't work. You might be the tough guy that kind of hates those artsy types, my friends. I don't care whether or not you believe all the doctrine. The way you know you're a believer is you love all the saints and you find that as you work for it. C.S. Lewis, my annual, my weekly C.S. Lewis quote, and this is how I end. He says, there are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. You've never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilization, these are mortal. They'll end, right? And their life is the life of every individual as the life of a mosquito. But it is immortals that we joke with and marry and snub and exploit. People that someday will be everlasting splendors in heaven or immortal horrors in hell. This doesn't mean we're to be perpetually solemn. We must play. But our merriment between people who have from the outset taken each other seriously. No flippancy, no superiority, no presumption. And our charity must be real and costly love with deep feeling for the sins in spite of which we love the sinner. No mere tolerance or indulgence which parodies love the way flippancy parodies merriment. Next to the blessed sacrament itself, your neighbor is the holiest object you will ever see. And if he is your Christian neighbor, he's holy in almost the same way as the sacrament. For in him also Christ, the glorifier and glorified glory himself, is truly hidden. We should be treating each other as infinitely precious vessels. The way, you know, if you were in a house and you were picking up a vase and you looked at it and you said, oh, what is this? And somebody said, ah, that's a 2,000-year-old vase from the Ming dynasty. And you'd go, ah, and suddenly fear and trembling would overtake you and you would treat that vase as the precious thing that it is. And there's something infinitely more precious in the pew next to you tonight. And there's something that I would say. And there's something that I would say. And there's something that I would say. Thank you.
