TITLE: Practicing Faith in a Pagan World (Part 4)
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:13-25
TOPICS: Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/practicing-faith-in-a-pagan-world-part-4/

============================================================

The bulletin indicates that we're going to move ahead into 1 Peter 3, because one of the privileges of a preacher is that he can change his mind, and I feel that it's important for me to spend one more time, one more piece of teaching on the passage we've been looking at, so don't confuse yourselves, just, if you have a Bible, turn to this passage, if not listen. And I'd like to read to you from 1 Peter 2, verses 13 to 25 again. It's one of those rare times, well, not totally rare times, in which it's almost an exposition of what I was preaching on in the morning. In the morning, we were talking about servanthood in general. Tonight, it talks about servanthood in particular, and it gives me a chance actually to kind of elaborate on many of the things that I was dealing with earlier in the day. This passage is about the strange paradox or the strange liberty that Christians have. Christians are free servants, as opposed to everybody else that I know of, practically, who are actually, you know, enslaved free people. Christians are not enslaved free people. They are free servants. And I'm going to read you this passage, just 13 to 25, and not, what I just want to do is pull out of it two very important principles about what it means to be a servant. And so I read at verse 13. Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted among men, whether to the king as supreme authority or to governors who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong and to commend those who do right. For it is God's will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish men. Live as free men, but do not use your freedom as a cover-up for evil. Live as servants of God. Show proper respect to everyone. Love the brotherhood of believers. Fear God. Honor the king. Slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and considerate, but also to those who are harsh. For it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of God. But how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God. To this you were called because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example that you should follow in his steps. He committed no sin and no deceit was found in his mouth. When they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate. When he suffered, he made no threats. Instead, he entrusted himself to him who judges justly. He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed. For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of your souls. That's God's word. As far as we read tonight, I'd like to say two things about the passage. Two things for our consideration tonight. We are, as Christians, enjoined to be free servants, but free servants, or put another way, we are called to a balanced servanthood and yet an intense servanthood. Here's what I mean. On the one hand, the key text here is actually in verse 16 where it says, if you pull out the little pieces in the middle, you see what the sentence structure is. It says, live as free, but as servants of God. Live as free servants of God. That's what's put in front of us. That's the hardest possible thing that has ever, that's the hardest possible thing I think we are given to do as Christians, and yet the genius of the cross, where God both punished sin and yet overcame it. He both showed his wrath and also showed his love. It flows out and says, you must be free servants. A free servant, on the one hand, is not just a servant, not just a slave, not just someone who's servile, not just someone who is a wimp, not just somebody who needs to have people rule over him or her. But on the other side, you're not just free. You're a servant. You're a servant. What does that mean? Well, it means at least this. First of all, we're taught here the need and the nature of authority. There's no more unpopular teaching in a place like Manhattan today, I think, than this whole passage when it says, submit yourselves for the Lord's sake. It says, respect civil authority, respect your master's slaves. Now, what does that mean? First of all, it means this. There's a tremendous anti-authority spirit in our society today. You know, back in the 30s in France, a group of psychologists got together and wrote a book which was translated and wasn't published into America to the 50s. It was very influential. It was called the authoritarian personality. The authoritarian personality. And the thesis of the book is there are people who need to be strong because they're afraid they're weak. And because they feel that they're weak, they have to lord it over people. They have to gain power over people. And the thesis of the book is authoritarian people create, especially in their own children and in people around them, they create authoritarian people who either need to be authoritarian or they need authoritarian people over them. This was very, very influential. In the 60s, for example, this book started to, the thesis behind this book laid behind a lot of the parent effectiveness training and a lot of the books on parenting that came out in the 60s and have continued on through because the books on parenting say that parents should never, ever use authority in trying to raise their children. Never. Never say, do this because I'm the parent. Don't say that. You have to reason. You have to try to persuade. Never use authority. Authority's out. And yet, and yet, you see, actually recently there's more and more studies, you know, studies. Boy, you know, as Tom Wolf says, it's fascinating how we're rediscovering all kinds of interesting things that people have known for centuries until around 1950. And now everybody's saying studies have shown, see, that children need authority. Studies have shown that we shouldn't go too far into debt. Studies have shown that we shouldn't lie to each other. Studies have shown that people need commitment in marriage and studies are starting to show. What a relief. But studies are showing, like one of the first ones was in the 1950s, Emil Durkheim wrote a book called Suicide. And this is in the 50s. He said, why is it that more teenagers commit suicide now? Far more, you see, three, 400% more than 20 years ago. That was in the 50s, believe it or not. He said that. He said, why? And he studied and he said they are suffering from what he called anomie, which means literally lawlessness, authoritylessness. Kids that don't know which end is up. Kids that don't feel that anyone's imparted to them what is right and wrong. A lack of authority, he said. A hunger, a yearning for authority. The fact is, as the passage tells us, that God instituted, it says, instituted. Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted, instituted by God, sent by God. God created human authority. He established it. You see it in the church. You see it in civil government. You see it in the family. There's all sorts of various institutions. Why? You can't live without authority. Can imagine, you know, musicians are great, are they not? What if they didn't submit to the key? To the same key, you know? What if they decide not to submit to the composer or the arranger or the conductor, whatever? You see, you can't have it. Every time you play a game, every time you stop at a stoplight, every time you get involved in music, you are submitting yourselves to authority or there's chaos. Ah, somebody says, well, I don't like, I like leaderless groups where there's no one in authority, but then the group's in authority. See, unless you're willing to let the group and the good of the group have authority over the need of the individual, there's chaos, absolute chaos. You can't function, the Bible says, without authority because, human authority, I mean, because God has created that authority. But, now, so on the one hand, again, Christians understand that human authority is not something that is, that gets in the way of freedom, that human authority properly used creates freedom. And, therefore, Christians know what lies behind that authority, what lies behind your parents, whether they're good or bad, what lies behind the civil government, whether your particular civil government is good or bad, what lies behind that, see, behind the office, behind the position, is the authority of God. Now, a lot of people say, oh, no, oh, no. There is, human authority, for example, Rousseau would say, human authority, civil governments have only the authority that people give them. The Bible says, no, no. Right here, it says, human authority is instituted of God. And let me, let me prove it to you. Let me prove it to you for a minute. Every book I read, every article I've ever read, they always say is, it's a blend of legitimacy and power. And if you don't have legitimacy and power, you don't have authority. Example, Juan Carlos for many years was the king. He had legitimacy. He was the king of Spain. He'd been thrown out by Franco, you see. But Franco didn't let him in, and therefore, he had legitimacy but no power, so he had no authority. Legitimacy is nice, but no power, no authority. On the other hand, when the Nazis overran Europe, they had power, but no legitimacy. Everybody would realize that they had power over France. They had power over the Netherlands. They had power over Belgium and all the places they overran. But who would say they had authority? Not really. They had power without legitimacy is not authority, and legitimacy without power is not authority. Everybody understands that. But look, if Rousseau is right, if the modern liberal establishment is right, that the social contract understanding of human authority, that human authority is nothing more than whatever the people decide it to be. There is no divine authority behind it or above it. But don't you realize, then, all the definition I just gave you that everybody understands falls apart. Let me show you what I mean. Why wouldn't... When the Nazis came and they took over, say, the Netherlands, and they said, we have authority, people would say, ah, but it's not rightful authority. You don't have the right to come in here and burn and pillage and rape, you see, and destroy. You have power but not authority. And what would the Nazis... What could they say? No, they didn't say this. They weren't smart enough to say this. What could they have said to anybody who believed Rousseau? Anybody who threw out the scripture? Anybody who says, well, you know, I don't know if there's a God or not. Human authority is just whatever the populace says it is. What they could say is, whose values are you talking about? Who's to say what is right and wrong? You know, recently when the... We had this great big human rights convention. I forget where it was. We had this great human rights convention recently. The United States government said, we want to cut off aid to countries where the government is torturing people, doing ethnic cleansing. You see, all those things are wrong, and we're not going to give you aid if you violate human rights. And what did they say? What did they say? They said to the United States, don't you impose your values on us. Who's to say what is right and wrong? Those are just your Western values. This is the way we do it here. We torture people. We do ethnic cleansing. Who's to say? Now, here's what I mean. Unless there is an authority above human authority by which it is judged, unless there is an absolute moral standard higher than the human authority, unless there's an authority behind the human authority, there is no difference between authority and authoritarianism. There's no difference. You can't say that the rightful government of France has been overthrown by the unrightful conquerors from Germany. Who's to say what is right? Who's to say what is wrong? As soon as you start to talk about legitimacy, as soon as you say, this is bad, you are trampling on human rights, this is bad government, this is bad government, as soon as you say that, you're assuming that there is another higher divine authority. You're shaking your fist at them in light of some higher judgment. If Rousseau is right, if the Bible is wrong, what everybody knows instinctively falls flat, and that is there's a difference between rightful authority and lawless authoritarianism. There's a distinction between tyranny and valid human authority. But if you don't believe what the Bible says, you've got no basis for that gut feeling. You know it, but you have no basis for it in your own worldview. Don't you see? The Bible says that there is a difference between rightful authority and authoritarianism. Remember the place where they tell the, you know, the religious authorities tell the disciples, you can't preach about Jesus anymore? And what does Peter say in Acts 4? Therefore, it remains to be seen, he said, whether we should obey God rather than you. In other words, what he's saying is, there is an authority above you. And therefore, here's what's so balanced about it, and this is what's so wonderful about being a free servant. Christians, unlike the radical people, the radical individualists of the West, we believe that there is an authority behind human authority. We respect the offices. We respect parents, even the bad ones, because we know what's behind them. We respect people in authority. There's a kind of loyalty that we have. There's a kind of respect that we give. We don't just jump out. We're not cynical about authority, because we know that you can't operate without authority, because God has set things up this way, and there's a divine authority behind the authority. But on the other hand, we have a critical and most critical consent to authority, because we can judge the authority. If you believe that God... believe that there's a revelation from the real authority by which we can judge all human authority, that makes us mavericks, don't you see? That makes us such independent thinkers. Our ethnic culture, our family traditions, popular opinion, expert opinion, 99% popular opinion means nothing to us because what we do is we look and say, is it biblical? I don't care if 99% of the people, I don't care if my parents and grandparents and great-grandparents thought this. I don't care if all expert opinion says this. Is this what the Bible says? There is nobody less sheep-like than a Christian who understands there's an authority above the authority. And that's the reason why Peter says here, live as free servants. That's what it means. There's this wonderful balance. We've got an understanding that there's an authority behind every authority so we respect human authority more than other people. But on the other hand, we know that authority and what it says above human authority. And therefore, we're critical. And we call human authority on the carpet. And we don't just go along with the crowd. And we don't knuckle under. That's the reason why, see, Christians are so, in totalitarian regimes, Christians always look like the liberals. Why? Because we don't care how loud a government says this is the way it's done. We don't care how coercive and oppressive it is. We know that there's an authority above that authority. We don't deify human government. So we look like we're liberal. But you see, in Western secular and individualistic societies, we look terribly conservative. Because we know there are absolute moral standards. We know that the individual needs is not the important thing. But whether or not God's, whatever God's will is. That's the reason, for example, and I'm not speaking, I'm not trying to say that I know that Alexander Solzhenitsyn is a born-again Christian. I'm not saying this, but I'm telling you that he thinks and writes like a Christian when he says this. When he was over in Russia, he wrote books that said the problem with communism, the problem with totalitarianism, is that they put the state in the position of absolute authority. And they will not acknowledge that there's a moral authority higher than the state. But when he came to the West, and everybody was willing to say, wow, what a hero, you know, what a liberal thinker he is, because he stood against the terrible totalitarian regime. He came here and he says, you know what the problem with America is? He says, the problem here is that people put the needs of the individual in top place, in absolute authority, the highest place, with no moral authority over the needs of the individual. And of course, it means that the West has very different problems than the East, he says, but the real issue is that they both are doing the same thing. They're both are doing the same thing. They will not acknowledge a divine authority above a human authority, whether in the West, in the East, the human authority that is deified is the state, or in the West, the human authority that's deified is how I feel today. He says, in either way, you have chaos. In either way, you have destruction. He's thinking like a Christian. So in one regime, he looks terribly liberal. In another place, he looks terribly conservative. That's the way we always will look. Nobody can put us in a category. Nobody can stick us at some place along the spectrum of liberal to conservative. We're always surprising them. We always will. Because we're free servants. Not just free, not just servants, free servants. But then, a little more, that's all pretty intellectual. But then, he brings it right down to where the rubber meets the road. And he starts to say in here, which is pretty, very, very, very important. He starts to say now, he says, how is it to your credit if you suffer for doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God. It says, show proper respect to everyone. Love the brotherhood of believers. Fear God. Honor the king. Now, the other thing that Peter says, now there's a lot of things that Peter says, but I'm trying to give you an overview. The other thing Peter says is, in the actual living out of this attitude of servanthood, he says two things that are very important. On the one hand, he says, respect everyone. And then, he also says, when you suffer, when you're abused, endure it. Now, both of those, I think, are extremely important if you want to understand what it means to live as servants. Christians live as servants. We don't have the same attitude as other people. We talked about this this morning. I'm not going to recount that. Jesus said, because he came not to serve, to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many. Therefore, those of us who have grasped that we've been saved through the cross, we're going to to serve. Jesus says the normal way that a person moves out into a relationship or into any activity is to be served. You do that. As soon as you meet somebody, you're right away sizing up, do I want to be with this person? Is this a good place for me to be? As soon as you go into a room, you size it up. Is this a good use of my time? Is this a good place to be? Are these the kind of people I want to be with? Can I get anything out of this? Jesus says you become a Christian, you have a different attitude. You don't go into relationships saying, I want to be served. You start off by saying, I want to serve. I want to be useful. How does he do it? Well, first of all, number one, he says here, show proper respect to everyone. What's that mean? You know, I don't like that translation. In the old King James translation, it says honor everybody. And you know the word that Peter uses, the Greek word that he uses here is the word timeo, from which you get your word Timothy. And the word Timothy means to fear God. It actually is the word you get the word timid from because it means fear and trembling, awe, respect. Now, this is an amazing verse. It says, if you understand what it means to live as free servants, you will honor everybody. You will treat everybody with honor. You will treat everybody with the utmost respect. What's that mean? I think here, let me give you some ideas. Do you have a servant heart? That's a hard thing to do. I'll tell you what, I'd rather ask you this question. Have you met people with a servant heart? If you have, here's how they make you feel. Servants are unbelievably affirming. They honor you. They make you feel honored. They focus on you. You don't feel like they're trying to hijack the conversation into areas where they're interested. You feel like they're trying to find out what you're interested in, where you are, and they go there. You can tell a servant because a servant is unbelievably lavish with compliments. And yet, a real servant, it doesn't, you know, some people are just, they learned in their family or in their culture to say frivolous things, you know, vague things like how wonderful you are and how great you are. But I mean, a real servant is never maudlin. A real servant is never vague. A real servant is accurate with the compliments. A real servant can almost sense what a good person you could be, finds the best in you, brings it out, mentions it, mentions it, talks about it. You feel affirmed. You feel built up. You feel like you're treated hopefully with hope. You feel like the servant's treating you as you could be and sort of discerns what you could be. A servant listens very, very well. A servant listens before he or she talks. I'll give you another example. A servant covers for people. A servant overlooks slights and faults. Now, here's the way you can tell the difference between a real servant and a person who's actually using servant service as a way of feeling better about him or herself. There's some people who are just cowards. They look like servants. They're always so nice, and they're always helping you, and they're always doing so many good things, and they always forgive you very quickly, and they're always covering for you and being willing to lay things aside that you've done, but they never confront you, ever. They never tell you what's really wrong with you. When they see you caught in a trespass, they won't say anything. Why? Because they're not real servants. If they were servants, they would always give you what you need, but they don't. They give to you because they need it. They need to feel like I'm a good, useful person, that everybody relies on me, everybody loves me. See, a real servant honors everybody, which means you give them what they need. I'll give you one more example. A real servant not only is very helpful, very loving, always goes into relationships and into situations saying to serve, not to be served. There are some people, though, they look like servants. They're very helpful and useful, but you can never do anything for them. We were talking about this downstairs after the four o'clock service. You can never do anything for them. If you try to help them, if you try to do something for them, they won't let you. You know why? They're not real servants. They're martyrs. It's not the same thing. A martyr is somebody who feels good about him or herself because you always feel that you're doing so much more for people than they're doing for you. That's where you get your sense of worth, and that's your fuel. You feel like I do for other people. Nobody does for me. I'm not just that kind of person. You're not a real servant if you won't let people serve you. Do you? Honor everybody. Respect. Awe. Do you treat people with awe? They're in the image of God. They're God's creation. Do you treat them that way? See, that's what it means to be a servant. Do you know anybody who treats you like that? They're the servants. As long as they him too, then you know. Let me give you something else though. When it says honor, show respect, that also means putting people ahead of you, not always jockeying for position. That's another way to know that you're a servant. That's also here in this word honor. There's a place where Dietrich Bonhoeffer very wisely puts it. He says, the first moment one person meets another, there is an impulse to search for strategic position to be assumed over the other. If you're a servant, you know that that's in your heart. If you're a servant, you watch yourself for that. And you're not always trying to find position. Remember James and John says to Jesus, when we come into the kingdom, one of us wants to be on your left, one of us wants to be on your right hand. And Jesus says, don't you understand? If you understand what I've done for you, I took the lowest place. I had the position, but I didn't hold on to my position. I emptied myself and I became a servant. And I became obedient unto death. And if you understood what I was doing for you, you wouldn't be after position. Because if you get the position by scrambling over, if you do what Bonhoeffer said, if you give in to that impulse, that you're always trying to find strategic advantage over other people, you want to let them know what you know. Let them know how smart you are. Let them know how cool you are. How sophisticated you are. You're in for a very frustrating life. You know, Cynthia Heimel in that very famous article, she wrote a column in the Village Voice some years ago. I can't vouch that she's right about every one of the people she mentions, but is she on the money when it comes to agreeing with what the Bible says about seeking a position, seeking to move ahead? This is what she says. I pity celebrities, she said. No, I do. This is 1990 in the Village Voice. I pity celebrities. The minute a person, the minute the people that I know become celebrities, he or she becomes a monster. Sylvester Stallone, Bruce Willis, Barbara Streisand were once perfectly pleasant human beings with whom you could lunch on a slow Tuesday afternoon, but now they've become supreme beings and their wrath is awful. It's not what they had in mind. When God wants to play a really rotten practical joke on you, he grants you your deepest wish and then giggles merrily when you suddenly realize you want to kill yourself. Sly, Bruce, and Barbara fervently, more than many others, wanted fame. They worked, they pushed, they stepped on the other guy's face in their desperate need. If I can be famous, people will adore me and my nose, Barbara thought. If I can be famous, I can get my chin reduced and life will be a breeze, sly reasoned. If I can be famous, I can have a baby with Demi Moore and all my dreams will come true, Bruce decided. And the night each of them became famous, they wanted to shriek with relief. Finally, now they were adored, invincible, magic. And the morning after, the night each of them became famous, they wanted to take an overdose of barbiturates. Why? All of their fantasies had been realized, yet the reality was still the same. If they were miserable before, they were twice as miserable now because that giant thing that they were striving for, that fame thing that was going to make their lives bearable, that was going to provide them with personal fulfillment and ha-ha happiness had happened. And nothing had changed. They were still them. The disillusionment turned them howling and insufferable. See, the point is, Christians already know that. Christians already know that. Why go after the position? Christians go to be servants. You want to be the greatest in my kingdom, says Jesus? Serve the most people. Well, somebody says, how? How? And actually, a lot of you have asked about that today. How in the world? And the answer is, you have to do what you're about to do, which is you have to remember what he did for you. That's the reason why as soon as Peter, Paul does it, Jesus does it, all the way through the Bible. As soon as, whenever the Bible says, I want you to live lives of, you know, whatever the writer says, I want you to live lives of selfless service. I want you to submit to authority. I want you to go the extra mile. I want you to turn the other cheek. I want you to forgive those who have despitefully used you. I want you to serve people, even unhappy people, even stubborn people, even unlovely people, even hard people to love. I want you to serve them. I don't want you to be selfish. I want you to live an unselfish life. They never, ever, ever say that without referring to what Jesus has done for you, ever. Otherwise, it's just moralism. Otherwise, it's just legalism. Otherwise, it's just another crushing burden of something else on your to-do list. Instead, what they say is, remember what Jesus did for you. What? It says, when he suffered, he endured it. What does that mean? It means when you suffer in the process of servanthood, there'll be times in which you have to do what he did. And what does it say he did? It says, instead, Have you been mistreated? What's a servant do? First of all, you realize you're not the judge. You don't know what that person who's mistreated you really deserves. Only God knows what that person deserves. Only God knows everything that person's been through. Only God knows. And only God has the right to judge. And a Christian remembers that and remembers that Jesus Christ, if Jesus did not decide to pay back his abusers, but Jesus entrusted himself to God who judged justly, then surely you have to. And surely you can, because you realize, look at what I have done against him and he's forgiven me. Surely I can forgive them. All this means is there's a dynamic. Something has to happen in you. And that is for you to become servants. And that is you have to be affected by what Jesus did. What did he do for you? He bore your sins upon the tree. By his wounds, you've been healed. And it's the freedom that comes from that that enables you to be a servant. Has that happened? Has it happened to you? One of the things that's so hard about being a good servant is that you have to keep fresh in your heart what he's done, how he served you. You've got to keep it fresh. If it just stays intellectual, you know, kind of remote, you kind of know it, but it's not affecting you. It's very hard to love unlovely people. That's one of the reasons why we do the Lord's Supper. There is a freedom that comes. There was a woman who was almost dead, old lady, and her nephew was sitting at her bedside. This is in the 1740s, a true story. This 14-year-old was sort of religious but didn't know what it meant to be a Christian. His aunt had talked to him about gospel a few times, but now she was very old and she was dying. In fact, everybody thought she was practically gone. She seemed to be in a coma. Nobody could seem to wake her up. And he was sitting by her and was sort of sad. And the people came by and they did something that you never do with a person who you think is in a coma. They talked about her. And they said, you know, poor, this poor lady. She's had such a hard life. Husband died years ago. She's never had any money. She's always been in poverty. Everything has gone wrong for her. How is it possible, they said, that she was always so kind to people when actually life had given her such a bad deal? And they were thinking about that. She says, poor so-and-so, poor, this poor lady. She opened her eyes. She sat up and she says, who calls me poor? Who calls me poor? I am rich. And soon I shall stand before him bold as a lion. And she collapsed and died. And her 14-year-old nephew never forgot those words. That's the reason why we know about them today. He became a great preacher years later. But he suddenly realized this woman has got something I don't have. This woman knows that she will stand before God bold as a lion. Who calls me poor? Who calls me poor? I am rich. And that's the reason why when somebody would come up to her and she served them, she never got upset about it and says, boy, you know, I'm not making out in this relationship. I'm giving and giving and this person is not giving me anything back. You see, a Christian, when he or she is in the right mind, the reason you can be a servant is you look out at the world and you say, world, I am rich beyond the dreams of the wildest dreams of the earth of an earthly billionaire. Who cares if somebody picks my pocket of five dollars when I have billions of dollars in the bank? If I can stand before him bold as a lion, if I am rich because of what Jesus Christ has done, I don't care if somebody snubs me. I don't care if somebody doesn't pay me back, doesn't thank me. You see, where does the servant heart come from? They wondered. And she said, because I'm rich and I will stand before him bold as a lion. Can you say that? A lot of you know that. Stir up the realization of it by taking hold of him in the Lord's Supper. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you would help us now to stir up the knowledge of how you served us so we can serve others. Give us servant hearts. Make us free servants. Servants because we're free. Because we're freed from sin. Because we're freed from self. Because we're free from the law. Because we're free from guilt. And because we're free from all these things and we're even free from our own culture and human authority. We're free thinkers because of the word of God. Because we're slaves of the word. So, Father, make us free servants because we're slaves of you. We're indebted to you because of what you've done. We're rich. We can stand before you bold as a lion. Help us to take hold of these truths. Change us with them. We ask it in Jesus' name.
