TITLE: Practicing Faith in a Pagan World (Part 3)
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:13-22
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/practicing-faith-in-a-pagan-world-part-3/

============================================================

You see, sanctification, growth and grace is possible. Real character change is possible. My wife knows that I never give people their pens back. Ever. And so, it's just nice to be a good example. I'd like to read to you from 1 Peter. And even though the real preaching section for tonight, I'm going to read it to you. It's really chapter 2 of 1 Peter. And I'm going to read from verses 9 to 21. It's not exactly what's printed in the bulletin. I'm sorry about that. But the real preaching section for tonight is 1 Peter chapter 2, 9 to 21. 2, 9 to 21. And it goes like this. But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light. Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God. Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. Dear friends, I urge you as aliens and strangers in the world to abstain from sinful desires which war against your soul. Live such good lives among the pagans that though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us. Submit yourselves for the Lord's sake to every authority instituted among men, whether it be the king or the supreme authority, or to governors who are sent by him to punish those who do wrong, or to commend those who do right. For it is God's will that by doing good you should silence the ignorant talk of foolish men. Live as free men, but do not use your freedom as cover-up for evil. Live as servants of God. Show proper respect to everyone. Love the brotherhood of believers. Fear God. Honor the king. Slaves, submit yourselves to your masters with all respect, not only to those who are good and considerate, but to those who are harsh. For it is commendable if a man bears up under the pain of unjust suffering because he is conscious of God. But how is it to your credit if you receive a beating for doing wrong and endure it? But if you suffer for doing good and you endure it, this is commendable before God. To this you were called because Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example that you should follow in his steps. And we'll end there. That's God's Word. You sang about this. You realize that one of the best songs we sing in evening service, which you sang tonight, is all based on 1 Peter 2. You have called us out of darkness, out of darkness into your marvelous light. I know the translation we read from here, the New International says wonderful, but the old authorized version said, You have called us out of darkness into your marvelous light. You have saved us from the darkness. We're a chosen race, see, a royal priesthood, a holy nation set apart for you. Now, this passage is controlled by the word example. In fact, this passage and all the way into, as we're going to see, chapter 3, talks about Jesus' example. Jesus was an example that we should walk after him and follow after him. But to truly understand the meaning of the word example, you have to realize that if you truly look at Jesus' example, you'll find that he's got to be more than an example. And if you truly listen to Jesus' teaching, you've got to conclude that he is far more than a teacher. And so, we have to put in context what this word example means. This is what I'm trying to get across. How easy it would be, since Jesus is laid up here as an example, to go through this passage and see or to conclude that a Christian is essentially somebody who finds out what Jesus Christ has taught and done and follows his lead, follows his example. So, in verses 11 and 12, we see that you're supposed to deal with sinful desires and put them down. We see in verses 13 to 17 that you're supposed to obey human authority. Verses 18 to 20, that you're supposed to work diligently in the marketplace. Verses 20 to 25, that we're supposed to not repay evil with evil, but following Christ's example, overcome evil with good. That's what that passage is about. Then chapter 3, verses 1 to 7, we're supposed to live respecting our spouses, considerately of our spouses. So, all the way through, we have all of these ethical principles, and you might conclude that what it means to look at Jesus' example is to be nice people. So, that's what it means to be a Christian. A lot of people think that. moral example, his moral example shows us he's got to be more than a moral example, and therefore, if you read the whole passage, you'll see before he's an example, he calls us. He's a Savior. Now, here's what I mean. Paul does not say, God forbid that I should glory save in the example of Christ. He says, God forbid that I should glory except in the cross of Christ. Paul doesn't say, when I came and preached to you, I determined to know nothing but Christ and his teaching and his example. No, that's not what he said. He said, when I came to you, I determined to know nothing but Christ and him crucified. The point is, in every other religion, the central thing is what the founder of the religion did as an example. In every other religion, you know, Buddha is your example, Mohammed is your example, Confucius is your example, and that's what makes you a Confucianist. That's what makes you a Muslim. That's what makes you a Buddhist, is you follow the example. That's not what makes you a Christian. Every other religion basically says, you can make, you know, the Buddhism says, you can make yourself a Buddhist, here's how you do it. Islam says, you can make yourself a Muslim, here's how you do it. Confucianism, all of them say, this is how you make yourself whatever. Christianity always starts off right away saying, you can't make yourself a Christian. Before you can live a Christian life, before you can be, you can follow the example, before Christ can be your example, he's got to be more than your example, he's got to call you. So you see, the whole passage starts up at verse 9 and 10, where it says, you're a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness. How did you become the people of God? Peter says, once you were nobodies, that's what he says. He says, once you were not a people, but literally he says, once you were zeros, once you were zeros, once you were nobodies, but now you've become the people of God. How? By imitating him, by following his example. No, because you were called. So you can't understand, let's put it this way, anybody who has really, really looked at the example of Christ, truly looked at the example of Christ, has gotten very depressed. Anybody who says, well, put it this way, anybody who says, ah, all this born-again talk is very interesting. I mean, some people seem to need that. I'm not saying it's wrong for everybody. Some people talk about being converted and having this great experience, but I say that the important thing is that you are good, that all good people who are following these great moral principles, the example of Christ, and the example of all these great paragons of virtue that we have through the ages, that's the important thing. Not whether you're born again, not whether you have this received Christ as Savior. That's good for some people, but the important thing is that you follow the example. If you say that, you've never looked at his example. Anybody who really sees Jesus' example, who really sees what he said and what he did, anybody who's ever really tried with any real integrity to follow his example, is down in the dust, despising yourself. There is no one more depressing as an example than Jesus, because his example is so lofty. Have you really seen it? Do you really know it? When he says, Jesus did this, leaving you an example. If you start there, okay, I'm going to do what he did. If you start there, I'm going to live as he lived. If you start there, you'll just get unbelievably discouraged. Look at his teaching. He says, I, you've heard it said, you shall not kill, but I say unto you, you shall not even have a malicious thought. You should not even have a hateful or spiteful word. You should always be full of compassion and servanthood. He says, you've heard it said, thou shalt not steal. But I say unto you, you shouldn't even be discontent. You shouldn't even be envious. You shouldn't even be jealous. You should always be grateful and peaceful in your heart. You've heard it said, no adultery. I say, no lust and burning. I mean, just look at his teaching. And then worse than that, look at his actions. You'll never ever see a wrong step. What would Jesus Christ have turned out if you gave him one of these personality tests? What if you gave him the Myers-Briggs? What would he be? Would he be an introvert or an extrovert? Would he be a thinker or a feeler? Would he be intuitive or a censor? If I got it right, you know, what would he be if you gave him one of these temperament tests? Would he be a sanguine or melancholy or phlegmatic? What would he be? Do you know what he would be? See, even those tests, if you want, if you've really looked at the example of Jesus, it just... they always say, oh, well, you know, there is no right and wrong. I mean, there's nothing right and wrong about being an introvert, an extrovert, a thinker, a feeler. This is just the way we are. Well, it's true, I guess, in the abstract. The reason that we have personalities, the reason we always, the reason we have temperaments is because we're not wise enough to always be exactly what we need to be in every situation. Was Jesus a thinker or a feeler? It all depended on what was needed. Was Jesus an introvert or an extrovert? Was Jesus a processed person or a person that came to closure? Was Jesus sanguine or was he introspective or was he, you know, outgoing or what was he? He always was exactly what he had to be at the moment. Anybody who has a personality, and that's all the rest of us, we always tend to think more than feel. We always tend to be extroverts more than introverts or vice versa or whatever. The reason we do that, those are habits. We tend to do it whether or not it's appropriate. You know why? Because we're not wise. Jesus was perfectly wise. Never a wrong word. Never an inappropriate statement. Never a false step. Even in the areas we're not talking about sin so much. Just wisdom. Jesus as an example is an indictment. Jesus, it just knocks you into the dust. You fall to the ground like Job and you say, I heard about you in general, but now I see you with my eyes and I despise myself and I repent in dust and ashes. I mean, yeah. Have you really looked at the example of Jesus? If you start with the example, if you say, that's what it means to be a Christian. Ah, the born-again stuff and all that. The important thing is just to follow these great moral examples. You don't know what you're talking about. You are dishonest, really. Really. You haven't ever tried. You haven't really looked. Before he can be an example, he has to be a savior. Or, another way to put it is, if you really look at his example, you'll realize he has to be a lot more than an example because as an example, he's a failure. Jay Gresham Machen once said, I read a sermon of his a long time ago. He says, if Jesus is just an example, if he's just a moral paragon, someone that we can emulate, it's awful. He says, it's sort of like going into a, he says, have you ever been depressed and upset? Your life is a mess. This sounds to me a lot like the Purple Rose of Cairo. I don't know if you ever saw that movie. And you come into the theater and you watch the movie or watch the play and it's beautiful and it's wonderful and everything is as it ought to be. And it's exciting and it's thrilling and it's dangerous. But then in the end, you know, it all comes out okay. And for a moment, you forget your troubles and you think about how great it would be. And then the lights go down, the curtain goes down, and you're there in the dark, stuck in your real life. Remember the Purple Rose of Cairo? That's how Mia Farrow makes it. Machen said, if you make Jesus into the same kind of religious founder that all the other religions have made their religious founders, the same kind of person, as an example, as an exemplar, that's all you've got. You can look at him. Look at how wonderfully he moves. Look how beautiful he is. Look how great he is. And you can say, wouldn't it be great to be like that? But he will leave you in the dark. You won't be able to touch him. He's dead, you see. I mean, if that's all he is as an example, he's gone. And he's nothing but an indictment. He's nothing but a sword, an arrow. He's nothing but a prosecutor pointing at your life. Oh, no. That's not the gospel. The gospel is before he is your example. Before you get to verse 21, you got verse 9. You have called us out of darkness, out of darkness into your marvelous light. Now, quick question before we keep moving on. How do you know you've been called? I ask everybody here, and I don't know who you are. You're a variety of people. Some of you are here for the very first time. Others of you have come for a long time. I'm just asking you the same question, all of you the same. Do you know that you've been called out of darkness into his marvelous light? That's what a Christian is. A Christian is not just a nice person who started to follow an example. A Christian is somebody who's been called out of darkness. Well, you say, how do I know I've had that experience? Well, let me give you a couple of ideas here. When a person becomes a Christian, it's not like joining a club. It's more like a new compound being created in a laboratory. When a person becomes a Christian, it's not like sort of transferring from one group into another group, but it's much more like the world being created. Once there was darkness, now there's light. Once there was disorder, now there is order. It's a supernatural thing. So how do you know? Let me just suggest three possibilities out of the text and out of the surrounding text. One thing is a call is always a disturbance. I mean, you know, ring them? You don't ring, you beep now, I guess. I mean, when's the last time you heard a phone that rang? Have you ever thought of that? It's been years. I mean, you have to find some antique somewhere. You know, phones don't ring, they beep. Or they, whatever they do, you know, they trill. They trill, you know, they roll their R's or something. Or you wave, you know, you wave, or you yell, but in all cases, you're disturbing people. It wouldn't be a call if you didn't disturb them. You know, they're doing something else, and you've got to break in, you know. I mean, to call somebody, you at least want to get somebody to say, hmm? You break their concentration. Now, a lot of people, if you're a Christian, if you've been called, you have been disturbed. There's a sense that something from the outside has come in and begun to deal with you. Nobody becomes a Christian by saying, I'm going to take up Christianity. You become a Christian by sensing that something is taking you up. You don't pick up, say, well, here are the basic principles of Christianity. I'm going to pick them up, and I'm going to go be a Christian. Oh, no, a person who's called has a sensation that some outside power, something much greater than anything that you have dealt with before, is coming and picking you up, you see, and taking you up and dealing with you and disturbing you. Now, you know, the call can come a lot of ways. I mean, you have the Philippian jailer. It came in an earthquake. Go back to Philippi, and you see in the book of Acts, the Philippian jailer got the call in an earthquake. Well, sometimes it can be a still small voice. But the point is, there's a disturbance. You may not like it. I'm not saying at all that it's pleasant. You may have been coming along all of your life, and this may be happening to you now. I just want you to know what's going on. You go along all your life, and you've always thought you kind of understood, you know, what Christianity was, and now you're beginning to wonder. You've always thought you had your life pretty much together, but now something's wrong. You're disturbed. You're beginning to ask yourself, will I be able to face death? You're beginning to ask yourself, well, what is my life about? It might not be an earthquake, but you're disturbed. Have you sensed that intervention? Is something coming from outside and dealing with you? You don't just decide to become a Christian. Never. Christianity decides on you. You never decide for it. It comes after you. You decide in response, is something coming after you? Do you sense it? Secondly, the call means out of darkness into light. Now, have you ever seen somebody walk out of darkness into light? They don't come out like this. They always come out kind of blinking, you know, and a little bit afraid of where is things, and I can't quite make things out. Here's one of the ways in which you can tell that you're being called out of darkness into light. You have lost your swagger. When it comes to Christianity, you used to think you knew it all. You understood. Yes, you understand why people do this and why people do this. You think you know. Do you still think you know? Do you think you understand Christianity? You haven't been called. When you're getting called out of darkness into light, you begin to realize how little you know. You begin to realize you can't account for things. You begin to realize you can't account for Jesus. You begin to realize you can't account for a lot of things. You know, there's a place where Jesus says to the Pharisees, because you think you see, you're blind. And because you think you don't see, he talks to another group, it shows that you're coming awake. The way you know that you are beginning to see is that you don't feel you see. And the way you know that you don't see a thing is that you think you see everything. Coming out of darkness into light means you begin to lose that swagger. You begin to lose the sense, well, I know everything. You become teachable, in other words. You start to say, I need knowledge. I realize what I don't know. When I talk to people who say, oh, yes, I understand Christianity, they think they know. They understand it. They've got it all pegged. You haven't been called. Oh, and of course, the most important thing is when you're called out of darkness, it says in verse 4, up a little even further, it says, behold, I lay a chosen and precious cornerstone in Zion. One who believes in him, who builds his life on him, will never be put to shame. Now, what that means is when the light comes on, when you're called and you begin to leave the darkness and come into light, you do not say, oh, so that's how I ought to live. See, people know how they ought to live. You don't have to be a Christian to basically know how you ought to live. I mean, I constantly say this, and nobody's refuting it. I think it's true. Generally speaking, philosophies and religions, there's an awful lot of commonality. People know how they ought to live. They really do know how they ought to live, basically. When you come up from darkness into light, you don't say, oh, oh my goodness, now I see how I ought to be living. You know how you live. The thing that dawns on you is not what you ought to do. What always dawns on you when you're coming out of darkness is what you ought to do. a cornerstone, a precious cornerstone. Jesus Christ has done something for me on which I can build my life. You may have heard about the cross. You may have heard about Jesus doing things for you, but it never occurred to you. What dawns on you is that he did not die. He did not come first as an example for emulation, but first of all, as a substitute. To die in our place, to believe in him is not to say, oh God, be my boss so I can really live right. To become a Christian is to say, oh God, be my father because I can't live right and because I see that Jesus has lived right for me. See, when that begins to dawn on you, you know, and you're blinking into the light and you're amazed when somebody says, oh yes, I've always known what it meant to be a Christian, you haven't been called. People who've been called may have heard these things, but it dawns on them what he's done. It amazes you. It thrills you. You say, I can build my life on it. You know, when Jesus Christ, sum it up, first point summed up, when Jesus Christ said, I came, the son of man came not to be served, but to serve and to give his life a ransom for many. You know, that's Mark chapter 10 verse 45, maybe the central verse in the book. The son of man came not to be served, but to serve. Why did he say that? Isn't he the king? Didn't he come to be served? Didn't he come and say, I am the king from heaven. Here is my will. Love one another, you see. Tell the truth. Serve me. Worship my father. Didn't he come to be served? Don't you see what he's saying? He's saying, before you can serve him, he has to serve you. He came not the first time to be served, but to serve. You cannot serve him until he serves you, until his life, a ransom, becomes effectual in your life. In other words, before he can be an example, he's got to be more than an example. He's got to call you out of darkness into his marvelous light. And so you can rejoice in his power and his might. Now, if that's true, that he's a great example, as long as you see he's more than an example, then what is his example? Well, as soon as you get into the example, you've got two things, and only two things that we can do tonight, because it's a long passage, and here's what they are. First of all, the two things that we, now that you know what it means to be a Christian, now it's safe to say, here's how to live a Christian life. You've always got to talk about the gospel. You've got to put it in the context. Otherwise, people immediately, immediately think, ah, this is it, the Christian life. Do this and do this, the checklist. You know, now God will accept me, and you miss everything. However, having said what we said, there's two things that we're told, and there's actually quite a few, the first two things that we'll look at is, number one, it says, in verse 11, it says, abstain from sinful desires which war against your soul, and live godly lives by abstaining from sinful desires which war against the soul. And then secondly, it says, submit to every human authority. So one of these had to do with the inside, one of these had to do with the outside, and what I'm going to do is I'm really just going to, you know, I'm going to lay out over the next few minutes, just going to lay out the basics of both of them, but they're very important. First of all, to live a Christian life does mean to abstain from sinful desires that war against your soul. Now, we alluded to this a few weeks ago, but this is where I can really get into it. What are sinful desires? You know, what's even worse is in the old King James translation, sometimes the older translation was better, sometimes it's worse. In this case, it actually says, I think, fleshly desires. And right away, people say, oh yeah, that's, yeah, that's Christianity for you. In other words, abstain from those fleshly desires. Well, right away, people may think that means bodily desires. Yes, you know, instead of partying, instead of having a good drink, instead of going out and dancing the night away, instead of falling into somebody's arms, you see, those are all sinful things because they're bodily. And that's the way Christianity is. It's sort of antibody. That's not what we're talking about. It's a bad, frankly, it's not only a bad translation to say fleshly desires, but it's even a bad translation to say sinful desires. The word here is epithumia, which means abstain from literally over desires. And when it talks about, the Bible mentions this word a number of places, and we've touched on this before, but it's so important to continually remind ourselves, what is an over desire? He is saying, Peter's saying, the Bible says constantly, that what sin does to the heart is not simply make you want to break the rules, you know, one of the best It's just to arbitrarily say, now I don't want anybody putting their fingers on that. I mean, until you said that, there was nothing wrong with it. Now suddenly, why not? Let's do it, you know, you know, let's get in. That's, and a lot of people think, oh yeah, that's, that's what it means, you know, sin is, is breaking the rules. This is so much deeper, so much more profound. Peter is saying, and the Bible says, what sin does is it takes desires and makes them over desires. This is the basic problem we've all got. This is the main problem. It's not the only one, but it's the main problem. Over desires mean things that are good that you want too much. Common sense tells us that one of the reasons there are things that we lose. There is, we lose things because they are good things that we want too much. Haven't you seen it? I mean, you know, here, there's tons of examples. I remember years ago counseling a woman who was incredibly jealous and scared she was going to lose her husband, and that's why she was losing her husband. It was, you know, it was, it was such a, it was such a perfect myth of Sisyphus kind of illustration. She was scared of losing him, and because she was scared of losing him, she was always carping on him. She was always suspicious. She was always spying on him. She's always saying, why did you do that? Why did you say that? And that's, and she was losing him. She was losing him simply because she was afraid of losing him. It was an over desire. There's nothing wrong with wanting to keep your husband, is there? I don't think so. That's a perfectly decent desire. It was an over desire. It absorbed her. She felt like, if I would lose my husband, it would be pretty bad. It's a pretty terrible thing. It's about as bad a thing as can possibly happen. Or to lose a wife, of course. But because it was the ultimate horror, because this desire to keep her husband had grabbed her soul. That's what Peter's talking about. She lost her husband. Never forget it. But you know what? You think, well, that's an extreme case. No. Look at the kids in most schools who have the fewest friends. You know why? Generally, they want friends so bad. They just want them so bad. Everybody says, oh, when they get near you, you know, you say, hi. And they say, let's go talk. You know, I mean, they don't say it out loud, but they say, you know, like Sally Fields at the Oscars. You like me. You really like me. And you say, oh, forget it. You know? But that happens. Look, what do you think hypochondria is? What is hypochondria? There's nothing wrong with wanting to be healthy. But frankly, the best way to be healthy is not to always worry about being healthy. You see, anything that captures your soul wars against the soul. It destroys itself. But the Bible says that that's constantly what's happening. Our biggest problem are not desires for forbidden fruit. Our biggest problem is epithumia. Epithumia. It's over desires. There is something about the sinful heart that wants to take other things instead of God and put them in the center. We talk about this all the time. But, you know, every time I talk about it, somebody gets it. So I keep talking about it. Somebody new gets it. They say, oh my gosh, I never thought of that or never saw it that way. Don't you see why you're so bitter? You know, very often, here's two people. You're in the same situation. The same things happen to you. One of you is horribly bitter. The other one seems to have been able to take it. Why? Is one of you more godly? You know, more self-controlled? Uh-uh. Look carefully. You will see that whatever happened to you was not... The thing that happened to the bitter person was that something came between you and something that is an epithumia. That's why you're so mad. That's why you can't stand it. I've got to have it. I've got to have it. Anything you feel like you've got to have has got your soul by the neck. It's trying to dominate the soul, you see. It's waging war against the soul. It wants to be your salvation. It wants to capture your soul. That's why it's warring against it. It's trying to capture it. It's trying to storm it. It's trying to take it. And here's one of the ways, you know, you're a Christian. Before you're a Christian, you don't really, except in the most general sense, understand what your soul is. This is a very, very important way to understand what it means to be a Christian. You may believe, before you're a Christian, you may believe you have a soul. You may say, well, I know I've got a body and I've got a soul. It goes to heaven. You might believe it in a general way, but your soul is your spiritual character. Your soul is your relationship to God. And it's not until you become a Christian that you realize, maybe before you were a Christian, you realized that there were, you know, you drank too much. You know, you go to AA, you realize this is dominating me and so on. But you haven't looked beneath why you drank. You haven't looked beneath and began to realize there are over-desires, things that are trying to capture your soul, things that have you. And the reason you're so excited sometimes and so depressed sometimes, you get so big. over-desires, good things that have become too important. Inordinate desires is another way to put it. You see? Christians begin to understand you've got a soul. Sometimes it's possible for a Christian to understand that you may, your soul may be strong even when your body and your emotions are just wrung out. And it's also possible to have your body and your emotions in pretty good shape and your soul dry as dust. That shows you're a Christian. I mean, that's actually an altered state of consciousness, to use the lingo of the day, that comes to Christians. Now, what are you supposed to do, it says? It says abstain from these desires. If you see that one of these desires has got you by the soul, the most important thing to a Christian is that you build that soul up. You know, the great saints, you know, the great men and women of history, the great men and women of God, they understood their soul. They knew that their soul needs as much exercise and building up as their body or their emotions. Why do you go, why do you take off and kick back and go to the beach? Because you just know you've got to restore your emotions. Why is it that you work out? Why is it that you run? You've got to restore your body. Christians understand it's just as important to be working on your soul. That's why you pray. That's why you feed the soul. That's why you read. And a Christian is someone who says, this is really good and this is really good, but I will do nothing that will jeopardize my soul. I would rather be at the bottom rung of the social ladder than jeopardize my soul. Has that happened to you? Have you begun to understand that? You know, are you abstaining from those things that war against your soul? Are you busy? So busy. Good things, they're crowding out. They're crowding out the development of your soul. Things that you know are so important to you and you're cutting corners to get to them. You're harming your conscience to get to them. You're not able to do ministry. You're not able to give. You're not able to really honor Christ because this is so important. And you're rationalizing yourself. You say, well, it'll only be a couple of years. Look out. Abstain from sinful desires. The war against the soul. What is your soul? It's your capacity to know God and to relate to spiritual realities. Don't you know what it's like to get... I mean, have you ever sat... I mean, I do this all the time because I sit on my foot. I always curl a foot underneath me when I'm sitting. And after a while, you know, my whole, you know, leg has gone numb. And so you take it out for a minute. And boy, it hurts just to feel the blood come rushing back in. You can't feel a thing to it. But it's something, you know, you didn't even... you didn't feel it happening until you realize suddenly that your leg is completely numb. Some of you are doing that to your souls right now. These things strangle your soul just as much as my sitting on my leg strangles my leg. Jesus says, what does it profit you to gain the whole world and lose your soul? I'm not trying... look at... careful. I'm not saying the soul is more important than the body. I'm not trying to pit the soul against the body. I'm not trying to pit... what I'm trying to say is your soul is your capacity to obey, your capacity to know and relate to spiritual realities. When your soul is strong, it carries everything else. It infuses your body with joy. It keeps... I've seen people, because their soul is so strong, they were able to handle things physically and they were able to keep going physically that nobody else could handle. Do you understand that? Look at the things. They may be little things that are distracting you from building up your soul. They may be big things right in the middle of you, right in the middle of your life that are strangling you. They're waging war against the soul. Don't do it. Don't listen to it. Say, nothing is more important. It says, dear friends, I urge you as aliens and strangers in the world to abstain from sinful desires which war against your soul. Live such good lives, which is the same thing, among the pagans that though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us. On the day he visits us, he's going to look at you and he's going to say, you know what? I gave you something I didn't give the animals. I mean, I gave you something I didn't give the fish, something I didn't give the plants. These are all my living creatures. I love them very much. I gave you a soul. I gave the ability to reflect me. I gave the ability to reason. I gave the ability to relate in love. I gave the ability to relate to spiritual realities. What have you done with it? How well have you developed it? How sensitive is it? How much endurance does it have? It's like a muscle in a way. It's like a leg. It's like a, it's like your emotions and yet it's not. If you're a Christian, you know what I mean. I can't, I just, I can't describe it as much as I can tell you, you know, analogies like that. Are you developing it? Because on the day you did. Oh, don't worry. You see, we have to conclude now. I just can't go any further. We'll get back into the text. But don't you see how depressing the second part of that sermon would have been if I hadn't done the first part? Don't you see how hopeless you'd be? Because you would say, well, my word, you know, how in the world am I going to abstain from all these sinful desires? I hadn't thought of it like that. How hard it's going to be. He's going to come. He's going to visit us. Oh, my gosh. What am I going to say on the day he visits us? But don't forget the first part. He has laid a precious stone in Zion. And here's what's going to happen. On the day he visits us, yes, we're going to be held accountable in the context, the context of complete acceptance. You know, I was reading Samuel Rutherford who said, stop grieving all the time. Stop feeling sorry for yourself. Your needs will be made up on the day that you meet the Father. For on that day, if you have a bill, give it to him. And watch how he makes up for all the losses of your life in a moment. Because he's more than an example, he can be an example. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that we are accountable to live godly lives, to abstain from sinful lusts, to deal with all these things. But we thank you that it's in the context of having been called out of darkness into marvelous light, having been accepted because we don't lay our own foundation, but your precious cornerstone, Jesus Christ, is now the foundation for our lives and our relationship with you. Oh, Lord, help us to keep this marvelous balance. Help us to be compelled and help us to be pushed into godliness because of our acceptance and help us to appreciate our acceptance even when we fall, even when we fall down. Help us to see that on the day you visit us, yes, we will give an accounting and we think about that. And that's why tomorrow we're going to abstain from sinful desires that war against our soul. But we also know that on that day you're going to say, you are my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased. Thank you, Father, for these great and precious promises. Help us to use them. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
