TITLE: Praying for Glory
SCRIPTURE: John 14:12-15
TOPICS: Glorification Prayer & Meditation
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/praying-for-glory/

============================================================

John, the 14th chapter, and this morning we have come to verses 12, and we're only going to read from verses 12 through 15. John 14, verses 12 through 15. I tell you the truth, anyone who has faith in me will do what I have been doing. He will do even greater things than these, because I am going to the Father. And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring glory to the Father. You may ask me for anything in my name, and I will do it. If you love me, you will obey what I command. This ends the reading of God's Word. Life, our lives are so hectic that in some ways trying to live your daily life reminds you of trying to walk across a rain-swollen, raging, torrential river. Constantly finding the turbulence just picks you up every so often off your feet, and next thing you know, you're struggling to get back on your feet, and you're trying to walk across. And you desperately look around for a rock or an island, someplace where just for a while you can get away from the turbulence so you can get up your strength to go back in. Today, Ann Morrow Lindbergh puts it this way, I want a central core to my life that will enable me to carry out my obligations and activities. I mean an inner harmony, essentially spiritual, which can be translated into outer harmony. You see, what she's saying is, what I desperately need because my life is so turbulent, I need these islands, I need an inner place, a place where I can develop an inner harmony, she said, which is essentially spiritual, that will enable me to deal with the turbulence of my outside world without outer harmony. Now, everybody agrees with this more and more every year. And therefore, our bookstores are just choked with books on meditation techniques and ways of finding that quiet inner power and finding that island, in a sense. Now, from a biblical point of view, so many of these books on how to get centered, their meditation techniques, their consciousness-changing techniques, there's all sorts of ways of doing it, biblically, these are all substitutes for prayer. Because knowing God in prayer, according to the scripture, is the way that you find that inner core that Ann Morrow Lindbergh was talking about. We've got to have it, and if you don't know God in prayer, you're going to find some sort of substitutes. What you really need and want is intimacy with the infinite. You want a heavenly Father that you can pour your heart out to and that you can listen, through which you can listen to him about his love and his grace and what he believes and cares for about you. And that creates that inner power, that inner core. It creates that inner island. Prayer is the thing you're after. Now, Jesus Christ, almost in passing, mentions prayer. It's very brief. Essentially, he only mentions prayer in verse 13 and 14. He says, I'm going to the Father, so you will do greater things than what I have done. And I will do whatever you ask in my name, so that the Son may bring glory to the Father. It's so concise, it's powerful. Therefore, all the guidelines of prayer are right here in this little nugget, this little seed. And all I want to do today, as we prepare to go to the Lord's table, is to lay those things out so you can look at yourself. And so that you can understand how you can find that same inner core. How you can have an island that every day you can go to. So you have a center from which you can move out into the turbulent waters of the life around you. The three things Jesus tells us about prayer are its power, its purpose, and its conditions. There's the power of it, the purposes, or the purpose of it, and the conditions that we have to meet for it. And let's just look at these, and we do it briefly today, because it's the Lord's Supper day. Number one, the power. He says, Now, there's just so many places in the scripture that have claims like this. It says in James 1, he says, He gives liberally, and he begrudges you no good thing. It says in Ephesians 3, And just so many secrets about it because it makes you feel great. Thank you. in the scripture that have claims like this. It says in James 1, he says he gives liberally and he begrudges you no good thing. It says in Ephesians 3, he will give you more than you can dare ask or think. We're told in James 4, the reason we don't have many things is because we don't ask for them. James 4 says you have not because you ask not. And the context of this verse on prayer is really a staggering context. If you read all of John chapter 14, if you go back to what we've looked at previously, and if you go forward to what we're going to look at in the coming week or two, here's what Jesus is saying. He's saying I'm going to heaven to sit at the right hand of my father and to take up his kingdom and to rule the universe. And I'm going to heaven and I'm going to send you the Holy Spirit. And he says, because I go to heaven, you will be able to do greater deeds than I can do here on earth right now. And therefore, then he turns and says, and therefore, whatever you ask in my name, I'll give you. You know, it's so easy to want to pull that thing out of context and say, whatever I ask, but what he's saying is, he says, I am the king and I'm going to heaven to deal with the things that I hate and I have sworn to oppose and eradicate oppression and injustice, suffering and immorality and death. And I've gone to heaven. And when I get there, your prayers will be the way that my kingdom power is released into history. That's what he's saying. He says, as long as you're for the same things I'm for, and you recognize what this great thing is, just imagine the things that Jesus says he's against as the king. He's against immorality, he's against depression, he's against suffering, he's against these things. He says, my power will be released into the world through your prayers and through you. And therefore, what he's saying here is that prayer changes things. It will change things. Now, that's the first point, the power of prayer. You know why I'm so fast? I'll tell you why. I'm done with the first point. You say, you're kidding. This is a record. And I'll tell you why I'm finished with the first point. You can press and spend a lot of time talking about what the Bible says about the power of prayer and how it changes things and how if you pray or write, the world will be changed through you. But I'm enough of a pastor to realize that the longer we spend on this subject, the more depressed we're going to get. Because we say, we know about those promises. We see those promises. Whatever you ask. What I want to know is, why doesn't it seem to be working for me? Why doesn't it seem to work? And the answer is because Jesus doesn't just tell you about the power. The power of prayer is put in the context of the purpose and the conditions. So let's move to the second point. What does Jesus say the purpose of prayer is? Now, the purpose of prayer, if you look carefully, it's right there. If your mind works the way mine works, you immediately honed in on the word, whatever you ask. You see, if I ask, the first time I read through that and I ask myself, what's the purpose of prayer? And I see the word, whatever you ask, my mind immediately goes to that. And I say, well, the purpose of prayer is to get the things you want from God. Prayer is the divine complaint department. Prayer is the divine order catalog. I would like two of these in this size, please. That's what prayer is. It's a way of getting things from God. That's not the, if you look at the grammar of the sentence, that's not what Jesus is saying in verse 13 or 14. What he says is, I'm going to give you all these things so that the Father may be glorified. All of prayer, everything I do is so that the Father may be glorified. That's the overarching purpose. It's in a sense, if prayer was like a, was like an instrument, you have to set your sights on the glory of the Father or it will not work. Now, why is that the purpose of prayer? I'll tell you why it's the purpose of prayer, because you need it. When you sit down tonight to pray about something you're deeply anxious about, what God knows, but what you are only semi-aware of, is the first thing you need is to glorify him, and the second thing you need is the thing you're so anxious about. Why? When my family and I lived in Philadelphia, we had a washing machine, that by and large was a good washing machine. However, sometimes it had a problem on the spin cycle. Because, you see, if the clothes originally, when they were originally put in, were nice and stacked in an orderly way, in a uniform way, crowded around the center of the drum, then when it went to spin cycle, everything was clothes, instead of being really oriented around the center, they'd all get off to the side, they'd all get off to this one end, and if they were all bunched over on this one end, what would happen when the spin cycle went was that the drum was pulled off of its center, and it would start to bang against the side of the washer. The washer would start to bang against the side of the dryer, the dryer would start to bang against the side of the sink, and it sounded like there was somebody downstairs in the basement with a huge sledgehammer just tearing things up. And you'd have to run down there, turn it off, and what would you do? You'd have to crowd the clothes back around the center. The moon is a small little piece of rock, and the only reason that it's doing well is because it revolves around the center, which is the earth, but what if the moon decided it wanted to have its own center? Next thing you know, there would be a pretty big collision, and a lot of people would die. The point, some things, if they are built to be oriented around a particular center, and if they get off of that particular center, it leads to disintegration. The point is, if something is built to be oriented around a particular center, if it moves off that particular center, there's disintegration. The Bible says that we are all built to center around God. We are built to glorify God, and as you remember from those of you who were here last month, the word glory means weight. In other words, to glorify something means to make it the center of your gravity. To glorify something means to say that as you weigh it against everything else, this is the most heavy, the most important. Everything else moves toward it. Everything else is less weighty than it. To glorify something is to center on it. To glorify something is to say, this is the center. And the Bible says that if you center on anything except the one you were particularly built for, that is God himself, there's going to be disintegration. There's going to be a lot of banging. There's going to be a lot of pain. For example, you may say, well, I believe in God, and I believe in the Ten Commandments. And yet, if you find out that to lie, that you'll make $20,000 more this year, and you lie anyway, and you go ahead and you lie, then the center of gravity of your life is your financial advantage. God's out in the suburbs somewhere, somewhere on the periphery. Or, if you cannot forgive somebody who has disgraced you, and you can't forgive them, and you're eaten up with bitterness about it, then you can say what you want. I believe in God, I believe in the Ten Commandments, but the center of gravity of your life is your honor, your image. Or, if a relationship breaks up, and you are inconsolably depressed. Now listen, I didn't say, is there anything wrong with being grief-stricken? I didn't say anything wrong with being in pain. Inconsolably means that you will not take your mind off yourself. You will not get up and get about things. You're shackled with self-pity. Then it's that relationship which is the center of gravity of your life. Why do you think you hurt so bad? Because when a relationship, when your financial advantage, when your honor or your image, when anything else but Jesus Christ and His glory, and the Father and His glory, is the center of your life, there's disintegration. You're off-center. You're banging. You have to rush to the basement saying, What's wrong? What is prayer? Prayer is going down into the basement of your heart, sort of turning things off, stopping everything, saying, What's going on here? Opening the lid, looking inside and saying, I've got to crowd everything in my heart back toward the center. I've got to glorify the Father. Now, how does that work? In the Bible, it is absolutely a rule. Glorifying the Father comes before you ask for anything. Why do you think in the Lord's Prayer, the first two-thirds of the Lord's Prayer is all about the Father and praying for the kingdom? Why is it that before you say, Give us this day our daily bread, you're supposed to say, Thy will be done? Jesus is saying, Don't you dare go and make your requests known until you've spent a rather large amount of time thinking about the glory of the Father. Let's be real specific about it. You're dealing with, you're so unhappy, you're depressed, you're mad because somebody abused you, and you just can't forget it. What do you do? You go into him and say, Lord, make me feel better. That's not the way prayer works. You get in there and you start to glorify. You start to think about what he did for you. You think about the fact that he was not, it was not beneath him to forgive someone for dishonoring him. You think about the fact that, you think about what he's done for you. You let the sweetness of what he is and what he's done for you dawn on you, and next thing you know, you turn around and say, Oh Lord, let me forgive him, and whoops, it's already begun to happen. You sit down and you begin to pray to God, and you glorify God, and you work in, you pray into your heart his greatness and his wisdom and his power, and you'll begin to find that you start to rethink the problems that you're about to pray about. You always start with glorifying the Father, and by the time you get to the thing that was just about killing you because you're afraid it wasn't going to happen, you will find that it's been de-centered, it's been de-glorified, and you start to say, Why did I think this was the end of the world? And now you begin to say, Father, this person I'm so afraid about, I'm so worried about, I'm so worried about him, I'm so worried about her, I put him in your hands. I see your glory, I see your greatness. And if you start with glory, you end up praying with tremendous power, tremendous confidence, it changes you. Now, I've got to leave this and mention the last point, but do you understand this? Some of you look at the person you want to become, and you say, Ah, look at that, look at Jesus Christ, and of courage, and of tenderness, of power, and of greatness. I could never be like that. Yes, you can. If you take a bent rod, and you want to get it straight, you've got to put it in the furnace, in the fire. And when you put it in the fire, you're able to start to bend it back. What does it mean to aim for the glory of God as the first and most important thing in prayer? The purpose of prayer is not to get God to see things your way. The purpose of prayer is for you to get yourself to see things God's way. It's totally opposite things. You get into the presence of God, and you start to think about His glory. You think about the holiness and the heavenliness of the Father. You think about the prophethood, priesthood, and kingship of Jesus Christ. And the more you think about it, you're stoking a furnace. And you're turning up the heat. Don't get into your requests. Don't get into what you're asking until you've glorified Him, until you've adored. You're turning up the heat, and pretty soon you'll start to feel your heart begin to run. It'll start to soften. It'll start to melt. And then you can turn to the things that you need. And then you can turn to the petitions and the requests, and wait till you see what happens. You turn around and you say, Oh my gosh, it's you. You're you. Why did I think this was so important? Why am I so afraid of this? Why am I holding on to this thing like it's the most important thing in the world? Nothing can bother me if you're for me. Nothing can make me or break me except you, and you're totally for me. Lord, here's my request. A lot of people in this room think you're upset because of circumstances outside of you that are bearing down on you. Not at all. Your problem is you're not praying about them. And you see, that's what Christians always say. But what is pray? Does it mean to go in there and worry in God's presence? Prayer is turning on the furnace. Prayer is starting with the glory of the Father. Prayer is turning the furnace up in your heart and passing your needs through that furnace. The furnace of a look at the glory of God. That's the power of prayer. The answers are just fallout. Now lastly, what is the condition for prayer? The condition for prayer is so powerful. It will change things. It will change you first. And secondly, as you rethink your needs out in the presence of the glory of God, it will change the world. If it's so powerful, I want you to know that God had to put a safety catch on it. If you were wise and you found an Aladdin's lamp and the genie came out and said, I will give you three wishes, anything you want. If you had a modicum of wisdom, you would throw the genie and the lamp back in the Hudson or the East River. Nobody who has any kind of wisdom as the Christianity defines wisdom would ever try to make wishes like that. See, wishes, magic, is prayer without a safety catch. Look. Look at little kids, what they want to do. Your parents, good parents are always saying, no, you can't eat that rock. No. You've got to take your tongue out of the electrical outlet. What if a toddler had three wishes? The end of the world. Oh, well, but you grow, see? And of course, now you're 15. Think of the things that you were sure you needed when you were 15. Think of how you screwed your life up because you got some of them. All right. All right. All right. Thank you. for me. I knew the job for me. I knew the spouse for me. I don't make mistakes now. Friends, prayer is so powerful that it would be like an Aladdin's lamp that didn't have a safety catch on. And what's the safety catch? He says, you have to ask in my name. Now there's two things that I'll just tell you before we close up here that it means to pray in Jesus' name. The one thing, it means you have got to come saying, I have absolutely no other recommendation except that Jesus died for me. That's why only Christians can pray in Jesus' name. When a policeman is shot, when you attack a policeman or shoot a policeman, is it not true in most municipalities now, the penalty is worse than if you attack somebody else? Why? Is that policeman a more wonderful and great person than you or me? And yet, no, we don't mind the fact that there's greater penalties. You know why? Because we know that policeman comes in the name of the municipality, in the name of the city. An attack on the policeman is an attack on all of us. It's an attack on our ability to live together peacefully, right? And therefore we say, in himself, in herself, the police person, okay, the policeman, the policewoman. Hey, in themselves they're nothing special. But because of the name that's on them, they need to be treated as if they represented the whole community. See, when you go to Jesus, when you go to the Father, to pray in the name is to say this. I am no good in myself. Yeah, I have nothing to recommend myself to you. But I come in the name of Christ. See, only a Christian understands that. If you're a moralist, if you come and you say, well, I've tried my very best. Therefore, and I've had a hard life. I deserve for you to answer my prayer. You're not praying in the name of Christ. There was an old minister once, and a guy came to him and said, listen, I've been a Presbyterian elder for 30 years. I've been a Sunday school superintendent for 15 years. I've been the most consistent Christian I know, and I pray, and I'm not getting anywhere. What's wrong? And the old minister said, you're going in your own name. Or you wouldn't be angry. See, friends, if you pray and you say, I deserve an answer. I have all kinds of people around me that have not lived the life I've lived. They've cheated, and they've done this and that, and I'm not having anywhere near as nice a life as they are. This isn't fair. You're going in your own name. In fact, some of you are saying, God doesn't answer my prayers, therefore I must be an absolute jerk. He must have cast me off. He must have thrown, I must be awful. And you get depressed. You're going in your own name, too. A Christian is somebody who says, Jesus Christ is not just my example. He's my righteousness. He is the one who has fulfilled the law for me. He stood in for me. He's paid my debts on the tree. And now I'm square with you, Father. And therefore, because of who he is and what he has done, hear my prayer. Only a Christian can say that. And until you start coming like that, with the confidence of that, you're not going to be able to get anything out of prayer either. If you're angry because God's not answering your prayer, your slip is showing. You're going in your own name. Or some of you go back and forth between being angry and depressed, thinking you deserve it and thinking you don't deserve it. Get it straight. Go in the name of Jesus. Lastly, to go in the name of somebody means you have to want what they want. If you're a lawyer and you're being asked to negotiate a contract for a client, you've got to go as much as possible and want what they want. You don't worry about your personal, right? I've seen some of you operate. You do a good job. You're professionals. You say, I'm here in the name of so-and-so. So what I want or don't want means nothing. But what he or she wants, that's what I am pressing for. To pray in the name of Christ is to say, Lord, what is good for me? I would like this and I would like this, but is this good for me? There's really no unanswered prayer. A good father listens to the little boy and the little boy says, I want to have fun, Daddy. I want to buy some firecrackers. And you say to the kid, you look underneath the specifics of his request and you see what he's really after and you say, I can take you someplace where you really have fun. And the little child has a choice. The child can either say, my father is really for me. He's really heard what I really want. And he's going to give me what I really want, though not in the way I asked. Or else you can say, my father has not heard me and I refuse to believe that he loves me. And I'll tell you, there's nothing more dangerous than to be a child who has decided at a deep level that the parents cannot be trusted. That child will eventually die. When you go to God and he doesn't answer your request, you go. believer, if you go saying, I want what's best, I want what will glorify you, and you don't get exactly what you've asked, you've got a choice, friends. And the choice is to say, he's heard me, he's giving me what I want, only not in the currency. He's giving me the thousand dollars and I ask for it in gold and he's giving it to me in stocks. He's giving it to me in some other way. He's giving me what I would have asked for if I know everything he knew. Or you can say, he hates me, he's not for me, and I refuse to enjoy myself and I refuse to trust him, I refuse to believe that he's for me. That's the choice before everybody here in this room. Whether you're a believer or whether you're not sure you are, you can start to glorify the Father, you can start to treat him as if you're a child and he's a father. You can start to treat him as if he's worthy to be trusted. Do you see that? Some of you, your lives are being distorted because you won't get your answer to prayer. And you're saying, I want to know why my life has gone the way it's gone before I obey him. And the answer is, that's your way of keeping control of your life. Because if you only know why before you obey, you're not obeying at all. Christian friends, is prayer working in your life? I challenge you to pray in this way that we talked about, and I challenge you to pray 30 minutes a day for the next 30 days and don't miss one. Start, there's two-thirds of the time on glorifying the Father. And then pour out your requests, and if your life has not changed at the end of 30 days, you can come back, and you can dress me up and down. And I'll be very happy to talk and think about it with you. Because I know that's not going to happen. Jesus Christ said, pray and faint not. There's your choice, either pray or faint. You've got his name on you. He's your Father. Go to him. Father, as we come to the table, all we ask is that you would enable us to give ourselves to your glory, to make you the center. Heal our hearts now as we pray and bring our hearts back into your true orbit. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
