TITLE: Prayer for the World
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 98:1-9
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Pilgrim Prayer: Psalms for the Journey
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/prayer-for-the-world/

============================================================

Scripture reading is taken from Psalm 98, verses 1 through 9. Sing to the Lord a new song, for he has done marvelous things. His right hand and his holy arm have worked salvation for him. The Lord has made a salvation known and revealed his righteousness to the nations. He has remembered his love and his faithfulness to Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God. Shout for joy to the Lord. All the earth burst into jubilant song with music. Make music to the Lord with the harp. With the harp and with the sound of singing, with trumpets and the blast of the ram's horn. Shout for joy before the Lord, the King. Let the sea resound and everything in it, the world and all who live in it. Let the rivers clap their hands. Let the mountains sing together for joy. Let them sing before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world in righteousness and the peoples with equity. The word of the Lord. Now, in the weeks leading up to Good Friday and Easter, we've been looking at the Psalms. And this Psalm, it was just read, in some ways it looks like a simple hymn of praise, like many others. And you could spend your time just talking about praise itself and its importance and its character. But I believe that in the center of this psalm, and also, not actually in the center at the end, but in this psalm and in its companion, 96, 97, and 98 are very similar. They're usually read together. They have a lot of links between them. And there's a puzzle, almost, I could say, a conundrum. It's one of the key conundrums in the Bible. If they understand it, you're going to be able to understand the whole Bible. But it's also a conundrum in human thought. And it's part of the human condition. You see it in verse 9, at the very end, where it says, he comes to judge the earth. See, everybody's exulting, clapping their hands, singing together for joy. Why? Because God is coming to judge. Psalm 97, which, as I just said, is a companion psalm, puts it very starkly in verse 8. This is Psalm 97, verse 8. But he says, there it says, the people hear and rejoice. The villages are glad because of your judgments. The villages are glad because of your judgments. Everyone is clapping their hands because you've come to judge. Let me give you the essence of this conundrum like this. Let me just give it to you. It goes, okay, ready? I've come to judge you. Yay! Huh? Okay, I've come to judge you. Yay! Huh? That's it. I just spent, you know, some days, I just did jury duty last week. And I've been in New York County so long that that's about the sixth, fifth or sixth time I've done jury duty. You can add that up and say, gosh, is he that old? And no one's ever happy in a courtroom. I just want you to know it's just not a place where people party. So what in the world is going on here? We're talking about judgment day, the final judgment of the earth. And it's a time of joy. How does that work? So what I'd like to show you, first of all, is let's look at that joy versus basically the last two-thirds of the psalm. Basically from verse four to nine, talk about the great promise, the joyful promise of judgment. And something about why, you know, why is it joyful. But then I think we need to talk for a moment about the problem, the conundrum. And then we'll look at the first three verses in which we actually see the answer, which is God's provision. So we're going to look at the promise of judgment, the problem of judgment, and God's provision for judgment that makes judgment a promise and not just a threat. So let's take a look at the promise of judgment. And by that, I mean what's so good about judgment today? Let's take a look from verse four to the end. It talks about the king coming. It talks about the Lord coming. And when the king comes. you, 96, 97, 98 go together. The way Psalm 96 ends is, Let the sea roar and all that fills it, let the fields exult and everything in it. Then shall the trees of the woods sing for joy before the Lord, for he comes to judge the earth, he will judge the nations with righteousness and the peoples with his truth. Psalm 96 adds the trees to everything else. It says the trees will sing for joy when the King, the true King comes back. And you say, well, that's just metaphorical. Yes and no. It's probably pointing to some greater reality than just trees humming. What we're being told here is that when the true King comes back, it's not just that wrongs are righted. It's not just that broken things are mended, but even inert and latent things explode in their full capacity and realize their full potential. And all this happens under the King when the true King comes back. And the ancient literature of the human race is filled with these kinds of stories. If you go out and get any kind of a compendium of fairy tales, go get those old Andrew Lang books, which is like, I don't know, how many are there? 15, 16? There's all these books of assembled fairy tales and legends and myths of the various cultures. See how often this thing comes up. The Greeks believed that there was a golden age when true kings reigned. And, of course, we have King Arthur, of course. And on his tombstone it says, supposedly, here lies Arthur, rex quandum, rex futuris, the once and future king. See, when he was here, everything was great. And if he comes back, it will be great again. Robin Hood is another fairy tale story in which he's fighting until the good king comes back, true king. King Richard comes back and puts everything right. Happens over and over and over again. And, you know, the absolute juggernaut, the incredible movie and literature enterprise, which is J.R.R. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings, is basically built around the return of the true king. And so there's a poem right in the middle of it that goes, From the ashes a fire shall be woken, a light from the darkness shall spring, Renewed shall be blade that was broken, the crownless again shall be king. And what Tolkien has done there is he's tapped into a deep vein of human imagination. And my question is, why is it there? Why is it there? I mean, the actual record of real human kings and queens is terrible. That's why we got rid of them. So, why are we still so, if that's true, and we've basically gotten rid of royalty as a way of governing, why are we still fascinated, why are we still paying all this money to go see movies and read books about them? Why is the few that are left, we have a few royal people actually left in the world, why are we fascinated with them? And I think there's two good answers, probably. One, I think they're both right, actually, as you know. One is a more sociological answer. And I think one of the reasons why we're fascinated by the stories of true kings is because we know that democracy, for all of its assets, is more like medicine than food. Do you know what I mean? It's more like medicine than food. I think Churchill was the one who said, democracy is the worst kind of government except for all the others. And what he's getting at there is democracy is unbelievably inefficient. And what it mainly does, it's like I said, medicine, not food. What it mainly does, its main asset, is it basically tamps down on the worst aspects of human nature. Basically makes it much harder to kill each other. Honestly. But when it comes to actually solving all the long-time human problems, not so great. It's more like we yearn for something beyond medicine when it comes to human society. That's the sociological answer. But I think the theological answer, which, of course, being a Christian minister, I believe, the Bible says that every human being is made in the image of God. And therefore, we have a knowledge of God, according to Romans 1, that we tend to suppress. And yet, even though we suppress it, and in a sense, we're not even maybe conscious of it, and yet at some deep level we know it. And here's what we would know. I believe the reason why we're so fascinated by the talks of a true king that comes back and everything is great, again, is because in the human race, there's a memory trace. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. comes back and everything is great again is because in the human race there's a memory trace and it's a memory trace of what well what the bible says that at one point there really was a king that stood on this earth and his rule was characterized by such wisdom and such power and such justice and such compassion and such beauty and such glory that it was like he was like the sun shining in a full of strength and and we know deep in us that in our souls that we were built to serve and love that king and that we will never reach our capacities we will know all our latencies and inert things that are in us we we know that we're nothing like what we're supposed to be we long to be so much infinitely and and we know that deep in our souls we know that only under the rule of the great king will we ever blossom we'll start to blossom in ways places we didn't even know we had buds by the way and therefore we know that if that true king really comes back and rules on the earth there really will be that'll be the end of all evil there'll be love without parting we will escape from death forever uh the world will finally be beautiful and we know it deep deep deep inside and therefore when we go these stories are like a memory trace of what we know to be true in fact you know here's here's a brittle for you how is the bible like maggie smith don't try to guess i'll just tell you uh a movie that i didn't really like except for two great scenes uh steven spielberg made a movie in 1991 called hook and it was his little whimsical retelling of the of the peter pan story and in his retelling of it peter pan has grown up he's played by robin williams if you remember and he's forgotten who he is somehow he's got a you know his memory loss and so he's grown up and wendy wendy darling who's played by maggie smith uh is now very old but she does remember peter doesn't and at one point maggie smith looks at robin williams wendy looks at peter and says peter the stories are true and his memory's starting to come back the stories are true now the bible doesn't exactly say that all the fairy stories are true it doesn't say that but what it says is the thing that all the fairy stories point to is true there is a true king he will come back when he does his rule will be one of beauty and greatness and glory and everything will be put straight and the end of death and the end of evil and the beginning of love and the beginning of glory and you will be everything you always knew you should be that's how the bible's like maggie smith the stories are true sort of so that's the promise but let's talk about the problem and there is a problem here and it's a major problem do you not see it i mean let's let's work it out here the problem is when judges come back what do judges do at least what are judges supposed to do they're supposed to they're supposed to right all wrongs and they're supposed to set everything straight and that means anything that anyone has done wrong has to be paid for and right there we got the problem how in the world could we rejoice at judgment day with all of its promise that's the problem uh now before i even show you how it's a problem in the bible i told you it's one of the main conundrums in the bible let me show you why it's not just a problem the bible it's a problem in human condition and human thought uh five years ago this knocked me over practically when i first saw it uh five years ago uh the victoria and albert museum in london had a major exhibit and they called it the first comprehensive retrospective on post-modernism 1970 to 1990 now some of you know many of you know that this word post-modernism has been thrown around now for oh my goodness 30 years or so and it's uh it's kind of our it's architecture it's literature it's philosophy and people have been saying well we're we're now we're post-modern and and here's the victorian albert museum five years ago saying yeah post-modernism is sort of over now so we're gonna have a retrospective we figure it ended somewhere in the early in the mid-90s or something like that and um the um uh the same time that that came out the the exhibit came out uh prospect magazine uh had an article in it by edward docks d-o-c-x by the way believe it or not and uh he's a british novelist and intellectual and he wrote an article called post-modernism is dead and it's a great article a fascinating article and i listen to it and you'll see the conundrum he said post-modernism is the idea of deep privileging any one meaning you article, and I listen to it, and you'll see the conundrum. He said, postmodernism is the idea of deprivileging any one meaning. It's the idea that all discourses are equally valid. Okay? You may have heard of it put that way. In other words, no one's got the truth. No one knows that my moral standards are the right moral standards. It's the deprivileging of any one meaning that it's saying that all discourses are equally valid. Basically, it's saying there is no judgment day. There can't be a judgment day because there's no one set of judgments. There's no one set of moral standards by which everyone has to be judged. It's just not true. And then he went on and said, here's why a lot of people like postmodernism. He says, quote, it has led to some real world gains for humankind. Because once you challenge the dominant discourse, you're in the business of giving marginalized and subordinate groups their voice. And from there, it's possible to see how postmodernism has helped Western society redress miserable injustices. See what he's saying? He says, look, if you say no one's got the truth, no one's got the right moral standards, there is no judgment day, there's no one set of standards, then everybody's free to have their own voice. Everyone's free to have their own freedom. Everyone's free to have their own rights. You don't have one group knocking another group down and saying, you're wrong and we're right. See, postmodernism. No one's got the truth. But then he says, well, why do we know it's over? And here's what he says, and it's great. He says, over time, though, a new difficulty was created. Because postmodernism attacks everything, a mood of confusion and uncertainty began to grow and flourish until in recent years it became ubiquitous. If we deprivilege all positions, we can assert no position. So in effect, aggressive postmodernism becomes indistinguishable from inert conservatism. You hear that? He says, if we, and by the way, he's coming from the left. He was a lefter, a left-wing person. And he says, if we deprivilege all positions, if we say, well, nobody's got the right position, we can assert no position. So in effect, aggressive postmodernism becomes indistinguishable from inert conservatism. And what he's saying is, if you say everything's relative, then I can't say that's unjust. I can never say anything's unjust. And he says, so we just have to accept everything as it is. And he says the result was what he called an inert conservatism. So he says, the postmodern will no longer do as a response to the world we now find ourselves in. But when you, if you press him at the end of the article, what's coming, he has no idea. See, here's why. He feels like if you go back to the idea that there's a truth and there's one set of standards, then you're going to have everybody fighting, well, now I've got the set, I've got the set, and we're killing each other, and we're oppressing each other. But, he says, the problem is if you get rid of that, then you've got what? If you deprivilege all positions, you can assert no position. And you can never, ever talk about injustice at all. And therefore, see, he's real excited about, he hates judgment day, and he wants judgment day. You see the problem? Um, but let me tell you about the biblical problem. What I mean by that, the Bible actually always shows us how when God enters into a relationship with somebody, he enters into a covenant relationship, it's binding. And a covenant relationship, you make promises to each other. It's an intimate, personal relationship, but bound through solemn promises, legal promises. And he says, I will be your God, you will be my people, and we make promises. And then he would always say, there's blessings and curses. If you obey, if you keep your promises, I will bless you. But if you break your promises, I will abandon you, I'll break it off. And therefore, the entire Hebrew scriptures, the entire Old Testament, basically, is, um, driven by one particular narrative. It's, it, there's a narrative that is the main tension that drives the plot of the Old Testament forward, and it's this. Since we are, those of us who have entered into a covenant relationship with God, God's people, since we're always breaking our promises, always, always, always, no matter what, good kings, bad kings, the people are always breaking their promises. Here's the question. Will God give up and say, sorry, you've broken your promises. I'm abandoning you. Then what about God's love and faithfulness? Or on the other hand, is God going to say, I give in? I just, you know, even though you're breaking your promises all the time, I'm going to accept you anyway. Then what about God's justice and holiness? See, there's all these places in the Bible, especially in the Old Testament, where you've got an enormous number of seemingly irreconcilable says i will never break my covenant with you i mean there's lots of those places where he says i'll never abandon you i'll never i'll always be faithful okay i will never break my covenant with you then there's lots of places like deuteronomy 29 where moses says if you go your own way the lord will not be willing to forgive you his wrath will burn against you all the curses written in the covenant book will fall on you the lord will blot out your name from under heaven so if you if you read these hebrew scriptures you'll see them all over the place seemingly irreconcilable here's the covenant if you follow your promises with promises you'll be blessed if you don't if you know you'll be cursed will god give up on us or will he give in to us if he gives up on us then where's his love and faithfulness if he gives in to us you know where's his holiness and justice or put it this way is the covenant of god conditional or unconditional or put it this way are the blessings of god conditional unconditional are they conditional on perfect obedience to the law or are they unconditional and they're given to um you know imperfect people which is it and there's almost no you see and there's almost no answer uh it's almost feels like there's no way within the scope of the old testament anyway that there can be an answer and it's it's so and it's it's irreconcilable that it actually splits people and i think virtually everybody in the human race either has a more of a liberal spirit or a conservative spirit when it comes to this see the liberal spirit i'm not talking about politics here for a minute please the liberal spirit says well you have to try to obey god but in the end he accepts you no matter what that's the liberal spirit and there's the conservative spirit that says well god loves you but in the end you got to obey him or he will judge you the liberal spirit basically says well you try to obey god but in the end he won't judge you and the liberal and the conservative spirit says well you need to you know god god god can be merciful but in the end you've got to uh obey him or he'll judge you so you have a liberal spirit a conservative spirit you have sadducees you have pharisees you have relativists you have moralists you have post-modernists you have traditionalists and actually you could you could even break down the religions you got buddhism you got islam i mean uh all the religion everybody breaks into one side or the other no everybody says either the blessings of god are conditional you got to obey or they're unconditional he gives them to you anyway and he just accepts you so do you see the problem if we got to the problem now if there's no judgment day what hope is there for the world see if there's no judgment day what hope is there for the world everything's relative everything's just going to go on and on miroslav wolf has a great book he wrote miroslav wolf is a croatian thinker and in the mid-90s he wrote a book after all the genocide that happened in the balkans in the early 90s and he says look i know a lot of people think that if you believe in a god of judgment that that can lead to being warlike but he says i want you to know something else he says i've been back to places where people have had their mothers and daughters raped and their fathers and brothers with their throats slit and their homes burned to the ground and if i look at them in the in the eye and i say to them well you just need to love your enemies there's never going to be a judgment day there's never going to be a day in which everything is put right we don't believe in that but you just need to not retaliate you need to live at peace they're going to say oh there's no judgment day there's no god who's ever going to stand on the earth and make everything right fine i'm going to get my gun i'm going to go do it myself see if there is no judgment day what hope is there for the world but if there is judgment day what hope is there for you and me romans 2 says the gentiles pagan paul says the gentiles the people who've never even read the bible or heard of the bible god will judge them on their what what their own conscience tells them see everybody has moral standards right you know doesn't matter what you everybody's got moral standards god will judge you on your own moral standards and nobody will live up to their own moral standards nobody if there's no judgment day there's no hope for the world if there is a judgment day there's no hope for us because nobody can stand on that day do you see the conundrum you see the problem what's the answer well the answer is in the first three verses the first three verses is talking about something that happened in the past sing to the lord a new song he has done marvelous things his right hand and his holy arm have worked salvation for him the lord has made his salvation he has remembered have seen. It's all past. Interesting, the verses four to nine is looking to the end of time. But the first three verses are saying the reason we can look forward to judgment day is because of the salvation God's already worked. Now, what are we talking about? Now, if you have a regular Bible with cross-references, you know, a lot of Bibles have cross-references. The cross-references are ways of showing you what the particular verse, how that verse you're reading there has links to other verses. And almost everybody has noticed that Psalm 98 is a lot like Miriam's song song in Exodus 15. It's almost like the psalmist had her song in mind. His right hand and his holy arm have worked salvation. He's remembered his love and faithfulness to Israel. Those things are a Miriam song. Now, what was Miriam's song about? Children of Israel had just been taken out of Egypt and they'd just gone through the Red Sea. And the Egyptian army had been drowned in the Red Sea. And God had worked with his holy arm. He had worked salvation. He remembered his love and faithfulness to Israel. And Miriam's singing this great song about the salvation. And so it's looking at the Exodus, right? And here's what I'd like you to keep in mind. God saved Israel out of Egypt through judgment. He sent the destroyer. He sent the angel of death into Egypt. God is going to judge the world at the end of time. But occasionally in the Bible, you see that God gives you a little bit of a, you might say, a down payment on judgment. And what he did to Egypt was imperialistic, violent, was enslaving Israel in order to free Israel from slavery. God sent some of that future judgment into Egypt's life at that moment. And the angel of death came down and slew the firstborn son in every family. And it was a terrible judgment, a terrible experience. And then they let the Israelites go. But here's what's interesting. Here's where biblical religion differs from every other religion. The Egyptians worshiped false deities, right? They worshiped pagan deities. And the Israelites worshiped God. But God says, since I'm sending judgment down on Egypt so that people have to pay for their sins, he says to the Israelites, you will be judged too. You're sinners too. And the only way you're going to survive this is if you slay a lamb and put the blood of the lamb on your doorposts. That's a remarkable statement. You know the story. It's the story of Passover. But here's what's so remarkable. The Jews, they worshiped God, right? Right? So wouldn't they be exempt from judgment? No. God is trying to say every human being deserves to be judged. Every human being. It doesn't matter whether you obey the Ten Commandments and they don't. You're only relatively better. The point is you're not living up to your moral standards. They're not living up to their moral standards. Everybody deserves to be judged. If I'm a God of justice and I am a completely impartial judge and I send my judgment down into the world, everybody, everybody's going to die. Your only hope is if the judgment falls on this substitute, this lamb. And of course, the children of Israel, Jews had no idea what in the world that was about. What in the world does that mean? But the point is they did it and they came out. But you know, Psalm 98 does not only sound like Miriam's song in Exodus 15. You know what else it sounds like? A lot like? It sounds like Mary's song in Luke chapter one called the Magnificat. Oh yes. In fact, there's so many lexical links they call them. His right, his holy arm, his work, salvation for him. He's remembered his love in Israel. It's almost like Mary was thinking about Psalm 98. And here's why. When she realized that she was going to bear into the world, the savior of the world, with the help of the Holy Spirit, she suddenly realized that her baby, her son, Jesus Christ was the resolution, was the climax of all the fulfillment of all those promises in the Bible, but also the resolution of the conundrum of the problem. Jesus Christ solves the problem of judgment. How? How? Here's how. Is the blessing of God conditional on perfect obedience to the law, or is it unconditional and comes to imperfect people? And I told you, up until the time that Jesus Christ shows up, it's like it's got to be one or the other. It's got to be one or the other. We got to basically be liberal or basically conservative. We got to basically be relativist or basically moralist. We got to basically be, you know, you have to, he's more holy. but not on the cross. John Stott says, the essence of sin is to put yourself in the place of God. In other words, to be your own boss, as if you weren't created by somebody else. The essence of sin is to put yourself where God deserves to be. But the essence of salvation is God putting himself where we deserve to be. Where's that? On the cross. See, what is, what do we deserve for though we owe him everything, we live our own lives. What do we deserve? We deserve to be cut off. We deserve the curses of the covenant. But when Jesus Christ went to the cross, what we have there is the judge almost like this. The judge pronounces the fine and then pays it himself. The judge pronounces the penalty and then goes and takes it himself. And what that means is, on the cross, the love and the holiness of God coincide and shine forth brilliantly. They coincide. Why? Because see, the law demands perfect salvation, perfect satisfaction, right? If you either obey the law perfectly or you pay the penalty and on the cross, the law is perfectly satisfied. But what does love want? Love wants exemption. Love wants salvation. Love wants redemption. And on the cross, love is perfectly satisfied. It's not like love gets its way and law doesn't. Law and love are perfectly satisfied, equally satisfied. On the cross, the love and the holiness of God perfectly coincide and shine forth brilliantly. And therefore, the question is, are the blessings of God conditional or unconditional? The answer is yes to both. Because on the one hand, they are conditional on perfect obedience to the law and Jesus Christ fulfill the law. But on the other hand, yes, God wants to give them to imperfect people and here they come. Believe in Jesus Christ and you, oh imperfect person, flooded with the benefits of God's love. And see how this works out personally? In America today, the reason why Edward Dock says we want moral absolutes and we don't want moral absolutes, because on the one hand, we need them. On the other hand, they feel like they oppress us. We use them to oppress other people, they crush us. But this is the answer. Here you have a judge and a king who did this for you. How can that person ever oppress you? They won't. Here's the one king and the one judge you can trust. And think of it like this. There's two kinds of children who are raised improperly so as to have miserable lives. Neglected and abused. The neglected child, no boundaries, overindulged as it were, you know, hands off. As the child grows up really not knowing what the limits are, you know, the parents sort of like say, oh, do whatever you want, you know. And then of course, that's the neglected child. Then there's the abused child. So if you believe in a God who doesn't judge, just a God who loves and accepts everyone, you're kind of like that neglected child. You might believe in a God of love in some general way, but not a God who ever tells you what to do and doesn't, you don't believe in judgment. You might believe in a God like that, but you probably feel like an orphan and you kind of are. Because you don't have a God of costly love, a God who not only tells you you have to obey, but says, but I went to the cross in order so that when you disobey, I can still love and accept you. See, that's a God that you're not an orphan. There's a God right by your side. But at the same time, you might have a harsh God, a God that's very judging and you really don't have a good grasp on the grace and love of God. And so you're always feeling unworthy. You're always feeling like two little butter stretched over too much bread and you're like an abused child. But I got to tell you, you will be either like a neglect, a neglected child or like an abused child until you see that on the cross, love and law were absolutely fulfilled to see the law by love fulfilled and hear his pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. And once you realize that your judgment day is over, it's already, it's already passed. You realize your judgment day for your sin is over. Why? It happened on the cross. Your, your judgment day for your sin is gone. It's in the past already. And now all you've got to look forward to on judgment day is beauty, glory, love. And you'd be like to look forward to that. c.s lewis wrote that when he gets to heaven remember what he says i'm home at last i belong here this is the land i was looking for all my life but i didn't know it till now let's pray our father we thank you that the promise of judgment can be ours the joy of judgment day the knowledge of judgment day the knowledge that someday everything's gonna be put all right so we don't have to take vengeance on others the knowledge that someday everything's gonna be put all right so that when we lose things and when we we we feel ourselves aging and when we see people dying we know that someday everything's gonna be put right we have the joy of judgment day because jesus christ your son solved the problem of judgment day he was the judge who was judged came to earth and took it all and we thank you that because of that we can look forward to the future with incredible hope and peace so now make us people who should live with the poise and the peace that goes with that knowledge and that belief make it real to us as you just have through the preaching of the word as you do when we sing your praises make it real to us so that we can live in its light we ask for this in jesus name amen you
