TITLE: Praying the Psalms (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Prayer (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/praying-the-psalms-ii/

============================================================

All right. I'll tell you what, because I'm much more in the mood to pray than to listen to myself speak, I would like you to turn to your handout. And because the exercise, the group exercise tonight, when we get into our prayer groups, is a little bit more involved than usual, a little more detailed than usual, I'm going to give you more time than usual, I promise. So you won't have to listen to me talk quite as much as you ordinarily do. I'd like to get you into those groups a little sooner. So take a look at the place that says praying the Psalms. Actually, that's what last month was about. In a more general way, last month we talked about using the Psalms for prayer. In a more specific way, I would like to get as practical as I possibly can about what I think the Psalms teach us about prayer up front. Eugene Peterson's book, Answering God, about the Psalms. When he gets to Psalm 1, he points something out. Psalm 1 is not a prayer. Most of the Psalms are prayers. Psalm 1 is not a prayer. There are several Psalms that aren't prayers. For example, Psalm 103, very famous Psalm. It says, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name. You know, it's so familiar, you forget. It's not a prayer. Not only is the speaker not talking to God, but the speaker's not talking to anybody else. Who's the speaker talking to? Himself. It's a meditation. He's taking the truth and working it into his own heart. And meditation is what Psalm 1 is. Psalm 1 is not a prayer. It's a meditation. Eugene Peterson's point, he says, you know, the Psalter was put together. The Psalms were written over many years. But when the Psalter was put together, the order is deliberate. Now, a whole lot of people have spent a lot of PhDs trying to figure out why Psalm 72 goes before Psalm 73, and I'm glad that they've gotten their doctorates on that subject. However, so it's sometimes hard to tell, but it's fairly easy to tell that Psalm 1 is the gateway to all other prayer. And Eugene Peterson says, the key to learning how to really pray is to learn how to meditate. Meditation is the gateway or the doorway into prayer. In my life, which is now, I'd say it probably happened 10 or 12 years ago, the biggest change that happened for me was to realize the difference between meditation and prayer and the importance of meditation. So my little personal introduction there says, and I'm certainly not going through all of this, but my personal introduction said that for many years, I did what most people do in a quiet time, in a devotional. I would study the Bible, and then I would pray. And I came to realize the Bible talks about, and it gives us examples in Psalm 103, Psalm 1, Psalms, a few others, of something that's neither study nor prayer. It's a middle discipline. It's something, it's a mixture or it's an overlap. It's hard to describe, but we're going to try it for the next 15, 20 minutes. It's something between Bible study and prayer. And there are many ways to define it. The definition I put in this very top paragraph is meditation is prayerful reflection on what God has just told you in His Word. Before you move to prayer, you sort of drill it into your heart, what you just saw in the Bible study. So basically, Bible study, meditation, and prayer is now the way, I think, in general, your devotional time should go. Not just Bible study and prayer, but Bible study, meditation, and prayer. Because if you learn how to do meditation, oh my word, your prayer life will just take off. So what is this? All right, let's take a look at what Psalm 1 tells us about meditation. Here's Psalm 1. Very short. I, you know, print the whole thing out. Blessed is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked or stand in the way of sinners or sit in the seat of the mockers. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither. Whatever he does prospers. Not so the wicked. They are like chaff that the wind blows away. Therefore the wicked will not stand in the judgment or sinners in the assembly of the righteous. For the Lord watches over the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked will perish. Now, just getting the basics. The object or basis of meditation is the law of the Lord. See? He meditates on the law of the Lord, the Scripture. There are other ways to meditate. You can meditate, and at some points I think the Bible indicates that we should meditate on what God's doing in our lives, His graciousness to us in our past. There are ways of meditating on other things besides the Word of God. But I tell you, now this is probably because I'm a Protestant here and a Presbyterian Protestant at that. I would say... you train your heart to meditate on the Word of God before you try to go to anything else. There's an awful lot of mysticism that's sort of untethered, it's not Christian mysticism, that talks about meditation techniques in which you meditate, but you're not meditating on the Word of God. And there's a whole lot of ways to, I think, since meditation is trying to shape the heart, the way you can be sure that you are shaping the heart in a way God wants is to meditate on God's Word, because meditation shapes the heart. Meditation works on your feelings and your emotions and your affections, and therefore if you want to be sure that you're shaping your heart the way it ought to go, learn how to meditate on the law of the Lord before you try to meditate on anything else. That's the first thing. Secondly, it says, he delights in the law of the Lord, and on this law he meditates day and night. Delight and law of the Lord. Most of us don't think of delight and law in the same thought, because the law seems like something that's kind of there, you know, but you have to do it, you know. And delight doesn't seem like something you get from thinking about what God's law is. But the fact that meditation brings about the light and the law of God tells us two things about meditation. A, meditation involves not just the head but the heart. The purpose of meditation is to take truths and work them down so that they actually affect you. The purpose of meditation is not so much to make the truth clear to your heart but real to your heart. Now, if the truth isn't clear, it can't become real. You follow me on this? You have to know what the Bible teaches. You have to understand it. If you look at a verse and you have no idea what the thing means at all, you can't meditate on it, all right, but you could learn what the verse means and say, okay, that's what it teaches, but unless you meditate on it, it doesn't become part of you. Meditation is to make the truth real to your heart, bring it into connection so that you internally relish and cherish the truth until it begins to affect you. And so, first of all, meditation involves not just the head but the heart, and it also involves not just thinking abstractly, but it involves the law, that is, how do I live? Meditation is, what does this mean to me? How would I be different if I really believe this? What difference will it make if I really live this out? So, meditation is working the truth into your emotions and working the truth into your actions from the abstract, and that's what meditation is. Now, turn over to the next page. I'm trying to make sure I hit the basics here. Here we have it again, and I don't want to be rigid, I can't be legalistic about this, but some of you might remember, I think it's in December, we talked about the fact that Psalm 4 and 5, when you come to them, indicate that the psalmist expected you, the Bible expects you to be praying at night and in the morning, not just in the morning, not just at night, but that there be a rhythm, that you open, remember we talked about opening the day and closing the day with prayer. You close the day with make-your-heart-content prayer, no matter what happened, and you open the day with change-the-world prayer. We talked about that. Here, it indicates that they meditate day and night, that there's some time before going to bed and there's some time after getting up that you are meditating and praying. And I still, I have to say, I'm still not as good at that as I'd like to be, but I think that there's something to it, very much something to it. But it's supposed to happen, however you do it, it has to happen relentlessly, constantly. Now, second thing, one of the most interesting things about the meditation, Psalm 1, is it's a meditation on meditation. Again, Eugene Peterson points out, what's fascinating about the psalm is it actually invites you to meditate on meditation. So, for example, Psalm 3 through 5 says, the man who meditates is what? He's like a tree planted by water. Now, what that's doing is it's inviting you to meditate. It's trying to say, well, now how is a meditating person, a person who's great at Christian meditation, how does that make you like a tree? And as soon as you ask that question, you're meditating. You're thinking it out. It's going to, it's going to, it's instead of just, see, here's an abstraction. Christians should meditate on the Word of God. That's an abstraction. But if you start to meditate on it, you begin to, it begins to grip you. Now, here's how you're supposed to do it. Look at the last part of this page where it says, meditation question implied is, how is a tree like a meditating person? That's what Psalm 1 is inviting you to do. And here's some of the answers. Number one, meditation takes place. the roots down. Meditation takes a great deal of time. It's cumulatively in its effect. If you do it for five minutes tonight, don't expect to see your life change, though it could happen. Secondly, meditation leads to depth and stability. The deeper one's roots go into a tree, the less likely a windstorm will blow you over. And so a meditating person is like a tree, and it makes you incredibly stable. It puts your roots down. Three, meditation is looking at the Word of God like a thirsty tree looks at water. The whole idea, the idea is a man who meditates is like a tree by water. And what's the water? It's the Word, but you're thirsty for it. And so we've talked about it before. It's working into your own affections, these truths that sit there and you say, yeah, I believe it, but what does it mean to me? And so it means taking your imagination, which you're doing even now, as you think about the image of a tree and working it into your life. Turn over to the next page. I'm going to go fast. Yeah, this is going well, all right. Number five, meditation leads to stability, but not immunity from suffering and dryness. Interesting. See, the more…by the way, these are only five meditations on the idea of a meditating person as a tree. A tree is stable, but not necessarily immune from dry times because it says he bears his fruit in season. Its leaf does not wither, which means you're still going to be prone to the seasons. There'll be dry times. There'll be winter times. So it doesn't mean things aren't ever going to go bad, but what it does mean is the promised immunity of the leaf from withering is not independence from the rhythm of the seasons, but freedom from the crippling damage of drought. And so, anyway. Now, let's see. Go to the bottom of page three. Meditation is…I realize now over the years, often I have asked you to preach the gospel to yourself. I don't use that term that much anymore. I think there was, you know, I go through phases just like you do. That was something Jack Miller used to say a lot. Preach the…learn how to preach the gospel to yourself. But basically, that's meditation because meditation means taking something you know and working into your heart until it really begins to affect you. And a great quote about this is here at the bottom of page three. You can see where it's in italics by Richard Loveless. He said, it is an item of faith that we are children of God. Right? You know that. There is plenty of experience in us against it. The faith that surmounts this evidence that is able to warm itself at the fire of God's love instead of having to steal love and acceptance from other sources is actually the root of holiness. We are not saved by the love we exercise by the love we trust. In other words, Loveless says you need to warm yourself at the fire of God's love. He's describing what it means to meditate on the righteousness we have in Christ by his death. You meditate on that until you're warm. So you don't feel so cold that you have to steal love and acceptance from other people. You can handle criticism. You can handle trouble. You can handle failure because you're not warming yourself at the fire of those things. See, this is the realm of the sense, the realm of the heart, the realm of the affections. You may know you believe. You say, I believe in justification by faith alone. But through meditation, you make it so real to yourself that you can handle failure, that you can handle criticism. And by the way, I don't know if you've ever noticed, but this is one of those passages. He says, to warm yourself with the fire of God's love instead of having to steal love and self-acceptance from the sources, other sources is the root of holiness. I have meditated on that passage for so many years that it shows up in the sermons. It showed up in yesterday's sermon. I don't know if anybody heard it. It's not like I tried to quote it. It just, it just become part of me. And it just, it bubbled up. And it's really, so meditation is taking things, is not making the truth clear. It's making the truth real. Well, page four, here's a little testimony about it from George Mueller, just to show you how it works. Now I want to actually want to get into the actual doing of it. George Mueller was a pretty famous Christian layman who's especially well known for the orphanage he founded. But anyway, he tells how meditation revolutionized his life. Here's a quote. You see, it's like, that's a one, two, three, four, like the fifth full paragraph down. He says, the difference between my present practice and my former is this. Formerly, when I rose, I began to pray as soon as possible and generally spent all my time till breakfast in prayer. Wow. But what was the result? I often spent even an hour on my knees before having been conscious to myself of having derived any comfort or humbling of the soul. So he's talking about, you know, his heart. And often, in this way now. I begin to meditate on the New Testament from the beginning, early in the morning, searching, as it were, every verse to get blessing out of it, not for preaching to others, but for obtaining food for my soul. After a few minutes, my soul had been led to confession, or thanksgiving or intercession, and when thus I have been a while, I go to the next words of the verse, turning all as I go into prayer, as the word may lead to it, but still continually keeping before me that food for my own soul as the object of my meditation. It often astonishes me that I did not sooner see this point. All right, let's just, let's go to how we actually do it. Go to the bottom of page five. I'm going to tell you what I think. It's not the only way to meditate. It's not the only way, but the way I've learned is people said, do it this way, and I tried it until I got the gist of it, and then I can change it. So, here's a suggested way to do it, all right? And then I'm going to have you get into groups and actually try to do it in groups, which is actually, I'm not sure, it's not exactly the same as doing it by yourself, but it actually would be a good exercise tonight. Let's talk about Bible study, prayer, meditation, and prayer. A, Bible study. You take a passage and you spend a little bit of time making sure you understand it. Now, slowly read a paragraph or a chapter three to four times. When a thought or phrase or word captures your attention, pause for a moment and thank God for it. You're already, that's not exactly meditation, but it's close. You're already reading the Bible in the presence of God instead of just reading it like a student. Then write down answers to any of the following sets of questions. This is a suggestion for you. Read a passage, write down the things that you notice, and then at a certain point say, what does this teach me about God and Jesus? What does it teach me about me? What examples are there to follow or avoid? Turn over. What commands are there to obey? What promises are there to claim? You could take five to ten minutes if it's very, very short passage. If it's longer, it's going to take you longer. But when you're all done with that, choose at the most one or two of the best thoughts you got, one or two of the best truths, one or two of the best teachings you just derived from your passage. And now you're done with your Bible study and you're ready to start meditation. And here's what I suggest. If you have very little time or if you're brand new at this, ask these two questions and write out your answers. And the two questions are, how would I be different if this truth was explosively alive in my innermost being? If I believe this flat out, if my heart was aflame with it, how would I be different? If I really, really, really, really practiced this, if I really understood this, if I really believed this, if I really felt this, how would I be different? The second question is, why would God be sending me to this passage today? What's happening right now in my life? How would this connect? Why might he be talking to me about this now? Now, those are two pretty suggestions. See, those are meditation questions. And you may not immediately have an answer that jumps to your mind, but that's fine because it's going to get you to think. But when you start to write the answers down, those will be meditations. Now, here's a slightly, just a slightly more elaborate approach to meditation. And I get this from Martin Luther's famous letter to his barber on how to pray. And it's the one that's helped me the most. And he says, when you take your little truth, you know, let's just say the truth is, I'm not going to try to do it in front of you here. You take a little truth or a teaching that you've gotten, and you ask these four questions. How can I praise God for what this teaches me? What sin can I confess because of what this teaches me? How can I thank God for what Jesus has done because of what this thing teaches me? And what do I need to become or do or have in light of this? So, you know, for example, if you decide this, if you decide the teaching is you should pray with other people, then you can praise God that He's a prayer-hearing God. You confess the fact that you don't pray with other people. You can thank God that through Jesus, you can always come before God as your heavenly Father. And then you could say, Lord, lead me to one other person I could start praying with regularly. That's it. I just meditated, okay? And that's what meditation is. Now, what I want you to do after that, whether you've used the first two questions or the last or the four questions, after you've written those things out, pray them. And you can just move through them. Adoration, confession, thanksgiving, supplication. Do this. Study the Bible. Take a couple of truths out. Ask either the two or the four questions and write out your meditations. And then pray. Do this. Study the Bible. Take a couple of truths. Okay. either the two or the four questions and write out your meditations, and then pray. And Martin Luther says something, and this may happen to you right away, but eventually it will if you keep this up. Martin Luther says, sometimes as you're writing out your meditations, suddenly an idea will just grip your heart. He says that's the Holy Spirit preaching to you so you can stop working through Tim Keller's little questions and go right to prayer. That's not exactly what Martin Luther says. Martin Luther says, when you're meditating, the whole idea is to warm your heart up so you can pray. And if suddenly your heart catches fire as you're meditating, he says, don't keep on working through your little exercises. That's the Holy Spirit preaching to you. You're ready. Start to pray. Start to confess. Yes. Do something like this, and do it 30 days straight if you can, and your life will change. I can almost guarantee it. I didn't say I did. I said I can almost guarantee it. Now, here's what I'd like you to do. I would like you, as we usually do, is get into groups of four. You got 35 minutes instead of 25 minutes tonight. Get into groups of three or four. And what I suggest is you meditate together on, come follow me, Jesus said, and I will make you to become fishers of Ben. Take no more than 10 minutes, and maybe you should make five minutes, saying, what does this teach us? Then choose one teaching, and then do the adoration, confession, thanksgiving, supplication, meditation together. Just brainstorm, and then make sure you have at least 10 or 15 minutes where you just simply pray out loud of the things that you've learned. I've done this many times with people, and even though it's a little, you know, you never quite do exactly what I just said here in the, the group doesn't exactly follow the rules, you know, step by step, but it'll be okay. And actually, I do suggest one thing. One of the ways you can figure out what, come follow me, said Jesus, and I will make you to become fishers of men, is that you can take every single word and say, what does this word convey? See? You know, Jesus says, follow. No, he says, follow me. That's personal. Follow me, and I will make you. Ah, that's a promise. Follow me, and I will make you to become. Wait, it's a process. I'm sorry. I'm giving you all the answers. But you see, every single one of those words is, is conveying something. You might want to go through and say, but when it's all done, somebody choose one or two teachings you most got out of your time of study, and then meditate on it, and then pray through it. Can you do that? Get into your groups of three or four, and meditate for about half the time. You know, study and meditate, and then pray half the time on follow me, and I will make you to become fishers of men.
