TITLE: Prayer for Security (Easter)
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 16:1-11
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Pilgrim Prayer: Psalms for the Journey
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/prayer-for-security/

============================================================

The reading today is taken from the book of Psalms, chapter 16, verses 1 through 11. Keep me safe, my God, for in you I take refuge. I say to the Lord, you are my Lord. Apart from you, I have no good thing. I say of the holy people who are in the land, they are the noble ones in whom is all my delight. Those who run after other gods will suffer more and more. I will not pour out libations of blood to such gods or take up their names on my lips. Lord, you alone are my portion and my cup. You make my lot secure. The boundary lines have fallen for me in pleasant places. Surely, I have a delightful inheritance. I will praise the Lord who counsels me even at night, my heart instructs me. I keep my eyes always on the Lord. With him at my right hand, I will not be shaken. Therefore, my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices. My body also will rest secure because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, nor will you let your faithful one see decay. You make known to me the path of life. You will fill me with joy in your presence, with eternal pleasures at your right hand. The word of the Lord. On Pentecost, the first day of the Christian church, when St. Peter was preaching the very first Christian sermon, this is all in Acts chapter 2, after he got through the introduction, the main text that he preached on was Psalm 16. And his message was that Jesus Christ is risen. And he preached on Psalm 16. So if Psalm 16 was a good enough Easter text for St. Peter, it ought to be good enough for you. What does Psalm 16 tell us on Easter Day? Essentially, it tells us two things. Because it's still a psalm of David. David wrote it. And in the beginning, you can see he's crying out for something. He's crying out for a refuge. He's crying out for safety, a refuge, which cannot be shaken. So, what the psalm is going to help us understand is why we need a refuge that cannot be shaken and how we can get a refuge that cannot be shaken. Why we need it? How we can get it. So, as we just said, why we need it. I mean, see, the very first verse, keep me safe. It's a cry. Keep me safe, my God. For in you I take refuge. And down in verse 8, see, he says, if I keep my eye on you, if you're at my right hand, I will not be shaken. He needs a refuge, a place of safety that will not be shaken. Why? What's this all about? It's actually one of the main themes of the Bible. Abraham, we're told in Hebrews 11, Abraham, we're told, did not put or rest his heart in his wealth, in any particular land, in nothing in this world. In fact, we're told, this is in Hebrews 11, it says, Abraham looked forward to the city with foundations, whose builder and maker is God. And later, at the end of chapter 12 of Hebrews, we're told that that city was a kingdom that cannot be shaken. So, Abraham was looking for something with foundations that cannot be shaken. Now, this is one of the main messages of the Bible, and that is that there's nothing in this world with foundations. There's nothing in this world that will last. There's nothing in this world that won't be shaken and pass away. That everything in this world is passing away. It's fleeting. It's precarious. It's temporary. What do I mean? Well, okay, for example, this world has no physical foundations. Did you know that? 150 years ago, physicists would have told you that the world was solid and that matter had always existed. Today, what physicists will tell you is that matter itself is nothing but energy and motion. And the particular configuration of energy that you and I call matter, we think of as solid, is actually, it started with a big bang, and it's winding down. It's going to more and more disorder, a second law of thermodynamics. So eventually, I mean, you've heard the idea that eventually the sun will burn out and all life on earth will die and maybe the universe will die. But do you realize that matter itself will go away? Because even matter itself is just a temporary configuration of energy. and the power of fer. going to make any difference in the end. One author put it like this, if nature is all that exists, if there is no God and no supernatural world outside of nature, then human civilization will, in the end, have been just an accidental flicker. And there won't be anyone around to even remember it. If the whole of human civilization lasted a billion years, in the end, it would be infinitesimally short in relation to the oceans of dead time that go before, proceed before, and follow it. This world doesn't even have any physical foundations. Secondly, this world has no intellectual foundations. No human philosophy will last. What's extraordinarily clear is that things that were written in the New York Times on the editorial page 20 years ago are now seen as hateful, obscene, primitive, horrible stuff. 20 years ago. And do you think we've arrived at the ultimate moment now? Do you think that somehow 20 years from now, everybody will read the stuff that's in the New York Times, and say, oh, isn't it wonderful how brilliant we've finally arrived at all the right views? No. In fact, let me be personal. There are things that right now you believe, as an enlightened person, that two generations from now will be risible, embarrassing people. Anyone who is related to you will be upset that you even put it on paper. Because there are no intellectual foundations here. No human philosophies last. And it's not just that they just sort of develop. They become obsolete. They become stupid. You give your whole life to building your life on the basis of a set of beliefs. They're going to go away. All human philosophies have no foundation. There's no physical foundations. There's no intellectual foundations. But worst of all, there's no emotional foundations. This life will take away everything that you love. Everything that means anything to you, it will be taken away. You can't keep your family together, or any group of friends together. This world will scatter them. Some will get angry. Some will just move. Some will sort of wander off. And of course, they'll all die. And not too many years ago, I read an interview with a young woman who's a model, and she said, you know, I've got to get ready for the future. She said, I'm 26. I'm a size 3. But I know by the time I'm in my 40s, I may be a size 8, a size 10. I know of people who get there, and they're just devastated. And I've got to get ready for that emotionally. And you want to say, my dear. There's a lot more that you're going to have to get ready for than that. Because you see, beautiful flowers, beautiful flowers. They are going to be in the ground decaying soon. And they're only on a slightly faster path than you and me. But they're on the same path. We're on the same path. So you see why David's crying out? We all cry out. We don't want to just be a wave upon the sand. We just don't want to be a flitting phantom. We want something that lasts. We want a kingdom that cannot be shaken. We want a refuge that won't shake. That will be there. Something we can stand on. We need a love that we can't lose. So that's the reason why all human beings that actually think about it and are not too busy on their cell phones and have enough time to think about it realize that there's nothing in this world that has foundations. And we need a refuge that cannot be shaken. So how do we get that? Now, what's interesting is, I think, is that David is... This is an extremely practical psalm. And he tells us three things, three important things that we are going to have to do if we are going to get a refuge that can't be shaken, if we're going to become unshakable people. First, it's more of a negative thing. We have to see what we run to. Look at verse 4. Those who run after other gods, not just who believe in other gods, who run after other gods. What does this mean? Well, in the older days, of course, ancient people actually believed in a set of divine beings. They believed there was a god of war, a god of beauty, a god of fertility, a god of wealth, a god of athletics, a god of wine and parties. And there were all these different gods, and people worshipped these different gods. Now, we don't believe that those entities exist, but we still... what that word run after means. To run after means to pant. See, you have to live for something. You have to live for something. Something has to be chosen by you to say, if I have that, then I have a fulfilled life, then I have self-worth. You're going to make that choice consciously, semi-consciously, and whatever that is will function in your life, though you may not want to say it, as basically divine. It's going to function exactly the way those things function in the lives of the ancient people who believed that wealth and that fertility and that beauty and that power actually had a divine being behind it. We don't believe that, but actually those things function in our lives exactly the way they did back then. And we say, if I have that, if I get into that school, if I get that kind of income, if that person will love me, then I will have a good life. You're running after those things. You're panting after them. Your tongue's hanging out. You're not just doing those things. You're running after them. This is your meaning in life. And David is, see, he's hinting, you notice he says, those who run after other guys will suffer more and more. As time goes on, you'll be shaken. You know why? Because even if you are part of that lucky minority of people who actually get the things that you're running after, they'll start slipping away because nothing in this world has any foundations. They will start slipping away. And you'll be shattered and you'll be shaken. So that's the first thing. You should recognize what it is that your heart's running after. The second thing, though, look at how deliberate David is. The second thing is, if you want to be, have a refuge, I cannot be shaken. If you want to be able to say, because my eyes are on him, he's at my right hand, here's what you have to do. It's very deliberate. Verse two, I say to the Lord, you are my Lord. Apart from you, I have no good thing. Literally in the Hebrew, it says, beyond you, no good. There's no good beyond you. He actually says it again in verse five. He says, Lord, you are my portion. That's my wealth. You are my cup. Cup meant experience, my joy. Now, didn't David already believe in God? Yes, of course he believed in God. But see, that's the importance. We're not just about believing in God. We're talking about running to him. We're talking about saying, you are my meaning in life. You are my highest good. You are my joy. It's very easy for us to deceive ourselves. You can be extraordinarily religious and never have done this at all. You can be incredibly religious. You can go to church. You can believe in God. You can say your prayers. You can give to the poor. You can believe all the doctrines. You can be very busy in religious activities. But if you are, and something goes wrong with your health, and something goes wrong with your family, something goes wrong with your financials, and you get furious, and you say, all this I've done for God, and why is he letting this happen to me? And you start to walk away. See, you have done God, but you've been running after those other things. What David is saying is change that around. Don't we? You'll become unshakable. Is to do those things, but run after God. So you've been doing God, but running after those things. David says, for the first time in your life, pursue God. Run after him. Say, I don't just believe in you. I'm not just obeying in order to get the things that I really get joy out of. You're the joy. You're the meaning. You're the self-worth. You're my all. You're my hope. Pursue God. That's the second thing, he says. That's the only way you'll be unshakable, because, of course, that's the one love you can't lose. That's the one thing that can't be taken from you. That's the one thing that even death, if it takes, you know, even death comes, it'll only make it better. God's love, God's presence, which leads to the third point. In some ways, what we've said so far, other religions can offer you. Buddhism, for example, is actually quite, quite good at saying that the reason why you're so shaken is that you're running after all these things. Buddhism says, you know, if you're that concerned about career or how you look or what size dress you're in or all, if those things really bother you, wow, those things are passing away. They're illusions. Buddhism says, don't run after those things. So Buddhism's quite good at that. Other religions, you know, Islam has a personal God, and you have to make him the most important thing in your life. So other religions can also say, make God the most important thing, don't run after other things. But only biblical religion can give you what David offers. He offers something way beyond just that, honestly. Because here at the end, these last few verses, he says something that we have to reflect on. remarkable when he wrote it especially. And other people who read this years ago, and the first people who read the Psalms and sang the Psalms, this must have been a shock. Look at verse 9 to 11. Therefore, my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices, my body also will rest secure. Because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, nor will you let your faithful one see decay. You have made known to me the path of life. You will fill me with joy in your presence with eternal pleasures at your right hand. Now, this is pretty remarkable. In that stage of redemptive history, at that stage of the history of revelation, back in the Old Testament time when the Bible was being written at this time, the ancient Jews had some idea of afterlife, but they didn't have a very strong understanding of what was going on. It wasn't all that well developed. But here's David saying something pretty remarkable. And basically, it boils down to this. He's saying, the love I have, the friendship I have with God, the fellowship I have with God, his love for me is so strong, I cannot believe that death could strip it from me. If you have a love relationship with somebody, and somebody comes into something, something comes between you, what do you do? If you have the power to get rid of it, you get rid of it. Well, God is omnipotent, you know. And David is saying, God loves me, and I have a friendship with him, and I have a fellowship with him that I just do not believe God will let death come between us. And so he says, basically, here's the two things that I have a conviction about. And the first thing is that I will see him face to face. See, literally, you know that word presence, it's the English word, look, you will fill me with joy in your presence with eternal pleasure at your right hand. The English word is presence, but the Hebrew word is always face. And here's what literally David is saying. He says, God, in your face is joy upon joys. At your right hand are pleasures forevermore. In your face, there's joy upon joy upon joy. And in your face, there's joy upon joy, but at your right hand are pleasures forevermore. He's talking about the beatific vision. He's saying, I'm going to see God face to face. He's got to know. David, who wrote this, certainly knew that Moses asked, show me your glory. Give me the ultimate experience. And God says, no, it will kill you. And yet David is saying, I'm going to see that. Now, it is really hard for us to imagine this. Notice he talks about pleasure, eternal pleasure, infinite pleasure, and joy. The only person I know who even comes close to getting us to understand this is C.S. Lewis and his great sermon that he preached at the University Church in Oxford in the 1940s called The Weight of Glory. You can find it online in its totality. And he actually has a, I only have time for one here, but he's got a couple of fascinating passages where he's trying to get to grips with what it will look, what it will be like. What is David talking about? Well, here's one way to think about it. And I'm going to have to, I'm going to have to explain it in the middle because it's such a wonderful thought. Lewis says in The Weight of Glory, he says, quote, the energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter when making the world are what we now call physical pleasures. Stop. Let's take that in. Did you hear that? The energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter when making the world we now call physical pleasures. You know what he's saying? If you go back to some parts of the Bible, like Proverbs 8, it says that when God was creating the world, he was just so happy. He was frolicking, practically. He was joyful. The creation accounts of other cultures and other religions usually have God acting sort of, well, or the gods. It's usually the result of a battle or something. Only the Bible. It says when God created the world, it was a work of joy. Now, here's what Lewis is saying, which is, I love this, and it's so, it's such a wonderful thought. He says when God was creating the world, he was in rapture, God's creative rapture. He was in such joy when he's creating the world that some of that joy got into, permanently into, the world he was making. And the energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter are what we call physical pleasures. Why is it that the sounds these people are making are bringing you a little bit of pleasure? Why is it some of you are crying? I was watching. Why is it you find it beautiful? What Lewis knows this is, why is it beautiful? What Lewis saw in I21s例えば in I21s crying. I was watching. Why is it you find it beautiful? What Lewis is trying to say is that when God made things like sound or music, when he made your body, when he made food, what he did was he put some of the joy he had, the creative rapture he had as he was making it, into it, and now we experience it as physical pleasure. We get some of God's, we participate a little bit in God's joy that he's put into creation. Some of these things we taste, we hear, we see. Why are certain sights just so beautiful? Why are certain sounds so beautiful? Here's the answer. The energies which God's creative rapture implanted in matter when making the world we now call physical pleasures, but even filtered, physical pleasures are too much for our present management. Yes. There's a whole sermon there. But then Lewis says this, but what would it be like to taste at the fountainhead the stream of which even these lower reaches prove so intoxicating? What would it be to taste at the fountainhead that stream of which these lower reaches prove so intoxicating? The greatest pleasure you've ever had in your life, the most beautiful sight, the most incredible sounds, the most wonderful physical pleasure you've ever had. He says that they're just far off hints of what must it be like at the fountainhead, in the presence of God, in his face, his fullness of joy. Hey, your right hand is pleasures forevermore. And David says, that I'm going to have. Now, 1 John 3 is a great place in 1 John 3 where it says, beloved, we do not know what we're going to be like, but when he appears, he's talking about the end of time, when he appears, we will see him as he is. And then it adds, anyone who hopes for that purifies himself as he is pure. To even know that that's going to happen, to even hope in that, to even say, that's for me, is going to affect you now. Of course it is. It's going to make you more unshakable. See, anyone who even hopes for it purifies himself, changes himself, you know, you become a more unshakable person. Oh, okay, that's great. I'm glad that David believed that. But how can I know that? Oh my goodness, we have a better, we have better proof that that's going to happen to those who believe in God through Jesus Christ than David did. Why? Because David has a second thing that he says. He doesn't believe that he is going, well, what does it say? In fact, you know, commentators have tried to figure out, what was David saying? My body will rest secure because you will not abandon me to the realm of the dead, nor let your faithful ones see decay. It sounds like he's saying, I'm going to be resurrected. My body's going to be resurrected. I'm not just going to have a, you know, a kind of afterlife as a disembodied spirit. My body is going to be resurrected. So I can really experience these pleasures. Is that what he thought? Maybe. But here's what Peter says on Pentecost. David didn't quite know, but he was pointing to one of his descendants, a greater David, someone who was truly faithful. Yes, David, of course, was faithful, but only Jesus Christ was completely faithful. And in the grave, God did not abandon him to the grave. God never let his body see decay, but raised him up. And now, verse eight, at the right hand, Jesus Christ is the right hand of God. And that guarantees that you who believe in him will be resurrected too. You know what that means? Look, if you do not believe that Jesus Christ was physically raised from the dead, if you don't believe in the historical fact, would you please imagine what would happen if you did? What if you knew he was raised from the dead? What if you knew the resurrection was a fact? And that if you believed in him, this future was your future. It would change the way you went to every funeral. It would change the way you wept every one of your tears. It would change the way in which you handled everything that came your way. It would change the way in which you acted every time things were slipping out of your hands. And what about the rest of us? We believe in the resurrection. A lot of us do up here. But imagine you were five to 10 times more sure of it. It would change you too. How can we do that? Well, think. You know, A.N. Wilson, who's a public, British sort of public intellectual, like most British public intellectuals, he didn't believe in Christianity, didn't believe in God. He laughed at it until a few years ago he got convinced. He got convinced by the evidence. He's actually got an article in the Financial Times today, plus one in the Guardian this weekend, on why you can believe Easter. You can believe that Jesus Christ actually rose from the dead. The evidence is there. It's really not just something that people who seem to want to think, believe in it, just do a big leap of faith. There's a lot of evidence there. He talks about the eyewitnesses. Or think of this, just for a second. Let's be rational for a second, because that's... be rational for a second. You say, well, back then, people were more gullible. Jews did not believe that there could be a resurrection in the middle of history. They believed that there might be a resurrection for the righteous at the end of history. But Jews did not believe somebody could be raised in the dead in the middle of history. They did not believe that a human being could be God. And yet thousands of Jews started believing that Jesus Christ was the resurrected Son of God. Now, you and I, here in New York City, we have a hard time believing in the resurrection because we're rational, we're scientific. But they had different, yet equally strong reasons to be skeptical of the idea that Jesus could have been raised from the dead. So here's the question. What evidence did they get? It must have been so powerful. In fact, put it like this. What evidence would you need today to overwhelm your skepticism, to believe that Jesus Christ was raised from the dead? It would have to be pretty strong, right? Well, they must have gotten the same kind. And they did. And then, as A.N. Wilson says in one of his articles, he says, talking about this, he talks about the fact that they were transformed. He says, we can easily dismiss Easter as a fairy tale if we hide from ourselves the uncomfortable fact that the first men and women who claimed to be witnesses to Easter were prepared to be tortured and to die horribly rather than deny the risen Christ. It's hard to believe that those people didn't see what they saw. Is there any reason to believe in the resurrection? Lots of it. Would that change your life? Absolutely. It would make you unshakable. Because the resurrection doesn't just mean that someday in the afterlife we get a consolation for the life we lost here. No, we get the restoration. We get new bodies, the restoration of the life that we lost. And more than that, we get the life that we always wanted in the world which we never had. Know that. Run to the doctrine of the resurrection. Run to it. And you will receive a kingdom that cannot be shaken. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that you have given us on Easter a tremendous assurance that you exist, that there is a love that we never can lose, that there is a foundation we can stand on, and that we can be unshakable in this world and life. Thank you for that. We pray that now as we sing again, as we think some more about what you did on that day, raising Jesus from the dead, that these truths would pass more into us and we might become more and more conformed to the image of your Son, in whose name we pray. Amen.
