TITLE: Predestination
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 1:18-31
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Hot Potatoes From Corinthians
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/predestination/

============================================================

1 Corinthians chapter 1, verses 18 to 31. I'll read it and then we'll explain what our new series here of teachings is about. 1 Corinthians 1, verses 18 to 31. For the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, the intelligence of the intelligent I will frustrate. Where is the wise man? Where is the scholar? Where is the philosopher of this age? Has not God made foolish the wisdom of the world? For since in the wisdom of God the world through its wisdom did not know him, God was pleased through the foolishness of what was preached to save those who believe. Jews demand miraculous signs and Greeks look for wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. I didn't do that, right, did I? We preach Christ crucified, a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, but to those whom God has called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God. For the foolishness of God is wiser than man's wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than man's strength. Maybe I'll do better on this page. Brothers, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards, not many were influential, not many were of noble birth, but God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. He chose the lowly things of this world and the despised things, even the things that are not, to nullify the things that are, so that no one may boast before him. It is because of him that you are in Christ Jesus, who has become for us wisdom from God, that is, our righteousness, our holiness, and redemption. Therefore, as it is written, let him who boasts, boast in the Lord. Lord, this is God's word. Well, every word is pure gold here. This is what we're doing. For the next few weeks, not many, four or five weeks, not next week, because next week we're going to have one of our open forums, a special night. We do a lot of sort of fun things, and I will be given a talk, but not in this series. But for four or five weeks, we're going to look at what I'm calling hot potatoes from 1 Corinthians. And I'll tell you why I call it that. Corinthians, the letters to the Corinthians, or at least the first one, and there's two, very long. The two letters of Paul to the Corinthians were letters to a church that he founded about maybe five years before. The church is maybe five years old or so when he wrote this letter. He founded the church only 20 years after the resurrection of Christ at Corinth. And Corinth was a town in a little isthmus, the place where all of the northern part of Greece and all the southern part of Greece comes together into a very, very tiny little isthmus between the two. It's only four or five miles across. And it was the crossroads. If you wanted to go north or south, you had to go right past it. If you wanted to go east or west by ocean, by sea, if you were sailing, you could either go about 300 miles around the edge, around the southern part of Greece, or you could actually bring your boat to one port on one side of Corinth and then transport your cargo four miles across the land and put them on another boat on the other side of Corinth and sail on. So everybody came through Corinth. And Corinth was, therefore, the place where everybody went to make money. Corinth was the place of commerce. It was huge. It was growing rapidly. It was incredibly multi-ethnic. It was very diverse. Nobody lived there because that was where they were from. They went there to make it. They went there to be successful. And it was the most money-obsessed, sex-obsessed, success-obsessed city. It was New York. It was New York. You know? Nobody was from Corinth. And they didn't care. They said, can you help me get to where I'm going? And then they accepted you. And, in fact, what's one of the most interesting things, if you want to know something about the culture of Corinth, we know that there was a word coined. There was a word coined because of the culture and the society of Corinth. It was the Greek word Corinthianize. And to Corinthianize meant to live without any morals at all, to be a completely amoral person, living without rules. That tells you something about that place. Paul went there and preached the gospel. And to his amazement, tons and tons of people became Christians. He stayed there a very long time before he moved on because he was a church planter. And he went from place to place. And he started churches. However, not long after... problems were, now, this would be a first application. Corinth, the church of Corinth was filled with problems and they are the problems that come from vitality. Now, if you actually go through the book of Corinthians, and we're not going to do that because it would be too long and tedious, you would see that what it is, it's a list of virtually every conflict, every clash, every point, every flashpoint, every point of contention. It covers every single point of controversy that you can possibly find. And it's not just, well, let me just read them to you. For example, in chapter 1 and 2, there's a lot of talk about party spirit. There were parties, there were divisions, there was backbiting, there were people, there was politicking going on in the church. If you get to chapter 2 and 3 and 4, you have the issue of worldly wisdom. How does Christianity relate to secular intellectual trends? What is the relationship? Should we go to college? Or should we stay away? And what is the relationship of Christianity to the wisdom of the world? If you get to chapter 5 and 6, you get into discipline, church discipline. You have a man who's having an affair with his stepmother, and he's a Christian. You have two Christians who are going to court together. They're against each other, excuse me. They're suing each other in court. And so the whole issue is, to what degree should the church discipline its members? To what degree should the church come and say, you can't do that, you see? How much authority does the church have over its members? To what degree do the members have to submit to that authority? Then if you get into chapter 6, you get into the whole area of sexual ethics. Because Paul mentions and shows that there were all kinds of problems coming up when it came to sexuality. What is a Christian supposed to be able to do? What can't a Christian do? And issues of sexuality and heterosexuality and homosexuality and premarital sex and extramarital sex, and all these things came up, and they're all there in chapter 6. Then you get to chapter 7, and he deals with divorce. You know, what are Christians supposed to do about divorce? What is the place of divorce people in the church? You know, can a Christian divorce the non-Christian spouse? Then you get to chapter 8, and chapter 8, and especially chapter 9, is a lot about cultural issues. You had Greeks, and you had Jews, and you had people of different cultures in the church, and they were fighting. And a lot of it had to do with this. To what degree are there universal principles that all Christians have to go with, and what things are culturally relative? What things are particular to that culture? What things are relative to a culture? And what things are absolutely central? And then when you get over into chapter 10 and 11, you have mistakes and fights about the meaning of the Lord's Supper. And when you get into chapter 12 and 13 and 14, you get two things happening. In chapter 11, you get the issue of gender roles. What is the relationship of men and women in the church? What are their gender roles? Are there male roles? Are there female roles? Then you get into chapter 12, 13, and 14, and you get into the whole issue of tongues and healing and miracles. What do you think? You think about it. It's every hot potato we still have. Is this ancient stuff? Not a bit. But here's what I want you to know. One of the things that's so interesting about Corinth, and let me apply this to Redeemer at this point. I read some years ago an article by David Martin Lloyd-Jones on 1 Corinthians, and he said something that's pretty interesting is that Paul is continually going into Corinthian letters, and he's tearing his hair out over these problems. And this church has all sorts of problems. For example, he says in the worship services, everybody's trying to get up, and they want to share. They want to do something. They all want to get into the act. And Paul has to say, do all things decently and in order. And, of course, you have these cultural problems because you have people from every class and every race, you see, and every culture in the church. And they're constantly stepping on each other's toes, and some people are being oversensitive, and some people are being insensitive. And you know what? I love this. You know, Lloyd-Jones says, nobody wants to be in a church like that. We want to be in a church where we don't have problems, where everything's under control, where everything is cozy, where things aren't changing, and when people aren't always having to put out fires. We want a church. We don't want a church like Corinth. And he says, you know the reason why most churches don't need the letter to the Corinthians? He says, most churches are too dead to need the letter to the Corinthians. He says, for Paul to come to a church and say, do everything decently and in order, for Paul to come and say, look at all these various kinds of people, male and female, and slave and free, and rich and poor, and black and white, and Hispanic and Asian. When you have a church like that, well, you know what you've got? You've got problems. But you know what else you've got? You've got a church that's reaching people. See, the gospel brings people together that wouldn't be together otherwise, and therefore you have the cultural problems. The gospel reaches people of all sorts of different politics, and therefore you have the political problems. The gospel reaches people of all sorts of different politics, relapsing all the time. You see? The gospel's reaching all sorts of people who are very excited and they take what the Bible says and they misunderstand it and they start to teach the wrong thing and then we've got to go over and talk to them about it. There's really only two kinds of churches. You've got the churches who are sinning because of sins of immaturity, sins of insensitivity. There's all sorts of sin around and those are the sins of the vital churches. Then you can go to the dead churches and those churches don't have all these problems. You don't need a letter like this, but there's a different kind of sin there. It's a lack of passion, a lack of vision, a lack of reaching out to people. There is no safe church. There's no place you can go where you don't have all sorts of sin around. There's no place you can go without problems. It depends on what kind of problems. What kind of problems do you want to have in your church? You want to have these kinds of problems. It's kind of a headache, but they're the problems of vitality. Now, the first problem and the only one we're going to look at tonight, and you know, some of you may know, this is a very important passage to me. And therefore, if I had my druthers, I would love to go through it line by line. I cannot. But here's what I want to say by way in a sense of meditation, because we're going to come to the table tonight. There is a major hot potato. I mean, Paul deals with all of them, divorce and gender roles and sexuality. I mean, he does with all of them, tongues and healing, everything, every flashpoint. We're going to look at a few of them over the next few weeks. Hmm? Okay? Don't bring your friends. It's one of the few times I say, don't bring your friends. No, that's not true. But anyway, you see, it's going to be an interesting series. However, tonight, here's a hot potato, and it's not one you probably would right away notice. And I actually haven't mentioned it yet. In this passage, because it's the first chapter, he lays out a foundation. He lays out a hot potato. He lays out something that is controversial. He makes a controversial point, but he lays it out as a foundation for dealing with every other problem in the church. And I know that when I lay it out to you, some of you, we're going to have, we have a question and answer time afterwards, and so a lot of you will be there asking these questions. I know that. I mean, the whole idea behind this series, and one of the reasons why it's going to be a short series is because every week, we're going to stir people up. Every week, we're going to say, here's what it's saying. And somebody's going to say, oh, well, that's why it's a hot potato. It's going to burn some people. Okay? However, let me point it out to you this way. Paul is saying here, before he gets to all the divisions, you know, men and women are kind of at loggerheads. Jew and Greek are at loggerheads. Right before the passage that I read so poorly tonight, right before it, actually, I was reading off my Bible and it was too far away from me, right before it, in 1 Corinthians chapter 1, just a little before it, he says, in verse 11, he says, my brothers, some of Chloe's household have come, some brothers have come, and they've informed me that there are quarrels among you. What I mean is this. One of you says, I follow Paul. Another says, I follow Apollos. Another says, I follow Peter. Another says, I follow Christ. There's always one of them, you know. Yes. Okay. That's a whole other thing. But you see, he said, now, what are we going to do about this? He says, I would lay a hot potato out that if you understand it, if you take it in, will give us a foundation for dealing all these divisions. It will get rid of the pride. It will soften the heart. In fact, it'll get at the root of an awful lot of the problems. All these divisions. And this is what he does. And it's going to shock you. He says, I would like to say that you are disoriented to, or maybe you don't agree with, or you don't understand, a doctrine that is very necessary if we're going to get along. He says, I would like to teach you the doctrine of predestination. Or, as he, you know, as here, doesn't use the word predestination, but the doctrine of election. Now, this is how he says it. Let me read you the passage where you see it. It's on the other side. Remember, you turn your page. We're going to be looking there. Brothers, he says, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards. Not many were influential. Not many were of noble birth. But God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. God chose the lowly and despised things, even the things which are not, to bring to nothing the things which are, that no one would boast. Now, here's what Paul is saying. Look here, especially at verse 30. It is because of him that you are in Jesus Christ, who has become for us wisdom, which is righteousness, holiness, and redemption. Now, what he lays out there is the gospel. He lays it out. See in verse 29 and verse 30? What does it mean to be a Christian? Whenever somebody, if I ever ask somebody, are you a Christian? They say, well, I'm trying. Now, I mention this enough that nobody does this to me anymore around here. But if somebody, if I say to somebody, are you a Christian? And they say, well, I'm trying to be a Christian. You don't understand what a Christian is. to be trying, it's to be in Christ Jesus. I mean, you're either in or you're out. See? You're either in a room or you're out of the room, you know? If somebody says, I'm trying to get into the room, what they mean is, they're out. If you're trying to get in, you're out. If you're in, you're not trying. I mean, there is no, you know, as Yoda said, do or not do, there is no try. I mean, Yoda understood it, okay? He says, you're in or you're out. What does it mean to be in Christ Jesus? Well, you say, oh, you mean Christians are people who are so sure that they're good, they're so sure that they're righteous, that they're just absolutely positive that they're in. Wow. No, let's see. What it says is, in Christ Jesus. Jesus, you're not in Christ Jesus because you're righteous, but to be in Christ Jesus is to have him be for us, for us, our righteousness, our holiness, and our redemption. That's pretty remarkable. What he's really saying is, you are not a Christian if you just repent of your sins. Here's a little nutshell. You're not a Christian by repenting for your sins. Everybody repents for their sins. Everybody. In every religion, there's nothing unusual about that. Irreligious people repent of their sins. They see they've done something wrong. They say, I'm sorry. Everybody repents. That's not what makes you a Christian. What makes you a Christian is when you finally admit, when you finally repent of your righteousness. That means when you finally are willing to say, not only do I sin, everybody knows that, but I also realize that the best things I could ever do are really just ways for me to try to be for myself what only Jesus Christ should be for me. Even my best deeds, even my best performances are really ways for me to be my own savior. I see that that's really what's wrong with me, and I see that actually I've been trying to be my own savior, so even my best deeds have actually been very wicked. They've been ways of trying to keep control of my life. They've been ways of trying to avoid Jesus. There's that great line in Flannery O'Connor. Flannery O'Connor says, there was a deep blackness in his heart where he believed, this is what Flannery O'Connor says, he knew that the best way to avoid Jesus was to avoid sin. Now, I mean, there's insight there. Flannery O'Connor was from the South. Flannery O'Connor saw an awful lot of religion in the South. There's a lot of religion there, but she also realized so much religion, so much effort to avoid sin is really an effort to avoid Jesus. If I live a good life, I don't have to see myself as a sinner completely dependent on him. If I live a good life, I don't have to completely give myself to God, because I've lived a pretty good life, and therefore, he can't ask anything of me. He can't have unconditional control over my life. He can ask certain things of me, but not anything, because I've lived, I've done, I'm a taxpayer, I've got rights. I've done the things that I need to do. Avoiding sin is a way of avoiding Jesus. What it means to become a Christian is to see you've been avoiding Jesus in all of your morality, avoiding Jesus in all of your goodness, avoiding Jesus. And you repent not just of your sins, but of your righteousness. And you say, Lord Jesus, Lord God, Father, because of what Jesus has done, receive me. Let him be my righteousness, not me. Let him be my holiness, not me. See? The determining factor in your relationship with God, the minute you become a Christian, is not your past, but Christ's past. Not your name, but Christ's name. Not your record, but Christ's record. Now, do you believe that? Do you believe it? Now, for some of you, it's new. And if it's a brand new thought, then maybe the next 10, 12 minutes of what I'm about to say might be a little bit, might stretch you a little bit to understand. But if you believe that here tonight, and I'm especially thinking about you, what Paul says is if that's true, then you believe in election. You believe in predestination. You've got to. Because here's what he says. Brothers, think of what you were when you were called. Not many of you were wise by human standards. Not many were influential. Not many of noble birth. All right. Why? See, he says, think of what you were when you were called. Now, he's talking about, think of what you were when you were converted. Think of what you were just before you became Christians. Why are you a Christian is what he's asking. Are you a Christian because you're wiser than other people? Are you a Christian because you're smarter than other people? Are you a Christian because, now this next one, this word where it says wise and then it says influential. And it's the same word that's used down here under strong. It's a word that means able. Able. Are you more able than other people? See. Are you more decisive? Were you wiser? Were you humbler? Were you more insightful? Now, you know, some years ago, I read this. David Martin Lloyd-Jones, in a sermon on Romans, he put it this way. He says, people seem to think that if you reject the doctrine of election, you are in a happy position. You say, I don't believe that I'm a Christian because God elects. I believe I'm a Christian. choice and decision. Now, as you see, Paul says, the reason you are what you are is not because you're wiser than other people, not because you're abler than other people, not because you're this or that, not because you're pedigree, not because of who, you know, who your parents were. The reason you're a Christian and other people are not has nothing to do in you at all. It does not depend on your choice. It depends on God's choice. Well, Lloyd-Jones comes out and says, well, many people say, well, I just don't believe that. I don't believe it's God who elects. I believe that we're free and I believe I'm a Christian because it depends on my choice and decision. But wait a minute, he says. Let me ask you where you are if you reject this doctrine. Take Acts chapter 28, verse 24. It says, Paul preached and some believe the things that Paul spoke and some believe not. Now, he says, why do some believe and some do not? Well, you say, because free will. Some chose and some did not. Very well. Very well, says Lloyd-Jones. But let me ask you another question. Why did some choose to believe and some did not? Oh, well, you say, one saw things in this way, one saw things in that way. Yes, very well, he says. But why did some see it this way and some the other way? Well, because some admitted their sins and some did not. Ah, yes, he says. But let me ask you again. Very well. But why did some people see their sins and others did not? And he keeps on pressing. Why did... This is a sermon by Lloyd-Jones on Romans 9. Now, the first person I ever heard do this was not Lloyd-Jones in this sermon, but a friend of mine, a man named Narcy Sproul, on his living room floor. My life changed when I heard this because he was going after, as lovingly as possible, a woman who says, I cannot believe in election. I think... I can't believe that the reason that some people are Christians and some people are not is ultimately because of God's choice. I think it's because of our choice. And this is what R.C. did. He just pressed her. He just pressed her. Just like this. And he says, why did some choose and some don't? Because some saw it. Why did some see it that way and some did it? Well, some humbled themselves. Why were some humbled and others were not? Well, some repented. Why did some repent and others did not? And here's what eventually you're going to get down to. Why are you a Christian and somebody is not? Because you're smarter? Because you're wiser? Because you're humbler? No, no, no. I just opened up. Why did you open up? Well, I just received the grace. Why did you receive the grace? See? Well, I just saw. Why did you see and they didn't? Now, when it comes right down to it, either you're saved because you're a little teeny bit better than the other people. Just a little teeny bit. Or else because God, in his loving, sovereign choice, chose you and opened your heart. It's one or the other. Now, why would Paul be pushing this? Now, you know, people are going to ask me afterwards and say, gee, this is terrible. I don't believe. The Bible doesn't teach this, does it? This is just Paul, right? People are always doing that to you. Poor Paul. That's just Paul. Well, yeah. Then there's Jesus. Jesus says in John 6, I told you, you have seen me and still you do not believe. All that the Father gives me will come to me. And whoever comes to me, I will never drive away. For I have come down from heaven not to do my will, but to do the will of him who sent me. And this is the will of him who sent me. I will lose not one of all that he has given me, but I will raise them up on the last day. No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him and I will raise him up on the last day. Jesus said, I tell you, but you don't believe. The miracles I do in my Father's name speak for me, but you do not believe. My sheep do believe. You do not believe because you are not my sheep. My sheep do listen to my voice. I know them. They follow me. I give them eternal life. They shall never perish and no one will snatch them out of my hand. You know, or it's not just Paul and Jesus. Then there's Luke. Luke says in chapter 16, chapter 13 of the book of Acts, it says Paul was preaching and he says, when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad and honored the word of the Lord and all who were ordained to eternal life believed. It doesn't say all who believed were ordained to eternal life. It says all who were ordained to eternal life believed. Now, why is Paul doing this? Now, you know, you're going to say this creates problems and of course it creates problems, but I just want you to know there's far more problems if you don't take it. Don't you see? Here, I just gave you the first one. Do you believe you're saved by grace or do you believe because you're just a little better than other people? You say, well, I don't believe it's because I'm a little better than other people. Well, then you believe in election. And you know what? See, what Paul's doing, he's pressing. And why is he pressing? Does he say, well, I think I'll write a letter on the doctrine of election? Paul never did that. Why is he bringing it up? Why is he bringing it up to the Corinthians? I'll tell you this. He is giving you the true multiculturalism. Oh, yes. He's setting it up for the whole book. I mean, there are problems like you cannot believe in the Corinthian church. But he is setting up the true multiculturalism. not really asking. But if you live in New York, you're going to ask this. And this is the question. How can we live with people? How can we be civil? How can we be respectful? How can we live with people with whom we deeply differ? How can we really get along? How can we really live together? How can we really be neighbors? How can we really work together? How can we respect each other? How can we love each other? People we utterly differ with. Now, I'd say there's only three possibilities. There's relativism, there's religion, and there's the gospel. Now, relativism goes like this. Relativism, and this is right now the way people are pushing this in New York, relativism says we will only get together if we agree that nobody's got the truth, that nobody's right, that everybody has to decide what's right or wrong for them, that everybody has to decide, you see, for them what is true, and therefore there's no real truth. You know, truth is something you create. You create your own reality, and we have to respect that. And nobody should say, this is right and this is wrong. You should be converted. See, so relativism is the first approach. And here's the problem with that. They say, well, if everybody, if everything's relative, we can all get along. There's two problems. First of all, relativists can only get along with relativists. If you believe in absolute truth, they have to kick you out. They have to do the very thing they just said that you're not supposed to do to them. They have to say, they have to get after you. They have to get on you. See, if you say, for example, I believe what you're doing is a sin, but I love you, they say, forget that. I don't believe it. You either accept me, or I want nothing to do with you. In other words, they will not let the absolutist be himself or herself. They won't let you. That's so ironic. They'll say, you've got to be yourself. But if I look at you and say, what you're doing is sinful, but I love you, and I respect you, and I care for you, they say, no, no, no. Oh, no. You're condemning me. No, no, I'm not saying no. I believe what you're doing is a sin, but I respect you, and I want to work together with you, and I'm open to you, and I can learn from you. Oh, no. Then what are they doing? They don't have a basis in their relativism for really liking or getting along with anybody but other relativists. And I'll tell you one other thing. If everything's relative, you've heard me say this before, then tolerance would be relative. If everything's relative, why can't I punch you out? And you certainly have no basis for telling me I can't. Relativism doesn't work. But then religion, traditional culture doesn't work either. Traditional religion does not work. Absolutely not. You know why? Because you do feel better than the other people. You've got it together. You see, if you believe in your Christianity, if you say, I'm a Christian, why? I'm trying, okay? I've tried my best. I'm living a good life. I'm trying to obey what the Bible says. I'm a Christian. Now, you're not a Christian. At least you certainly don't understand Christianity. But if that's your approach, and if you say, the reason that I'm a Christian, other people are not, was because I was wiser. I was humbler. I kind of, you know, laid all this out. I did all these things. I just said no all my life. I've sacrificed. You know, I've tithed. I've done these things. I've brought people to church. I've done these very hard things. You're not going to get along with the Hindus and the Jews and the gay people around you. You're not going to get along with them. Why? Because you think you're better than they are. You have to. You know, it may be very, very deep. You know, you may say, well, I'm supposed to be a nice person because I'm a Christian. Christians are nice. But down deep, there's a level of tolerance. There's a level of intolerance. But what about the gospel? Here's what the gospel tells you. The gospel says no boasting. The gospel says God chooses the weak to shame the people who think they're strong. God chooses the foolish to shame the wise. What is that? No boasting. And this means this. If I am saved by grace, and I look at that Hindu person, or if I look at that Jewish person who doesn't believe, or a gay person who doesn't believe, if I look at them, here's the first thing I have to say. They may disagree with me, and I may disagree with them. I even may think they're lost. But I'll tell you this. If I'm a Christian, it's not because I'm smarter than they are, wiser than they are. It's not because I'm a better husband or father. It doesn't mean I've got more moral sense, necessarily. They may be superior to me in many, many ways, and I have to know that I can learn from them. And if you don't believe that, you don't believe you're a sinner saved by grace. So on the one hand, there's a humility, but there's a humility toward them, a real humility. Like, I can learn from you. You've got things that I don't have. Why? Because I'm not saved by anything but grace. But on the other hand, there's hope. And here's why there's hope. You never write people off. Never. And if you write people off, if you look at anybody as hopeless, if you look at anybody as too bad, too messed up, they'll never come around. You know what? That shows that you don't believe that you're a miracle. You don't believe that your Christianity is a miracle. You believe, basically, the reason you're a Christian is you chose. You don't believe that you're a Christian because God chose. Because if you believe that, there's a playfulness about you. You see, if you ask a person that doesn't believe in election, are you a Christian? They say, well, of course I'm a Christian. I've done this and I've done that. But if you ask a person who believes in election, who understands the implications of it, are you a Christian? You'll say, yes, what a joke. Me? A Christian? You're always amazed. You're never standing on your own dignity. You see, there's a joy about you, there's a hopefulness about you, and that is absolutely irresistible. You will be totally hopeful toward people, no matter who they are, but at the same time, absolutely humble toward them. And Paul says, if you understand this, if you understand the doctrine of election, you're going to get along. You are going to get along. Because you won't be boasting. You'll be boasting in the Lord. My dear friends, you want to believe this. For a minute, no, I don't even have a minute. Let me just say that, you say, oh, there's so many troubles with this. What about the people that aren't chosen? Come to Q&A, we'll talk. I mean, we're not going to do it up here. But I'll tell you this. The thing that really moved me so many years ago, Dr. Edmund Clowney, one of our teachers, one time said, if your wife ever asks you, he was talking to guys, basically, he said, if your wife ever asks you, honey, do you love me? And you say, yes, of course. And then she says, why? And if you say, because you're prettier than other women, because you're smarter than other women, because you meet my needs, because you're very serviceable to me, she's going to be upset, and rightly so. Nobody wants that kind of love. Nobody wants love that says, I love you because you're this or you're that over this or that. You've performed well. You know why? Because that's not loving you for you. Oh, no, that's conditional love. And that means you're loving what you're getting. And nobody wants to be loved for what you're giving to somebody else, because then you know the person's not really loving you, the person's loving what you're giving them. You're not being loved for who you are. You're not being loved unconditionally. You're not being loved permanently. What you want to say, he said, to your wife is, I love you just because I love you. Now, if God says, I love you because you were humbler, I love you because you repent, I love you because you obey, I love you because you're trying, he doesn't love you at all. If you don't believe in the doctrine of election, you don't know this kind of love. Not really. I mean, you do know it, because you see, most Christians don't believe in the doctrine of election. Most people do it. They just aren't being consistent. They're not thinking it out. And that's what I'm trying to help you do. Because the ramifications are very important, especially for getting along with other people. But, think, this is a love that truly has put on you for you. This love is, he loves you just because he loves you. He doesn't love you because you're wiser, because you're nobler, because you're stronger. As a matter of fact, you say, well, does that mean he's arbitrary? He's up there just throwing darts and he says, you know, I'll take that one, I'll take that one. No, no. It says right here why he loves some people, why he chooses some people, not others. It's something of a mystery. We know it's not in us. We know it's not in us. But we do know this. He tends to choose the weak. He tends to choose the foolish. He tends to choose the low. Why? To show the world that he's a gracious God who loves us for ourselves, not a God who uses us, a God who is utterly a God of grace. It is not that I did choose thee, for, Lord, that could not be. This heart would still refuse thee, hadst thou not chosen me. My heart owns none before thee, for thy rich grace I thirst. This knowing, if I love thee, thou must have loved me first. Let's pray. Our Father, help us to see, help us not to be distracted by all the difficult ramifications of this doctrine. Help us to just eat it now. Help us to, it's a sweet doctrine. This is a love that is prior to our love. This is a love that comes to us. This is a love that loves us unconditionally. This is the only unconditional love. This is the love that comes and takes us. This is the love that transforms us. This is a love that doesn't love us because we're lovely. This is a love that makes us lovely. and this is the love we need tonight as we celebrate the Lord's Supper we pray that we would taste this love in a new and rich way and let it change us let it make us filled with humility and filled with hope and filled with joy and filled with love make us with it the people that know how to build a human community we pray this in Jesus name Amen
