TITLE: Preparing for Salvation
SCRIPTURE: Exodus 1:17-2:14
TOPICS: Sin Salvation
SERIES: The Gospel According to Moses: Discovering the Lost Language of Salvation
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/preparing-for-salvation/

============================================================

The scripture reading comes from the book of Exodus, chapter 1, verses 17 through chapter 2, verses 14. The midwives, however, feared God and did not do what the king of Egypt had told them to do. They let the boys live. Then the king of Egypt summoned the midwives and asked them, Why have you done this? Why have you let the boys live? The midwives answered Pharaoh, Hebrew women are not like Egyptian women. They are vigorous and give birth before the midwives arrive. So God was kind to the midwives, and the people increased and became even more numerous. And because the midwives feared God, he gave them families of their own. Then Pharaoh gave this order to all his people, Every boy that is born you must throw into the Nile, but let every girl live. Now a man of the house of Levi married a Levite woman, And she became pregnant and gave birth to a son. When she saw that he was a fine child, she hid him for three months. But when she could hide him no longer, She got a papyrus basket for him and coated it with tar and pitch. Then she placed the child in it and put it among the reeds along the bank of the Nile. His sister stood at a distance to see what would happen to him. Then Pharaoh's daughter went down to the Nile to bathe, And her attendants were walking along the river bank. She saw the basket among the reeds and sent her slave girl to get it. She opened it and saw the baby. He was crying, and she felt sorry for him. This is one of the Hebrew babies, she said. Then his sister asked Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and get one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you? Yes, go, she answered. And the girl went and got the baby's mother. Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take this baby and nurse him for me, and I will pay you. So the woman took the baby and nursed him. When the child grew older, she took him to Pharaoh's daughter, And he became her son. She named him Moses, saying, I drew him out of the water. One day, after Moses had grown up, He went out to where his own people were And watched them at their hard labor. He saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, One of his own people. Glancing this way and that, And seeing no one, He killed the Egyptian and hid him in the sand. The next day, he went out and saw two Hebrews fighting. He asked the one in the wrong, Why are you hitting your fellow Hebrew? The man said, Who made you ruler and judge over us? Are you thinking of killing me as you kill the Egyptian? Then Moses was afraid and thought, What I did must have become known. This is the word of the Lord. Briefly, my wife and I would like to thank you all One more time, like we did in July, For the innumerable kindnesses, The countless expressions of spiritual, emotional, Physical, practical support, The multitude of prayers That you've given us for the last three months. Most of you know, but probably some of you may not, The reason for all of that outpouring Was that this last three months, I have had surgery and treatment for thyroid cancer, But the treatments are just finished a couple of weeks ago. And I'm back. The prognosis is excellent. I'm taking up my major responsibilities And easing into my minor responsibilities. And with gratitude to God, to you, To my family, and especially to my wife, too. So I'm back to preach each week. And what we're going to do this fall Is we're going to be looking at the life of Moses In the book of Exodus. Why? Let me just give you kind of an intro To the whole series here briefly. I was raised in a generation In which almost every luminary In the educational establishment said, That one of the things we need to expect to see In America over the next few decades and years Is that the more scientifically And technologically advanced A country or society gets, The less the people will feel the need For belief in God And in the supernatural. And therefore we should expect to see A religion sort of Slowly but surely dying out And a people who Still use words like Sin and sinner Like saved and salvation These people should be They should be responded to With either a cringe A yawn are obsolete and primitive terms. Now, today we stand at another spot. That theory that the more scientific and technologically advanced a society gets, the more spirituality and faith and religion goes away is completely in retreat. And most of us have discovered, and I wouldn't say everybody, but most discover that you can't live your entire life without at some point feeling that underneath all my psychological and social issues, there's a spiritual emptiness. There's a spiritual need. I'm not saying everybody, but most people cannot get through life without having some poignant times like that where they sense that. But the problem is now for so many of us is that as soon as you begin to move out and seek to look at the resources of faith and spirituality that are out there, we come up against these words that we've learned to despise, like saved and sinner. When my wife first became a Christian in the 60s, if she ever said to anybody, I'm a Christian, and people would raise their eyes at her, she would say, well, I don't mean, you know, not a Billy Graham kind of Christian, a saved Christian, a born-again Christian, and they'd all go, phew, that's good. And we don't want to use those words. What we'd rather say is, I'd like to say, I need more spiritual energy in my life. But I read a book this summer by Barbara Brown Taylor, who makes a wonderful case that that's impossible. You can't avoid these words. She was talking to a man, this is from her book, she was talking to a man about his Greek language. He was a native Greek speaker, and he was saying this. He says, she says, when language is translated, not only its beauty, but also much of its reality is lost. When words are translated, not just a lot of their beauty, but their reality is lost. For example, my friend said, what the world calls the Olympic Games are no such thing. These events are not play. These events are not sport. Well, what are they, then I asked him. I can't tell you in English. He said, the Greek word for what happens at the Olympics is no English equivalent. So she reflected on that, and she continues, in the same way, I believe there are words in the Christian language that have no equivalent in the languages of business, law, or psychology. When we lose these words, we lose the hold they have on the realities they represent. Sin does not translate simply as rule-breaking, for instance, any more than it translates as sickness or psychosis. It's a bigger word than that, with deeper roots, as are words like repentance, grace, and salvation. Now, what she's saying, she's making a great case for it, is that you can't avoid the question, are you saved from sin, if you want the spiritual realities. And one of the reasons why you can't avoid the question, are you saved from sin, and you can't avoid these words, is because the Bible itself, with all of its power, with all of its unique and rich range of literature, all of its narratives, all of its history, all of its poetry, the whole Bible is devoted to fill those words with meaning. You know, the Bible's not a textbook, so you can look up in the back, what's the definition of faith? What's the definition of sin? What's the definition of salvation? If you want to know about faith, you have to ponder and enter the life of Abraham. If you want to know about salvation, there's no better place to go, though there are many places to go. If you want to know what the word salvation means, there's almost no better place to go, than the life of Moses and the book of Exodus, where God is revealed as the one who rescues, the one who saves, the one who leads out. So that's what we're going to do. We're going to do a series looking at the life of Moses and the book of Exodus. Now, what was read to you this morning is a chunk right out of the middle of the first two chapters. And Exodus chapter 1 and 2 cover many decades, several lifetimes. It gives the historical background to the birth of and the youth of Moses. And we learn three principles from these first two chapters represented by the reading that was done and was printed in your bulletin. We learn three great principles from Moses right away about salvation, and here's what they are. First, first principle is salvation is rescue from the misery and slavery of serving anything as more important in your life than God. Now, let me give you the background of what comes before the passage that was actually read to you. In verses 1 to 7, we learn that the descendants of the family of Joseph and Jacob had come down to Egypt, as you know, at the end of the book of Genesis, to escape famine. But we're also told that they multiplied and they flourished and they grew very, very numerous. Now, the king of Egypt was very threatened by a... that had their own distinct cultural identity. And he says in verse 8, he says, look, they have become much too numerous for us. We must deal with them, or they will become more numerous, and if war breaks out, we'll join our enemies and fight against us. So what does he do about it? We're told, so the Egyptians put slave masters over them to oppress them with forced labor. They made their lives bitter with hard labor in brick and mortar and with all kinds of work in the fields. In all their hard labor, the Egyptians used them ruthlessly. Now, this, of course, is not news. Almost everybody knows this part of the story, that they took the Israelites, they took the Hebrews, and they turned them into slaves. But in verse 14, which I just actually read to you, every English translation, almost unavoidably, has to mute and obscure one of the main themes of the book of Exodus, which is introduced to us here in the very, very beginning of the history. In that verse, which I just read to you, I won't reread it because I want to show you, there is the same Hebrew word, avad, which means not work or labor per se, but it means to serve as to serve a master. And it's used over and over again, literally. And, you know, no English translation will actually put it this way because it sounds so ridiculously, boringly repetitive. But literally, this is what verse 14 says. It says, they made their lives bitter with serving in brick and mortar and with every kind of serving, with every kind of serving, they made them serve. Now, why do the English translations never lay it out like that? Because it's so boringly repetitive, it's so silly to listen to, that you just have to use synonyms instead of the same word over and over and over again. But therefore, you're obscuring one of the main themes of the book of Exodus, and that is this. If you serve anything or anyone but God, you are a slave. There's destructiveness, there's bitterness. You're only free if you're serving God. If you're serving anyone or anything else, you are in slavery. Now, the whole book of Exodus, this is a major theme, so I'm sure sometime in the future we'll get back to it. But let me introduce it to you now because it is so vivid. It's one of those things when you read the book of Exodus, it's so big that unless you miss it because it's so big, it's there so often. Let me show you what I mean. When Moses goes to Pharaoh, he never says, let my people go. I know that's what Charlton Heston said. I know that's what a lot of you think, Moses said. But he never says, let my people go. He always says nine or ten times, let my people go. Let my people go that they may serve me. Let my people go that they may worship me in the desert. Let my people go that they may worship. What's that mean? Let me put it another way. If you read the book of Exodus, you always bog down in the middle, especially New Yorkers, I would imagine, because the first part of the book of Exodus is really filled with special effects, the plagues, you know, miracles, action. And you say, wow, you know, Moses, the last action hero. And you're real excited until you get halfway in. And the next thing you know, Exodus is page after page after page of instructions in how to build a tabernacle and what you're supposed to put on the doorposts and what, you know, what designs are supposed to be on the veil before you get into the holy place. And you're sitting here like this and you say, when they make it into a movie, they'll leave this part out. And they probably will. And if they do, they'll miss the main teaching of the book, because the book of Exodus starts in slavery, but it ends in worship. Yes, salvation is liberation. Yes, we see in the book of Exodus that God's salvation means freedom. It means liberation. But when you and I, modern people, hear the word freedom, we immediately, liberation, we put it through our modern grid. And here's the modern view of freedom. Freedom is not having any master at all, not having any lord at all. It's being able to choose what you want to do and to live your life the way you see fit. The whole book of Exodus is designed to subvert that definition. That definition may hold true at a certain political and civic level, but at the personal and spiritual level, it's a myth. The book of Exodus says, your liberation is not finished. He doesn't say, let my people go that they may live life the way they want. Let my people go that they may worship me. Until you are ravished by, bowed down in, astounded before the beauty and glory and presence of God, you aren't free. Unless you are serving the living God. in your life, unless you are absolutely centered on him, you're a slave. Anything you center your life on more than God makes you a slave. Anyone who is not absolutely centered in God is a slave. In other words, the whole book of Exodus is designed to subvert the Enlightenment view that you can have personal and spiritual freedom without God. You say, how could that be? Well, think this out. Everybody lives for something, right? Everybody's got to have something you live for, something that you say, if I have that, I have significance. If I have that, I have security. No, it might be a more religious thing. You might say, you know, the reason I'm significant and secure is because I'm a good person. I'm a devout person. It might be a secular thing. You say, well, look at the money I make or look at my family or look at my professional attainments. Everybody lives for something. Everybody has something that says, if I have that, then I feel good about myself, then I'll be happy. But think, anything that you must have to feel good about your life or about yourself, your heart is in servitude to. Your heart is chained to it. And you're not living free in the world. You're only happy as long as everything's going well. If any circumstances threaten any of those things, you're in trouble. You're in despair. You're in anger. You're in anxiety. You're enslaved to despair. You're enslaved to fear. Only if God is the most important thing in your life, only if His love is the ultimate source of your security and His pleasure with you is the ultimate source of your significance. Can you walk at large? Can you be absolutely free, walking about not being afraid of what's going to happen? The first principle of Moses, the first principle of the whole book of Exodus is your journey of reliberation. Your exodus out of slavery isn't done until it finds its destination in absolute and utter worship and service to God and God alone. You're only free if God's your master. If God's not your master, your ultimate center of your life, you are enslaved to something else, something that's not the real God, something that's not worthy of you putting the highest allegiance of your soul onto or into. The movie Signs, it's kind of interesting in light of thinking about 9-11. You know, the movie Signs posits this idea that someday, it gives you the example of the situation in which suddenly over all of the major cities of the world, UFOs show up and everybody knows we're being invaded. We know it. What happens? What happens is everybody flocks to places of worship. That's how the movie puts it. And we know now that that is exactly what would happen. Now, in time of crisis, why does that happen? Some people say, well, it's just emotional weakness. No, let me tell you what a crisis is. In a crisis, something that made you feel safe in the universe, something that you were building your life on, something that you had godified, something you had divinized, something that made you feel safe in the universe, something you thought was a rock on which you could build, turns out to be papier-mâché. It could be your belief in the military might of your country. It could just be a lot of people build their whole life on this absolute overwhelming delusion that life is basically safe and bad things only happen to other people. And a crisis, whether it's corporate or individual and personal, a crisis is not where you suddenly feel a need for faith. A crisis is that the faith that you have misinvested in something else is desperately looking for the real God, something that is a rock, something on which to build. And this is, you know, the reviewer in the New York Times was upset with the movie Signs because he said, he thought, it was implying that you can't be a good parent or a good person without belief in God. I don't know what the movie maker was in his mind, but I know the book of Exodus would never say, you can't be a good person without belief in God. But what it's really trying to say is, if you want to be absolutely stable in all situations, if you want to be absolutely free from ever being enslaved to fear, if you want to be stable in all situations so that nothing can get at your foundation, you've got to make God the ultimate thing you serve, the ultimate one you serve. Dear rock, the name on which I build my shield and hiding place, a never failing treasury filled with boundless stores of grace. The first thing you learn is salvation is rescue from the misery and slavery of making anything in your life more important than God, serving anything more than you serve God. The second thing we learn, the second principle. we are usually prepared for salvation by God working behind the scenes through bad and difficult times. We are usually prepared for salvation by God working behind the scenes through bad and difficult circumstances and times. See, one of the things that the Exodus writer does brilliantly, and you can probably only get a sense of this if you read the whole two chapters. I'm sorry that I couldn't print the whole two chapters. There's really not room in the bulletin, though I'm preaching essentially on all two chapters. One of the things that the narrator does so brilliantly is that God is not mentioned hardly at all in the two chapters. The two chapters tell us that things just got worse and worse and worse, and God hardly seemed to be around. The three things that happen in the book are this. First, Pharaoh decides to enslave the people. When that doesn't seem to really be working, then he tries to kill all of the male infants. That was an act of cultural genocide because his idea is if I kill off the male infants, the female Israelites will be either turned into wives or servants and they'll be actually just assimilated in the Egyptian population. And when that doesn't work, when he can't get the midwives of Israel to do it clandestinely, he tries to just have them all killed by ordering everyone, both Egyptian, I guess, and Israelite, to kill all newborn male Hebrews. So, in other words, things are getting worse and worse and worse. There's all these disasters. They're being enslaved. Now, their children are being killed. And then the one person who seems like he can do anything, one Hebrew, who we'll get back to this in a second, who actually is able to be raised in a place where he has the resources and the connections and the training to be a leader, he screws up terribly. He screws up royally, we could say, by an intemperate act of killing an Egyptian man who infuriates. And we did read about that in the passage. And as a result, he alienates the Israelites that he's hoping to lead. And he puts himself in a position where Pharaoh hears about this and he has to run off into the desert in verse 15. So, he's completely out of position. He's completely cut off from the power. He can't do a thing. All of this chapter, things get worse and worse and worse. And what's so brilliant about it is the narrator hardly mentions God at all, which is very unusual. Two long chapters covering years and years and years of Israel's history. God is only mentioned for the first time in verse 17. And then he's mentioned in verse 20. And apart from that, he's not even mentioned. Now, here's what's brilliant about it. On the one hand, the narrator is conveying the natural sense we always have when things are getting worse and worse and worse that God is just not there. The narrator is conveying the natural human response. When things are getting worse and worse and terrible things are happening, we're saying, where is he? He seems to be absent. Surely, when the Egyptian troops rolled into the Hebrew towns and started putting chains on people and started beating and killing people that resisted, surely a lot of the Hebrews were saying, where is this God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Or where was he when they came to take us? Where was this God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob when they came in to take us? It's very similar to the question, where was God on September 11th, isn't it? When bad things happen, he seems absent. And the Exodus writer, the narrator, brilliantly gets that across, but he also brilliantly subverts. He subverts the idea that if bad things are happening, God must be uninvolved or remote or uncaring or incapable. Because if you read the whole chapter, you'll see, amazingly, in the long run, every bad thing is going to turn out for good. Everything Pharaoh does doesn't just backfire generally, but accomplishes exactly the opposite of what he wanted. You see in verse 20 that his persecution and enslaving of the children of Israel actually leads to acts of bravery and leads to greater cultural identity, greater sense of ethnic solidarity. Not only that, when he says, okay, then I'm going to kill all the male infants, one of the great ironies of the whole two chapters is only because Pharaoh tried to kill off all the male infants does Moses become exactly the training he needs to be a liberator. Finally, and only because Pharaoh trying to kill him, and therefore the efforts to try to rescue him. It's only because of the decree to kill all the male infants that we have one man, Moses, who is nursed and raised by his own mother for the early years of his life. Most commentators and people who understand the cultures of that time say he would have stayed with his own parents, his own mother, for three or four years. That's how long it would have meant that she took care of him as her nurse. So he would have had his own Hebrew cultural identity, but then he went off into . the best education in the land. He was trained to be a general. He was the ideal liberator created by the very decree designed to destroy the people. So on the one hand, every bad thing, in the long run, every bad thing that Pharaoh was doing is turning out for good. Secondly, even the stupidity of Moses. Moses very stupidly seems to have squandered his ability to be a leader, but it's because he goes out of the desert that he learns humility and he learns maturity. There's a place in the book of Numbers where it says, Moses was the humblest man on the face of the earth, and that was the missing ingredient that would never have been in his Egyptian training, his imperial training. The missing ingredient in his ability to be a leader. So even Moses' stupidity sows the seeds for greater wisdom. Pharaoh's oppression sows the seeds for greater liberation. But this happens over so many years that only you and I, from the standpoint of history, can see what God was doing. Let's apply this. What does this mean practically? Two things. This principle, number one, it means this. Now look, I'm going to say this respectfully, because surely you know that after the summer that I've had, we had a few what-are-you-doing-God days around my house. So I am not up here on a high horse scolding anybody, all right? But having said this, I respectfully would point this out. This text teaches us that when God seems the most hidden, he's not. When God seems absent, he's not. He's working for good, and he's working for justice behind the scenes of even the worst tragedies. He does not want anyone to suffer, the Bible says. He takes delight in the suffering of no one. And yet behind all the suffering and evil, he's working infallibly to bring about good and justice. And the reason we can't see it is we don't, is because our little spiritual pea brains don't have the ability to get the perspective. Chapters one and two cover years and years, more than a lifetime. And it's a way of the Exodus narrator saying is, in your own lifetime, you're not even going to be able to see why some of the things happened to you or happened to those around you that it did. But here's why I said, respectfully, when you're in trouble and God seems to have abandoned you, would you please unmask the logic of your heart? Because here's how your heart is reasoning. A, I can't see any good reason for this to have happened. B, therefore, there can't be any good reason. I can't see any good reason for this to have happened. Therefore, there can't be any good reason for this to happen. There's two problems with that. Number one, that is absolutely faulty logic, obviously, but number two, it's arrogant. When you freak out because you think God's just not there, he's uninvolved, he's remote, he's not working, there's a lot of arrogance in that freaking out. Can I say it with all due respect as someone who occasionally has freaked out recently? Even the wise cannot see all ends, so do not freak out. Now, there's one other thing quickly to say. If you are someone who would love an encounter with God, you're seeking God and you're afraid, maybe you don't seem to know how to get his attention, please don't be upset. Don't worry about that. Moses is being prepared in Exodus 3 to have a life-changing encounter with God in the burning bush. But God has actually been working in all of his difficulties to get him to that point. Why? God is absolutely sovereign. God gets everything done that he's going to plan. You cannot knock God off of his plan, but he works with us as subjects, not objects. He works with us as people, with a will. He works with us as people, with a psychology and a history. And therefore, he brings Moses along until, here's what I'm trying to say. He gets Moses in the desert. The desert represents hard times when all of our other sources of significance and security dry up. Do you notice how often in the Bible people meet God in the desert? If you're having trouble and you're trying to find God, don't worry. You wouldn't be seeking God unless God was seeking you. Don't be afraid that somehow I'm not going to be able to get his attention. You wouldn't be seeking him unless he was seeking you. He's preparing you for himself, even in the tough things, behind the scenes. So the second principle is salvation is we are prepared for it usually through God working behind the scenes through tough, difficult, bad circumstances. Now there's a third principle of salvation. Number one, we said salvation is rescue from the misery of putting anything more important in your life than God. Secondly, salvation usually you're prepared for it through God working behind the scenes through difficulties and problems. Thirdly, thirdly, through the strong and the powerful. The third thing we learn here is wonderful, but let me just put it to you like this. We see again something that's going to keep happening through Exodus, and we saw it all through Genesis. Those of you who have been with us over the last few years, we've gone through most of the book of Genesis, and that's this. God never works through insiders, only through outsiders. God works for and with the poor, the marginal, the excluded, and the oppressed. He works through weakness, not through power. He works through failure, in a way, not through achievement. Now, we see this all through the book of Genesis. Remember, Robert Alter, the great scholar of Hebrew literature, says the book of Genesis is absolutely subversive of the world cultures, because all the way through the book of Genesis, God always works with and for the wrong person. He always works with and for the second son, not the first son, in cultures in which the first son got everything. It was always Abel, not Cain. It was always Isaac, not Ishmael. It was Jacob, not Esau. Not only that, God always worked through the barren woman, the older woman, the unlovely or unloved woman. It's always Sarah, not Hagar. It's Leah, not Rachel. Over and over and over in the book of Genesis. Now, look what's going on. How does God save the people in chapter 1 and 2? All the heroes are female. There's only two males. One's wicked, one's stupid. All the heroes are females. And let me show you what kind of females. In chapter 1, the heroes are the two midwives. Up in verse 13, 14, they're given names, which is very significant. They're named Shipra and Pua. And the pharaoh comes and says, I want you to kill the children, the male children, you know, find ways of making them look like an accident and all that sort of thing, and they won't do it. Now, here's what we know about midwives. Cultural historians will tell us that midwives were usually women who did not have children of their own. Now, what's the significance of that? The significance of that is that this is in a culture in which women who did not have children were considered at very best useless and at worst probably cursed by the gods. And they were relegated to low social status. And it's probably who they were because notice, verse 20 tells us that God rewards them by giving them children, which means that they didn't have them. In other words, they were the way most midwives were. But get this, God saves the people through women who are lower status than men and midwives who are lower status than most women, who stood up courageously and obeyed God rather than men and did an act of creative social civil disobedience, an act of creative civil disobedience in the face of social injustice, stood up for God, stood up for the right, stood up for what was right and for God. God used them, the lowest of the low, social outsiders, gender outsiders, economic outsiders, to be the saviors of his people at that stage. But then you get a chapter two. We have, of course, Moses' mother, who, of course, in an act of wonderful creative civil disobedience in a way, you know, she has been commanded to throw her infant son on the river, so she does, just not quite exactly in the way that Pharaoh probably wanted her to do. And she puts her, this is brilliant and creative, but she puts him in a basket, of course, floating near the place where the Egyptian women bathed. And Pharaoh's daughter, and now this is what's amazing in chapter two, Pharaoh's daughter is a Gentile. Pharaoh's daughter is an outsider, a religious outsider, a racial outsider. But her compassion and her bravery, and it's a great risk, you know, to defy the decree of her father, saves the people. God uses a Gentile to save the people. God uses a woman. God uses the poor. God uses the excluded. God uses the racial, gender, social outsider. What does that mean? Two things quick. Number one, it means, if somebody, if there's anybody in this room, anybody hearing this sermon, all his life, her life has been said, you're a nobody, it doesn't matter. In fact, if you've been telling yourself all of your life, you're a nobody, it doesn't matter. If you're willing to put God first, if you're willing to put God first, it's interesting, and it's not an accident, that the king of Egypt is never given his, we're never given his name, by the way. All the commentators for 20, 200 years have been debating which king, which pharaoh is this. The king of Egypt, his name is never given, but the two wives, the two midwives, those poor, those marginal outsiders, their names are put in the text. Do you think that's an accident? So that, you know, to the end of time, everybody's going to know about them. They were nobodies. But see, the first thing we learn, who seeks it. But God especially likes to work with people who have been told all their lives they're nobodies or have been feeling all their lives they're nobodies. Isn't that incredible? But secondly, if you want a heart patterned after God's heart, you will care for the people without privileges and without power. People who have really had a deep experience of the grace of God always begin to start to have the same concern that God had for people without privileges and without power. And they work for them. And they seek to serve them. They seek to help them. They seek to do justice. And they seek to do compassion for people like that. Now, three principles. Got it? But I can't stop there. Here's why. I'll give you three principles from Moses. Anything but serving God is slavery. God is always at work, even in the hard times, so trust him. And you should really care for the people without privileges and power. You should care for them and work for them and be kind to them and so on. There they are. Should I finish the sermon right there? You know, my watch tells me that I'm a little rusty. And it is time to finish the sermon, but I can't quite. Because I'll tell you why. If I leave you only with the principles of Moses and not the person to whom Moses points, you will strangle yourselves with the principles. Now, this is very important. This is most important. Wake up now. I know it's early in the morning. If I only give you the principles of Moses and I don't show you the person to whom Moses points, you will strangle yourself with the principles. What do you mean the person to whom Moses points? Does this story sound familiar? The king decrees that all the male infants should be killed, yet a child is born who grows up and liberates the people. Does that sound familiar? Does that sound familiar? He is rejected by his own people, but he goes into the wilderness and he's anointed with a spirit and he returns to lead them out. Does that sound familiar? Does this sound familiar? He's under the sentence of death. He's under the sentence of condemnation and death. But the very sentence itself, through and because of that sentence of death, he is raised up to become the prince and liberator of his people. You say, well, you're stretching it. That's interesting, but you're stretching the analogy. No, I'm not. Because in Luke chapter 9, we're told that when Jesus Christ was transfigured on the mountain and his disciples saw him filled with glory, two people appeared, Elijah and Moses. And we're told in verse 31 of chapter 9 of Luke, it says, and they discussed with Jesus his departure, which he was about to fulfill in Jerusalem. Now, that little word, departure, is a weird word, and it's very difficult for any translator, English translator, to render properly because literally it says in the Greek, Moses and Jesus and Elijah were talking about his exodus. It's the Greek word exodus. Very, very unusual word to use. They were talking about Jesus' exodus that he was about to fulfill in Jerusalem. They were talking about his death as the exodus. Moses and Jesus were talking about his death as the exodus. What does that mean? It means just this, that Moses' exodus and liberation was great, but it was only a social and physical liberation for one people group. But Jesus is about to be the ultimate Moses, the ultimate mediator, the ultimate liberator, leading an exodus that will liberate from sin and death itself for all eternity, for all. Moses liberated at the risk of his life, but Jesus liberates at the cost of his life by dying on the cross. Now, unless you see Jesus Christ as the ultimate Moses, unless you see that his death on the cross is the ultimate liberation, those principles will strangle you. Let me show you real briefly, then I've got to finish. Number one, the first principle is that you'll be a slave unless you serve God. I'll tell you what you're going to do with that as a principle. You're going to say, okay, I'm going to be really good. I'm going to serve God. I'm going to come to church. I'm going to read my Bible. I'm going to obey the Ten Commandments. I'm really going to be good. And you know what you're doing? You're being your own Moses and your own mediator because you're trusting in the quality and commitment of your own service. But we read today, we read today before Philippians 2 that says what? It says, who being in the very nature of God made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant and humbled himself and became obedient even under the death of the cross. It's Jesus' service that saves you, not your service. And here's what's weird. You're going to stay a slave if you think the quality of your service is what will get you into heaven, or the quality of your service will be the source of your significance and security. I'm going to really serve now. If you see just the principles of Moses and you don't see the person who Moses pointed, you'll strangle yourself with the principle. It's only when you... because of Jesus' service, not my service. My service, the quality of it will never work. It'll never be enough. Trust in the ultimate act of servanthood. The night he said, I will be done and went to the cross. Trust in that rather than yourself. Now, the second principle, the second principle is God's at work behind the bad things. Without Jesus, without getting Jesus, the ultimate Moses, if you just have that as a principle, I want you to know that it won't be enough. It's too abstract. You'll be stoic. Bad things will happen to you, and you'll say, I know God's working in good somehow. I don't see what it is, but I'm going to trust. It's too abstract. It's too stoic. What you need to see, Jesus Christ on the cross, the ultimate place where the very, very, very worst turned out for the very best. The ultimate place where God seemed to be absolutely absent, totally absent. My God, my God, why has that forsaken me? And yet in it, God was doing the ultimate, the best thing he could possibly do for anybody. Only when I see Jesus on the cross dying for me that I see that he's really been involved with my suffering and evil here. Instead of a principle, I need a person. Instead of a principle, I need a person. And lastly, it's great to work for social justice, but I'll tell you something. Without Jesus in the end, you're going to get very tired or you're going to get coercive and just start to get violent. The reason a Christian can work for social justice there is, Jesus shows me the reason why God loves the powerless. Jesus' salvation was accomplished by Jesus letting go of power, sacrificing himself, dying on the cross, not by triumphing. And Jesus Christ's salvation is brought into your life, not by saying, I'm strong, Lord, take me in, but I'm weak, Lord, I need your grace. And it's only when you get that upside-down whole approach. In religion, you come to God and you say, you know, accept me, Jesus, because, Father, because I've been very good. In Christianity, you come and say, Father, accept me because of what Jesus has done. I'm a mess. I'm a failure. When that has happened to you, when you realize you're loved though you're a sinner, then and only then will you move out and help the other powerless and unprivileged people in the world in a right way. You won't be paternalistic. You won't look down your nose at them. And you won't give up because you know there's a new world coming. Because you know eventually justice is going to happen. Because you know eventually it will win. Only if you see the person to whom Moses points will the principles of Moses that Moses teaches you not strangle you. In Jesus Christ, you can really serve him and be free. In Jesus Christ, you can really trust him no matter how bad things are. In Jesus Christ, you can really and absolutely truly work for justice in this world with hope, with humility, with confidence. Look to the one Moses points. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us time to consider this long passage and introduce us to these great themes. We pray that you would show us more clearly each week what does it mean that we can be saved from sin through these vivid narratives in the book of Exodus that point us to your Son, Jesus Christ, in whose name we pray. Amen. Amen.
