TITLE: Problem of Meaning: Is There Any Reason for Existence?
SCRIPTURE: Ecclesiastes 1:1-18
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Ecclesiastes
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/problem-of-meaning-is-there-any-reason-for-existence/

============================================================

Ecclesiastes verses 1 through 18. The words of the teacher, son of David, king in Jerusalem. Meaningless, meaningless, says the teacher, utterly meaningless. Everything is meaningless. What does man gain from all his labor at which he toils under the sun? Generations come and generations go, but the earth remains forever. The sun rises and the sun sets and hurries back to where it rises. The wind blows to the south and turns to the north. Round and round it goes, ever returning on its course. All streams flow into the sea, yet the sea is never full. To the place the streams come from, they return again. All things are wearisome, more than one can say. The eye never has enough of seeing, nor the ear it's a fill of hearing. What has been will be again. What has been done will be done again. Nothing is new under the sun. Is there anything of which one can say, look, this is something new. It was here already long ago. It was here before our time. There is no remembrance of men of old, and even those who are yet to come will not be remembered by those who follow. I, the teacher, was king over Israel and Jerusalem. I devoted myself to study and to explore by wisdom all that is done under heaven. What a heavy burden God has laid upon men. I have seen all the things that are done under the sun. All of them are meaningless. A chasing after the wind. What is twisted cannot be straightened. What is lacking cannot be counted. I thought to myself, look, I have grown and increased in wisdom more than anyone who has ruled over Jerusalem before me. I have experienced much of wisdom and knowledge. Then I applied myself to the understanding of wisdom and also of madness and folly, but I learned that this, too, was a chasing after the wind. For with much wisdom comes much sorrow, and the more knowledge, the more grief. Kind of goes along with the weather, doesn't it, today? Why, many people ask, is this book in the Bible? And if it is in the Bible, why can't we avoid it? Why do you bring it to us? The reason the book seems strange is because when you go into most of the books of the Bible, there's a sense in which you hear preaching. I'm a preacher. That means, as you will see, I have got to provide answers. And in the old King James version of the Bible, it's the authorized edition, the Bible translation that was produced in the 17th century and is still very popular, this author, the author of this book, is called the preacher. Now, that's a mistake, because if this guy is a preacher, he is a complete failure. However, the translation that I read from is more accurate, it's still not the best one, because it calls him a teacher. The Hebrew word that he uses for himself is koheleth, and the best translation is probably the philosophy professor. This person is not a teacher in the sense of being a lecturer. If you want to understand this book, you have to realize this man is a teacher in the sense of being a seminar leader, because his approach to teaching is that of the one who asks questions. His approach is the Socratic dialogue. He is a discussion leader, and the book of Ecclesiastes will only be understandable if you realize that it's a book of questions, not answers. It's his job, like any good seminar leader, not to give you the answers, but to ask you questions and to push you and to push you to find the answers. There's a sense in which the book of Ecclesiastes ought to be first. I mean, if you really want to be fair, you should take the book out and bind it in the Bible and make it first. Why? Because have you ever found a book that starts out with discussion questions? Questions to goad you, questions to make you think, questions to prepare you for the book? Ecclesiastes is not the place we find answers. It's the rest of the Bible we find answers. This man's job is to push you to the logical conclusion of your position. This man's job is to lay bare the foundations of your life. thought, to say, why do you believe that? Why do you believe that? And if you believe that, do you see what that leads to? Do you see what that leads to? Push you, because he knows that none of us have got, as I'll try to show you, the spiritual or the intellectual guts to really look and ask the question, why, why, why, about everything we do and everything we believe. See, his job is the job of the Socratic dialogue. His job is to ask questions. And so each week, over the next six weeks, I think I've forgotten, Jeff Scott and I are going to take you through the book of Ecclesiastes, not over a period of a year like we did with the book of John, because most of you couldn't last that long emotionally through the book of Ecclesiastes, we don't think. But rather, over the next six weeks or so, we're going to take one of these great questions. See, Quoheleth, the teacher, the philosophy professor, brings you the questions that philosophers have wrestled with for ages. It's the most contemporary possible book. He brings it, and he pushes you with it, and he shows us what questions we've got to ask the rest of Scripture so that we can understand the beauty and the power of the Christian message. Here's the question I'd like you to see today. In many ways, it's probably the controlling question of the whole book, though as we go through, you'll see there's other questions. And it's in verse 3. What does man gain from all his labor at which he toils under the sun? Now, that question, every phrase in that question is critical. The philosophy professor says, and you're all laughing, it was so bleak. The philosophy professor says at the end of the chapter, the more you experience life, the more you accomplish in life, the more you know about life, the more nauseated you get. That's why he just laughed at the end when he said, the more knowledge, the more grief. The more I saw, the more I experienced, the more I accomplished, the more sick I got in my heart about life. Now, not everybody gets sick about life who's accomplishing many things. If you stay busy enough, if you stay caught up enough in the day-to-day whirlwind, you can keep from that nausea. What the teacher is telling us is the people who really get nauseated about life are not necessarily just the people who accomplish things, the people who experience a lot, but the people who think about it. The people who reflect, the people who ask questions, and the question that will lead you to the abyss, the question that will beggar your mind, the question that will push you to the foundations of your life and to the boundaries of your thought is the question, what gain do you have to show for all your toil under the sun? Now, friends, this word gain is a unique word in the Bible, but it's used throughout Ecclesiastes. It's used ten times. And it's a word that means leftover, and it's a word that means profit. See, profit is what is of permanent value left after you've done everything, after you've done your effort, and after you've started your business, and after you've paid all your debts, and you've done the whole thing, and it's all over, what have you got to show for it? What is left over? What of permanent value? And the philosophy professor asks this question in verse 3, you're very busy. You're very busy. You're working so hard. When it's all said and done, what will you have to show for it? What is your life for? What is your life accomplishing? What difference are you making? Now, do you see how relentless this is? Suppose somebody came up to you and said, I would like you to go this Tuesday to 46th and Park Avenue, and from 3 to 5 p.m. I'd like you to stand on the corner. Suppose a friend of yours came to you and said that. You would say, well, why? And they would say, what do you need to know that for? I asked you, go to 46th and Park and stand on the corner from 3 to 5, and you'll say, I'm sorry, you're my friend, but I need to know why. I want to know why. What will it accomplish? What gain will there be to anybody? What purpose is there? See, that's natural. And the philosopher says, you will ask a question like that about how you spend your Tuesday afternoon, but will you ask a question about that, like that? Thank you. question? What is your life about? How do you know your life is not a waste? What will you actually accomplish with your life? And if you're not asking that question, you're really not living thoughtfully. You're not living as a human being, you're living as an animal. You're going on instinct. And what's interesting about this text is that question, which is such an impolite question and such a difficult question and a question that really pushes you to the foundation, that he actually anticipates the stock answers. And like a good seminar teacher, like a good philosophy professor, he anticipates those stock answers and he throws them to the ground. And I wish I had the time, I don't exactly, but I'd like to briefly outline those three stock answers that he destroys in this chapter, but also in the rest of the book. And since this is a philosophy classroom that we're in here, and because this is a philosophy teacher, I'd like to point out that he's actually dealing with three very common philosophical schools. He's dealing with the questions here of the humanist, and pardon me, the answers of the humanist, the answer of the hedonist, and the answer of the existentialist. Three stock answers. What do you hope to show for your life? What is your life about? What are you really accomplishing? What does your life mean? The first stock answer is the humanistic answer, and that is, I'm here to make the world a better place. The second answer is the hedonistic answer, and that is, well, you know, life is pretty meaningless, but the only way you get meaning is to find the day-in and day-out pleasures of life and work. And the third answer is, life is meaningless, and so you have to defy the senselessness of the universe by living a life of courage and morality in the face and the teeth of the cruelty of life. That's the existentialist approach. These are three answers that the 20th century has given to the question, what is the meaning of life? Look at the three, quick. The first one is the most typical. What are you really accomplishing in life? And the answer is, ah, well, one hopes that when it's all said and done, we've made the world a better place to live, that we've improved life for the rest of humanity. You know, many funerals, that's the sort of thing you hear. Ah, this beloved person made the world a better place. His life, her life wasn't really meaningless. Oh, no, but our lives were enriched. The world was enriched. Human, the quality of life in the world has been improved by this person's life, and therefore this person did not live or die in vain. The philosophy professor shows that that is utter nonsense. There is no way that you can make a difference in the world with your life. None. First of all, he points out that when it comes to human history, your life is insignificant. See, in verse 11 he says, There is no remembrance of men of old, and even those who are yet to come will not be remembered by those who follow. How much do you remember about your own great-great-grandparents? How much do you even remember about them? And they're your own great-great-grandparents. You know the place in Les Mis, where the young college students are about to die on the barricade, fighting for righteousness, fighting against oppression, and they realize they're going to die, and one guy starts singing, Will there be anyone to remember me when I fall? Could it be my life means nothing at all? Is my life just one more life? Am I just one more life? What's the philosophy professor say? Absolutely. He says, Any other answer is sheer romanticism. Nobody's going to remember you in 40 years, unless you leave $4 million to your alma mater, and they put a plaque up, and then in 400 years nobody will remember you. What's the difference? Or maybe you rule the world. Okay, in 4,000 years nobody will remember you. Some archaeologist will just kind of infer your existence from the evidence. But he gets even more devastating than that. Not only don't you really make a difference in human history, but he even suggests, in the most amazingly modern approach, that when it comes to natural history, your life is insignificant. He says in verse 4, Generations come and generations go, but the earth endures forever. And even though Ecclesiastes, the teacher, is writing in a pre-scientific era, he makes the most scientific of statements here. Any scientist will tell you that, it lasts a billion years, is no more than a flash in the pan in comparison with the full history and life of the universe. Now here, the key phrase that you must understand in order to understand this book is the term that comes up again and again and again, under the sun. This is the key to understanding the approach of the philosopher. So listen, what gain have you got for your toil under the sun? See, under the sun is the philosopher's way of talking about not that which is above the sun, not heaven, not God. God, let's assume for a moment that nature is all there is. Let's assume that the only life is the life under the sun. Now that's a very modern approach, by the way, because most people think it's uneducated to assume anything else. In our modern culture, religion is a subjective thing. We can't really know if there is a God. Some people feel there is. That's fine. Everybody has a right to religion. It's a subjective, private thing. But the fact is that nobody can be sure about it, God. And all we've got is the now, the under the sun. Okay, the philosopher says, let's assume that's all we got. Let's assume that there's nothing but nature. In that case, all of the history of organic life on this planet, even if it's a billion years long, is like a flash in the pan. And when it's gone, it's gone utterly, and nothing, nothing you've ever done, nothing anyone's ever done makes any difference at all in the final analysis. There's no gain. There's no profit. Imagine somebody comes up to the philosophy professor and says, you know, the real question, the real question confronting human beings today is will the governments of the earth do something about the disastrous environmental catastrophe that our human society is about to inflict upon itself because we are destroying the environment. And unless we do something, the earth might become uninhabitable. And civilization itself might be in jeopardy. What would the philosophy professor say? He would say, you're kidding, right? The real question couldn't be whether or not we can save civilization. Civilization is doomed. You see, inevitably, inevitably, the planet dies. Solar systems die. You know, the universe goes on. Planets come and they go. What you're really asking, the philosophy professor says, is if by our stupidity we might hurry up the inevitable extinction of our civilization a bit, you know, if you're on a ship and it's going down and everybody's about to be drowned and there's no hope of being saved, no hope of rescue, and the captain comes running out and says, oh my word, the boiler is about to explode and if it explodes we'll probably sink two minutes sooner. What do you say? What a tragedy. No, what do you say? And somebody says, let's get in there. We've got to stop the boiler from stopping. It'll be the end of the ship. You say, what do you mean it's going to be the end of the ship? The ship's on its way down anyway. How much of a tragedy can it be? And the philosopher says, you know, the real question of the age is not whether or not we can do something to stop nuclear holocaust. The real question of the age is not whether we can do something to stop environmental disaster. The real question of the age is, is life under the sun all there is? Because if it is all there is, then nothing you do will mean anything. Whether you live a life of violence and oppression and racism and genocide, or whether you live a life of humanitarian concern and compassion, in the end, will mean nothing. It will make no difference. Everything will be over. There's no gain. Everything will end in nothing. Futility, futility, all is futility, if life under the sun is all there is. And I just hope that I'll make the world a better place to live. The philosopher says, give me a break. He says, if life under the sun is all there is, if there is no God who created you, and if there is no God sustaining the universe, if there's no eternity, there's no afterlife, there is no way you can make a dent. You're like a footprint on the sand right at the ocean edge. You know, you put your foot into the sand, you make a footprint, you lift your foot out, and immediately it fills up. And it's gone. The philosopher says, you hardly exist. Well, somebody says, oh. All right. Well then, what is the meaning of my life? I think, says Woody Allen, at the end of... approach instead of the humanistic approach. He says, you're right, you're right. If you think about the big questions, you think about what does life mean, there are no answers. He says at the end of the movie, all you can do, all you can hope for, for meaning in life, is simply to enjoy the pleasures of the day. Now, he's not a crass-head in this. He says, enjoy creativity. Write a poem. Hug a child. Take a ride in the boat on the lake. Enjoy your family. Enjoy your work. That's all you can do. Don't look at the big picture. Don't ask, what does life mean? Because we can't answer that. Just enjoy family and work and the pleasures of life. But the philosopher will not let you stick with that. He says in verse 8, all things are wearisome. The eye has never got enough of seeing. The ear has never enough of hearing. In verses 12 to 16, he says, I was king over Jerusalem. I devoted myself. I saw it all. I accomplished it all. I had all the pleasure I wanted. I had all the accomplishment I wanted. And it was all a chasing after the wind. Here's the point. There's a great place where C.S. Lewis, in one of his essays, it confronts this idea of hedonism. It says, you know, all we have is life under the sun. Which means we really don't know that there's any meaning in life. We weren't put here for a purpose. We're the accidental, we are the result of an accidental collision of molecules. As Jacques Manot said, who was a Pulitzer Prize winning biologist, a French biologist, he says, you know why we exist? Our number came up like in a Monte Carlo game. It says, we won in the crapshoot. We are accidentally created by the universe to be conscious of the fact that we're accidents. Basically, he says, we're grown-up germs. Because, you see, if life under the sun is all the life there is, that is the meaning of life. C.S. Lewis responds to that, and responds to people who says, therefore, all you can do is sort of live your life day in and day out. Hug a child, fall in love with a girl, write a piece of music. And he says, the only trouble with that is that that is a philosophy that says the only way you can possibly enjoy your life from day to day is to forcibly keep yourself from thinking. It's basically the approach of the ostrich to the fact that the wolf is about to eat it. What does the ostrich do? Head in the sand. I'm safe. And C.S. Lewis, in this little essay, goes on and he says, you know, I'm starting to fall in love with a girl, but then occasionally it occurs to me that there is no such thing as love and that this thing I'm feeling for her is just a kind of psychic phosphorescence arising out of my genes. He says, when I'm reading a book and I'm starting to feel noble, I love the book I'm reading and I'm starting to get these noble feelings, then I realize that, you see, if life under the sun is all there is, then all what I consider thoughts are basically just an electrochemical field of interchanges happening in my brain. I hug a child and I begin to realize the child is just an accidental collision of molecules and my feelings for it is just a kind of electrochemical responses inside my nerves. When I hear a piece of music, I realize that ultimately any distinction between beauty and ugliness is really an illusion. The idea that some things are noble and good and other things are ugly is just my projection of these categories on a senseless universe and random universe and therefore the only reason I like this music is just my nervous system is conditioned to respond to this particular set of sounds. There's no difference between cacophony and there's no difference between noise and music and Lewis finally says, the only way that I can enjoy music, I can fall in love with a girl, I can hug a child and enjoy it, is if I continually, continually stop thinking about reality. And so at one point he says, if this life is all there is, if there's no God, if there's no spirit world, if there's no soul, if there's no eternity, if there's nothing else but life under the sun, he says, quote, you may still, in the lowest sense, have a good time, but just in so far as it becomes very good, just in so far as it ever threatens these pleasures, if it ever threatens to push you on from cold and pure sensuality into real warmth, real enthusiasm, and real joy, to that extent, you will be forced to feel the hopeless disharmony between your own emotions and the universe in which you live. In other words, how can I enjoy hugging this child when the reality keeps breaking through? How can I enjoy... this is meaningless. That nothing means anything. Hedonism isn't a bad try. If you can really, really, really continually kill your humanity by refusing to think. And the third stock answer, we said there's humanism that says, oh, I'm here to make the world a better place, which is silly, says the philosopher. Oh, I'm here to kind of enjoy myself, which is silly, says the philosopher. The eye is never satisfied with seeing nor the ear of hearing. And then lastly, you have the most heroic and noble of all the answers of the 20th century to the question, what does your life mean? The existentialists, the Camus, the Sartres, you know what they used to say? They used to say, you know what? You're right. Life is meaningless. But let the world be senseless. I will not be. Let the world be merciless. I will not be. My life is meaningless, but I'm going to be humanitarian in the face of it anyway. That's authentic human existence. Even though the world will win, I will be noble, I will be compassionate, I will work for justice, and go down to a never-ending defeat. And that sounds wonderful. You know, it was an interesting group of people in the 50s, 60s, and 70s who developed this idea that the meaning of life was to admit that life was meaningless and to still lead a life of courage and commitment and integrity in spite of it. In other words, life was cruel and senseless, but I wasn't going to live that way. A man named R.D. Lange decided that that meant, since life, reality, was cruel and senseless, that if I was going to live a human, compassionate life, I had to be out of touch with reality, and therefore, by definition, really compassionate human beings are insane. Albert Camus said, what it means to live an authentic life is to live a life of absurdity. Right here on Broadway, you've got it, in Man of La Mancha, an existentialist manifesto. You see, the main character, the whole plot revolves around the fact that the main character has discovered that there are no knights, that there is no right that always triumphs. There are no knights of the round table, you see, there is no nobility anymore. There is no chivalry, so what does he do? He decides he's going to live as if those things are true anyway. And the debate around the man, by all the different characters are, is this man insane or not? And one person says, of course he's insane. There is no such thing as idealism. There is no such thing as chivalry and knights and right-making, always triumphing. He's insane. And the man says, yes, I am insane. That's how I find meaning in life. I rebel against the insanity of the world. I spit in the eye of the cruelty and senselessness of life. Gosh, that sounds so noble. The only problem is, where do you get this standard? Where do you get this standard of justice and of common sense and of decency by which you discern that the universe is cockeyed? Where do you get the idea of a straight line by which you can tell me that the universe is crooked? Where do you get that idea? You get it out of your brain, don't you? And your brain, remember what that is? Just an electrochemical field. How in the world can you pull from where? Where do you get a standard by which to judge the universe when there's nothing but life under the sun? And you see, the philosopher comes very close, very close to the modern mindset when he says up here in verse 17, I applied myself to the understanding of wisdom and also I studied madness and folly. But I learned that this too is a chafesting after the wind. You know what he says? He says, I tried wisdom and I even tried being crazy. Not being crazy as a frolic, not like Animal House, but being crazy as a studied and as an intentional rebellion against the senselessness of existence. He says, you know what? That didn't find me meaning either. How could it? Where do you get this standard? How dare you say heaven is unfair unless you appeal to a standard of fairness in some higher heaven still? And how do you know that there is such a thing? Do you see what the philosopher is doing? Bottom line, final point. The philosopher is pushing and pushing and pushing you to show that there's no... a life above the heaven, either there's a God who created you, and a God who sustains you, and a God who will judge you, and there's an afterlife, an eternity, either there's a God, or else everything is utter futility, and there's nothing in the middle. There is nothing, listen, how could it possibly fit? How could this modern secular mindset work that says, yes, there is no God, yes, we're accidents, and yes, eventually we're going to annihilation? In other words, my origin is insignificant, my destiny is insignificant, but while we're here, we've got to work for human rights. Every human being is valuable, we have to work for human dignity, and we have to work for equal rights and for justice for all. Come on! And people think Christians, people think Christians are people who are naive. Are you kidding me? Look at the faith it takes, listen, if my origin is insignificant, and my destiny is insignificant, have the guts to admit that your life is insignificant. Do you see the utter opposition of the alternatives? Either there's life above the sun, and there's meaning, or there's no life except that which is under the sun, and nothing means anything. Application. Application. What does this mean for us? It pushes and pushes and pushes us, and shows that you just can't do what most everybody does. Either you're sold out for him, either you know him, either you're sure there's a God and you know he's in your life, or everything is hopeless. Maybe you don't like what the philosophy professor does, that's his job. Maybe you think that he's extreme. Hey, good teachers always get your goat. Listen to him. Now the real answer that the Koheleth really points to is not found in the book of Ecclesiastes. That's not his job. He's a discussion guide for the Bible. He's a small group leader's guide. It's not his job to give you the answers, it's his job to give you the questions. The answer, the gorgeous answer, is found in the passage that Jeff read earlier. John chapter 1, verses 1 to 14. John chapter 1 is also cast in the philosophical framework. In John chapter 1, verse 1, John tells us, In the beginning was the Logos, and he was with God, and he came to earth, and we beheld his glory. What is the Logos? I know in your English translation it says, in the beginning was the word. Well, what's the Logos? Here's what the Logos is. The Greek philosophers used to get together and say, if we could just find the Logos of life, then things will be fine. The Logos meant the reason for life. And they argued, what was the reason for life? You see, if you came into my apartment, and you saw me trying to make popcorn, and I said, you know, this popcorn popper just doesn't work. The popcorn is always soggy, and it just always smells bad, and it feels like it's burning out. I don't know, everything's wrong. You walk in, and you see it's an espresso machine. And you say, I can tell you exactly why the popcorn comes out so soggy, and I can tell you why it seems like you're breaking the machine. It wasn't built for this. It wasn't built to make popcorn. It was built to make espresso. You're not using it in accord with its Logos. You're not using it in accord with its reason for existence. You're not using it in accord with its design. And that's the reason it's breaking, and that's the reason why you haven't realized its potential. Well, see, the Greek philosophers said, it's true that when you look at anything that's been built by somebody, any machine, you've got to realize, you've got to find out what the original reason for the Logos of the machine was, in the design and intent of the Creator, and all you have to do is find out what that Logos is, and then use it in accord with the Logos, and you'll realize its potential, and you will avoid breakdown. So he said, if we could just find the Logos of life, if we could just find out what life was for, what we're for, and then we could bring our lives in conformity with it, what potential we would experience, and all the breakdowns in our lives would go away. But for years, the philosophy schools argued, what is the meaning of life? Is it to live for your parents and honor them? That's what Confucius said. Is it to make the world a better place? who tried their various solutions found that when they brought their lives into accord with it, it didn't transform them. And by the time Jesus came along, there was tremendous skepticism and despair amongst the philosophers of the Greek and Roman Empire. And they said, there is no Logos. There is no meaning in life. And then John comes along and drops the bombshell of the ages, and he says, guess what? There is a Logos to life, but it's not a truth brought by a person. It's a truth that is a person. The Logos is not an abstract principle. The Logos is not a theorem. The Logos is not something you can find in a book. The Logos is a human being. God come to earth. The Logos became flesh and tabernacled amongst us, and we beheld his glory. And when you know this one, and when you behold his glory, and when you serve this one, and when you worship this one, you find your reason for life. And instead of everything becoming futility, everything becomes utility. The opposite of futility is utility. Instead of nothing meaning anything, now everything means everything. You know what it means to be a Christian? It means to know that everything in this life is just a reflection of the truth of God's nature. I know the reason that there's spring after winter. I know the reason that a seed, when it dies, brings up a flower. Because that tells me something about ultimate reality. That God brings life out of death. I know when I talk to somebody on a subway, I could turn them toward God so that if that person makes a decision to move toward God, that conversation on the subway could be something that has this for a gain, this for a profit, three billion years from now. That person and I could be sitting around the throne laughing and saying, Remember, that conversation in the subway, right now counts forever. Everything means everything, or else nothing means anything. Those are the two poles. If Jesus is the Logos, if everything that you do during the day is connected to him, don't you see, everything means everything. The baby is crying at 4 a.m. You get up. You get your hands full of all that stuff. Now, there's two ways to look at it. You can say, this child is just the chance pattern of matter that is the result of a chance collision of molecules. This child eventually will die and rot, probably after I've died and rot, and no one will remember it, and nothing this child ever does, and nothing I ever do, will come to anything. Or else, this child is in the image of God. This child is an immortal soul. This child, if he or she turns to the Lord, he or she and I will sit around the throne three billion years from now, laughing and loving, and in each other's arms, and casting our crowns before us, before him, lost in wonder, love, and praise. Everything means everything. When I clean up my house, it's not because I have an electrochemical need in my brain for order, it's because I'm made in the image of a God who brings order out of chaos. Everything means everything. If Jesus is your Logos, you've got splendor in the ordinary, and every bit of your life, even the smallest details of the humdrum of life, is shot through with glory. Either nothing means anything, or everything means everything, and there's nowhere in the middle. Conclusion? Some of you are secularists. Some of you don't know whether you believe in God or not, and yet you still want to believe that you can trust your thoughts. You still want to believe that good deeds make a difference. You still want to believe there is such a thing as right and wrong and oppression and cruelty and compassion, but you have no basis for any of those distinctions. You're living as if there is a God. You know why? You have to, because Romans chapter 1 tells us you know there's a God, even if you won't admit Him. So you're using Him. You're living off of His capital, without acknowledging His lordship. There's not a person in this room, there's not a person on the face of the earth that can really live as if everything is meaningless. Nobody in this room can live really as if there is no God, because you know He's there in your heart of heart and your self of selves. So turn to Him. Stop using Him. Start to think. Start to read the scripture. Talk to other Christians. Don't you see that the more you think, the closer you will come to Him? That's the message of Ecclesiastes. And Christian friends? God, but you're not really basing your life on the real Logos. See, the Logos is not an abstract principle. It's not enough for you to intellectually believe in Jesus. You've got to know him as a person. The message of the Bible is that the Logos, the meaning of life, is a person that you have to know in relationship and commitment. So I want to ask you, if there's anybody here who says, I'm a Christian, I believe, but you're not active in Christian fellowship, your prayer life is nowhere, you're not making Jesus the highest priority of your life, then intellectually you say Jesus is the reason for life, but actually in day-to-day life you're building yourself, you're creating little Logoses. You're building your life on your career, on your looks, or on relationships, or on some hopes and dreams, and they will let you down. None of them are great enough to bear up the greatness of your soul. You were created for him, and for him alone. It's not enough just to believe in him in general. You've got to commit yourself to him totally. And then you will find that this life is not a jumble, a phenomenon. A phenomenon. Instead, this life is an outline of the glory that you came from and that you're bound to. If you say, listen friends, let's just close with this prayer. Say to him when we pray, Father, Lord, Jesus, when I live for myself, I lose myself. When I live for the now, I lose the now. But when I live for you, I find myself, and when I live for eternity, I get the now. A now shot through with glory. If you live for life under the sun, you'll lose life. If you live as if life under the sun is just part of a universe shot through with the glory of God, you will find your meaning. You will find yourself. You will find your father. You will find your brother. You will find him. Let's pray. Our Father, as we take up the offering, we want to offer ourselves to you. I pray that people who might be present here who have never seen the practical and logical implications of their positions would be driven to grab hold of you and to admit that they do know you, to admit that they do know that you're there. But I pray, Father, for everyone in this room that they might not just know about you and use you as some kind of abstract theorem, but see that the only way they can have meaning in life is to behold your glory and to give themselves to you utterly. We ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
