TITLE: Problem of Ethics: How Do We Know Right from Wrong?
SCRIPTURE: Ecclesiastes 6:12, 12:13
TOPICS: Restoration God the Father
SERIES: Ecclesiastes
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/problem-of-ethics-how-do-we-know-right-from-wrong/

============================================================

I've been looking at the book of Ecclesiastes for a number of weeks, and today we're going to talk about, see what the book teaches about the issue of ethics and values. And I'm going to exercise my pastoral executive privilege by not reading any more than just two verses out of this book to set us up for the Lord's Supper so we can focus. Marcus, I'm going to read a place where, one verse where the author, we call him the Koheleth, we call him the Professor, where the author says what the main problem is surrounding the issue of values and ethics, and then the second verse in which it gives the solution, problem-solution. Chapter 6, verse 12. Chapter 12, verse 13. First, the author says, chapter 6, verse 12, For who knows what is good for a man in life during the few and meaningless days he passes through like a shadow, who can tell him what will happen under the sun when he is gone? Who knows what is good for a man under the sun? Then chapter 12, verse 13. Now all has been heard. Here is the conclusion of the matter. Fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. Fear God and keep his commandments. Two tremendously profound verses. Let's look at the subject. What's the difference between a placebo and medicine? A placebo is effective because it's believed in. Medicine is believed in because it's effective. A placebo has no real power over the physical universe and therefore must be believed in to help. Medicine has real power over the physical universe and will help you whether it's believed in or not. Now, for years, up until the modern times, though there's been lots of fighting and disagreements over the years about which religion and which philosophy is right, all people believed that there was both a spiritual realm and a physical realm, that there was both a spiritual universe and a physical universe, or that there was a universe but it had two sides to it, and that one was as real as the other. Therefore, under that understanding, all people believed, though they differed on what religion was true, they believed that if a religion was true, then it squared with it was true to that spiritual universe, so that if you embrace the true religion, you would prosper just as medicine squares you with the rules of the physical universe. So, true religion would square you with the rules of the spiritual. And they also believed that false religion would destroy you. Why? Because if a false religion, if a religion was not true to the reality of the spiritual universe, then you would be put at odds with the fabric of it and you would be destroyed just as poison brings you at odds with the rules of your body and of the physical universe. Therefore, some religions are medicine and some religions are poison, but none of them are placebos. You see, the old understanding was that religion was believed because it was true. It wasn't true because it was believed, or a religion was helpful because it was true, not true because it's helpful. That's the way people used to believe, but not today. Today, in this country, 98% of people believe in God, and yet I'd like to show you right now that they believe in God in a completely, a radically different way, a radically different way. Listen, most of the people, we know from polls and so forth, and from research, most of the people in this country, most of the people in Western countries who believe in God say this, it is tremendously narrow-minded for one religion to say it's the right one. It's tremendously narrow-minded for us to say that you have to believe this religion and not these. The vast majority say it's tremendously narrow-minded to say that, and the vast majority believe that any religion, practically, will help you and is good for you if you believe it sincerely. That sounds very open-minded. What I'm trying to show you is, in other words, modern people who believe in God don't believe religion is true, because, you see, it would be ridiculous for anyone to say, They say, what they have to be, hey, they do a video, sorry, different things, and it is So I'm going to comment to somebody's dialogue you is, in other words, modern people who believe in God don't believe religion is true. Because, you see, it would be ridiculous for anyone to say, all drugs, any chemical substance you take into your body will be fine if you believe in it. You know why you'd never say that? Because you believe the physical world, life under the sun, is real. And because it's real, you've got to submit to it. You can't just live in it any old way you believe. You've got to submit to it. You've got to square with it, because it's real. And if you believe that all religions are relative, what you're really saying is, I don't believe the spiritual realm, life above the sun, heaven, God, eternity, it's real. You don't believe it's real. That's a radically different understanding of reality than our ancestors had. Our ancestors said, religion is medicine or poison. It's not a placebo. Religion is believed because it's true. It's not true because it's believed. It's helpful because it's true. It's not true because it's helpful. But modern people say, look, a religion is good for you if it helps you. In other words, religion is not true. In other words, the spiritual universe doesn't really exist. It's not true in the sense that you mean by the word true, that you have to submit to it and square with it. In other words, modern people are secularized. And the word secular secular, and secularism comes from a Latin word, seculum, which means the now, or a piece of time. It's timeism. It's nowism. It's the understanding that this life under the sun, this nature, this history, this world and this life is the only life that's real, the only life we can know about, the only life that counts, the only life that's true. If you believe in God and religion, that's fine for you, but this is the only part that's true. The purpose of this book of Ecclesiastes, that we've been looking at for a number of weeks, the purpose of the author is to show you that if this life is all there is, if life under the sun is all there is, if you're a secular person, not only is your view of life nonsense intellectually, he says, but it sets up strains in the fabric of life that lead to breakdown. The whole purpose of this book is to show that that view, that the only reality is actually the physical, the material, that that view not only is intellectual nonsense and absurd, but also if a society believes it, it sets up strains that lead to breakdown in it. If a person believes it, it sets up individual and personal strains that lead to breakdown. That's his point. And he's trying to say, or we've been trying to look at it every week and say how the author shows in every different area how this view of bracketing out God, of saying, well, I don't know if I believe in God or I don't know that we can know about it, what that does to you and what that does to society. Today, we're looking at a subject the author surfaces, the area of values and ethics. What he's saying here, especially as I'm going to show you in chapter 6, verse 12, he says, is if you believe that this life is all there is, there is no basis for values. There's no basis at all. It sets up strains in your heart and in society that will lead to destruction. That's the problem, but then he says there's a solution. So let's look at the problem and the solution. The problem is chapter 6, verse 12. He says, if this life under the sun is all there is and therefore is meaningless, who's to say what is good? Who's to say what is valuable? Who's to say what is right and wrong? Do I have to show you the culture of the crisis we've got in our society about ethics and values? Just for a minute, let me point something out. Up until recent modern times, there's always been debates about what is right and what is wrong. There's always been debates about ethics. What is honesty? What is sexual integrity? How should the sexes treat each other? How should the races treat each other? And you see, different religions and different philosophies have different understandings and there's always been struggle and conflict and even wars over it. But all, all, all, up until modern times, all people believed that there was a real physical world and a real spiritual world and the values in this world have to be based on the values of the eternal world. In other words, we've got to find out what God thinks if we're going to find out what is right and wrong for human beings. In Washington, D.C., there's the Bureau of Standards. And in the Bureau of Standards, there's a room. And in that room, climate controlled, you will find the pound, the foot, the inch, the yard. Why? Here's why. Because every ruler and every scale in the country is a little different from every other one. None of them are exact. And if there would, if there would, all measures, there would be no way ever to figure out error. No way. Because every scale and every ruler would have the right to say, hey, I have as much right to claim to be the standard as you. And there would be no way of judging error. And as a result of that, you see, we have a way of judging error. Now, spiritually, through the ages, the religions differed on what ethics were and what values were. But all religions agreed that there must be a cosmic bureau of standards. There's a room somewhere, you see, where honesty and integrity and purity and nobility and compassion and justice and those things, there they are. They all differed on how it was and the nature of God and so forth. They all understood that. And they also understood that if there was no eternal world, if there were no absolute values that were above history and outside of time, then it would be ridiculous to imagine that you could ever talk about values at all. Because every one of us is like a little scale or a little measuring stick or a little ruler. And every one of us has different feelings about what is right and wrong. And who in the world would have the right to say, my feelings are more important than yours. And yet that's exactly what this society for the last hundred years has been doing. Western society for a hundred years has decided that since life under the sun is all we've got, then this world is all we know, we must figure out our values and our morals and our mores on the basis of non-theological, non-divine, non-religious grounds. Recently, in Pennsylvania, some poor lawyer had the audacity during a trial to, he was asking for the death penalty and he appealed to the Bible. And he was severely disciplined by the judge. Now, I'm not trying to argue one way or the other about the death penalty. The point is, you are not allowed ever, when you're talking about right and wrong in this society, teaching values in schools and so forth, you're never supposed to appeal to religion or God. If you want to find out what your personal right and wrong is, you go to psychology. What are your needs? If you want to find out social right and wrong for the society, let's go to sociology. What do most people believe? What works for us? But, you see, the ancients believed, and Kohelath, as I'm going to show you, Ecclesiastes proves, that to try to find values on any other basis except religious is doomed to utter failure and to bring a whole person and a whole society and all our lives down with it. You know, the polls are showing, the research is showing, beyond a doubt, that people lie more than they ever have, they cheat more than they ever have, they break promises more than they ever have, and they're admitting it on Gallup polls more than they ever had. Why? Verse 12, chapter 6 says, if life under the sun is all we've got, who can say what is good? There is, that's a rhetorical question. It's his way of saying, nobody can. And here's why. Because unless you know what your purpose is, unless you are created for a purpose by a creator, there is no way to judge whether or not how you live is right or wrong. Now, listen. Chapter 6, verse 12 is actually a restatement of chapter 1, verse 3, which we looked at four or five weeks ago. Quick reiteration. Chapter 1, verse 3, the professor says, the Kohelath says, what does a man gain for all his toil under the sun? Now, the word gain means profit. And what he's saying is, if this life under the sun is all there is, what difference does anything make after all your work? And do you remember what we said in looking at the chapter? What he was saying is, if this life is all there is, that means that you're an accident and your origin is insignificant. And if this life is all there is, then when you die, you rot, and eventually all the civilization will burn up in the conflagration of the sun. And so, your destiny is insignificant. And if your origin is insignificant and your destiny is insignificant, have the guts to admit, he says, that your life is insignificant. And that means that here's a man whose purpose in life is to live a life of nobility and a great achievement. And here's a man whose purpose in life is to sit on the street corner and do nothing. And what does the Kohelath say? In the end, if this life is all there is, then in both cases, the purposes end up the same. It's all the same. The end result is the same. If you're an accident, then there's no purpose for you. Now, in chapter 6, verse 12, he's actually asking the same question, only this time he's asking it from the perspective of ethics. And what he's saying is, if this life under the sun is all there is, if you've got no purpose, you see he uses the word meaningless, if you've got no purpose, then there can be no value. must be valueless. Let me show you. It's a powerful argument. If life is purposeless, then life must be valueless. You know, I saw on TV the other day, the Humanist Society said, you know, there is no God and there is nothing but this earth, and the reason we are living lives of warfare and cruelty and environmental exploitation is because we think there's a heaven. The only way we're ever going to get moral is to see that this life is all there is, and Kohalus shows that that is utter nonsense. If this life is an accident, then there can be no values. Look, if I build something, if I create it, if I create something for a use or for a purpose, purpose, then there's automatically right and wrong ways to use that. I don't have to write it down. It's automatic. If I create something with a purpose, there's automatically right and wrong rules for operation. So, for example, something I tell my children all the time is chairs are not built to bear up your weight on two legs. You know, you lean back on chairs and you balance like that, you know that whoever built the chair, now the chair does not have, usually, at least I've never bought a chair that had a little instruction saying, tell your kids not to lean back on the chairs. But the point is that the creator had a design, and that is that a certain amount of weight can be borne by the four legs, and if you misuse it, you're breaking the rules. You're not honoring the designer. You're not honoring the design of the creator, and it will lead to brokenness. It will lead to breakdown. Anything with purpose has right and wrong ways of use, and if you break those rules, you have brokenness. Now, for a minute, let's think about an accident. Think about a lump of steel that accidentally is created. Here you are in a steel place, a steel plant, and let's just say that during the time in which the steel was molten, some of it has fallen to the ground, now it's hardened, and you have a 10-pound misshapen lump of steel. How do you break that? You can't break it. Because there's no purpose for it, there was no design for it, don't you see that if I would break it into four pieces, does that really mean it's broken? And it was broken to start with. An accident has no right or wrong ways of use. Of course, I could use it to hurt some other object. I mean, I could abuse some other object with the piece, but I'm saying, in itself, there is no right and wrong for how that should be used. There's no right and wrong. It can't be broken. It's already broken. And therefore, the whole idea of being broken is meaningless to an accident. An accidental creation. Kohalath is saying, if your life is an accident, if there is no God, your life is an accident. And if there is no God and your life is an accident, there cannot be any basis for talking about values. You cannot make any distinctions between right and wrong behavior. You can't make any distinctions. Distinctions between oppression and justice, between cruelty and compassion, between racism and tolerance, are absolutely and utterly baseless. Because your origin was insignificant and your destiny is insignificant. And that means, in the end, it's all the same. No matter how you live, live a life of cruelty or a life of altruism, in the end, it comes to the same. There is no difference, no leftover, no residue. You see, it all comes to the same. And therefore, everything is valueless. Now, when you listen to that, I'll tell you what happens to a person who either doesn't believe in God or isn't sure they believe in God. Or, like many, many people in society today, has a secularized view of God. That is, that he's not really real. You hear that if there is no God, your life's an accident. Okay. And therefore, there can be no right and wrong. And yet, something inside of you says, okay, that makes sense logically. But you have to look at human beings and realize that they are not the same as a lump of steel. That they can be abused. That they can be broken. And that the world is broken. That people are misusing one another. I know it's wrong. And yet, you see, if you believe this world is all there is, you've got no basis for those feelings. And where do those feelings come from? Some years ago, there's a sociologist named Tony Campolo that wrote an interesting thing I read recently. He said when he was teaching at the University of Pennsylvania, during the Vietnam War years, during the time in which there were these great studies, um, uh, I said, um, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, uh, Thank you. He said when he was teaching at the University of Pennsylvania, during the Vietnam War years, during the time in which there were these great protests, student protests on the campus, and I remember them pretty well too, one day he sat down at one, and very often they had an open mic and people would come up and say whatever they felt. He says, I'll never forget one speaker. The speaker came up to the mic and first of all said, how many of you believe in God? And a couple of people said, what's that got to do with anything? Sit down. And they said, no, not yet. Let me tell you something. If you don't believe in God, then there really is no right and wrong except your subjective feelings. You see, you're all scales, you're all rulers, and one person's feelings are just as valid as the next. And he says, therefore, if a person says, I enjoy and I think it's right to bomb villages and to burn babies, how do you have any right to call them wrong? I believe in a God and I believe in eternal values that can judge my society, but if you don't, you don't have any right to be here. Somebody put up their hand and said, they said, listen, anything is right as long as it pleases you, unless it hurts somebody else. And the speaker said, why? What's wrong with hurting other people? Well, you can't have a society if you do that. And the speaker looked at him and said, listen, you cannot get an imperative out of an indicative. It may be true that selfish behavior hurts society, but you cannot prove that society ought to be preserved. Where do you get that? If we're all going to die, if everything's going to blow up, if the same thing happens to human societies will happen to the rocks in the end, how can you say one thing is more valuable than another? If one little scale and one little ruler decides that I'm the right one, what right have you got to say, no, you're wrong? You've got no right to call what they're doing wrong. You can just emote. Tony Campola said that he never heard such electrifying silence after that. He said what happened was the people who were sitting there were actually experiencing Romans 1. Romans 1 says, though men and women knew God, they refused to glorify him and honor him as God. And they exchanged the truth of God for a lie and worshiped the creature rather than the creator. You see, they sat there, and on the one hand, they had no basis for believing that bombing villages and burning babies was wrong. They didn't want to admit that there was a spiritual realm, and there were ten commandments that were so real that they had to submit to them. They wanted freedom, you see. They were secularized. They wanted to say this life is all there is, and everybody has to decide for themselves what is right and wrong. And yet they instinctively knew that it's wrong to bomb villages and to burn babies, and they had no basis for that. In other words, just as Romans says, though they denied God, they had to live as if there was meaning. They had to live as if there was right and wrong. In other words, they had to live as if there was a God, even though they denied there was a God, because in their heart of hearts, they know he's there. And that's the only explanation for why people who believe were accidents could possibly believe there's a right and wrong. That's the reason why one writer put it this way. Our modern society is in a terrible pickle. He says, with ghastly simplicity, we remove the organ and demand the function. We laugh and honor and are shocked to find traitors in our midst. We castrate and bid the geldings be fruitful. You know what the problem is? The problem is we know we're broken, and therefore we know we're built for something. See, the reasoning of the Kohelet, the reasoning of the author is, if there's no God, or you can't know if there's a God, then there's no purpose. And if there's no purpose, there is no value. And yet, though we don't want to admit that God built us, and God built us for a purpose that we have to submit to, and we have to give him the lordship of our lives, yet we know there's values. We know we're broken. We know we're not lumps of steel. We know that there's something wrong. That there are deeds that are not just inauthentic, but they're wrong. And we know we're broken, and we know our society's broken. We know our world's broken, and we have no way of even complaining about it unless we acknowledge that there's a heavenly bureau of standards somewhere. We're broken. What's the solution? You see the problem? If this life is all there is, there is no good, and yet we know there's a good. What's the solution? Chapter 12, verse 13, in which the author says, fear God and obey his commandments. What that is saying is that there is a heavenly bureau of standards, and the brokenness of our life and the brokenness of the society will only heal when we go back. lives and base our society on them. Well, listen, I know how this has got to sound. I hope you guys don't mind. You know, recently one of my children said to me, Dad, what year were you born? I said, 1950. And he said, geez. Another one of my sons once looked at the junior high yearbook. I said, that's my junior high school yearbook. And he looked at the pages and he said, I guess most of these people are dead by now. And you see, G.K. Chesterton said, there's never been a modern, there's never been a time that was less willing to admit that it's just a time. We've never had a time in which we felt less like ancient things can help us. Ancient things are irrelevant. And so how dare anybody come and say, let's take out a 3,000 year old code of laws like the Ten Commandments, and that is the solution to all of the brokenness of your heart and of society. Who dares to say such a thing? Jesus Christ, who said, heaven and earth will pass away, but my word will not pass away. Heaven and earth will not pass away till every jot and tittle of the law is fulfilled. What he was saying is, the mountains, the heaven and earth, the ocean is mere scaffolding. It's fluff compared to the law of God. There is an eternal bureau of standards. And it must be fulfilled, and it must be adhered to, and it must be submitted to. Jesus said that. You see, here's the, here's the dirty little secret of the world. The dirty little secret of the world is, the people who get to the top, the people who get to the pinnacles of power and achievement and fame, to places that most of us in this room will never even come close, that they're unhappy, that they're empty when they get there. And if it's true that having college is named after you, and if it's true that having a $500,000 a year dock privileges at the World Trade Center for your yacht, and if it's true that having worldwide critical acclaim as the greatest playwright in history, and if it's true that having world-beating political power, if it's true, and we know that people who've attained those things have killed themselves over the emptiness of their lives, that must mean that the human soul, listen, is so great, and is built and designed for such glory and such pinnacles of glory, that even that kind of achievement and that kind of experience is too small for it. It doesn't fill it. The human soul is so great, well then, what could possibly fulfill the human soul? It's this. The law of God, the commands of God, the integrity, the purity, the love, the compassion, the justice of the commands of God are like high steel on which and only on which a life of greatness can be built. Well, somebody says, look, this is very inspiring, you know, good setting, we just had good music, you know, you're up there and you're raising your voice and it all sounds kind of enthusiastic, but wait a minute, let me just get, let me just figure out what you're really saying here. I'm a mess and my society's a mess and we got to go back and obey the Ten Commandments and everything will be all right. Listen, it's just not that simple, you say. It can't be that simple. As a matter of fact, a number of you are going to say, there were times in my life in which I tried very, very, very hard to be obedient to the law of God and to be religious and to take the Ten Commandments and really tried and all it did was make me feel like a failure. All it did was make me feel worse, smaller, dirtier. And I actually had to get away and I had to get away and I had to become free to figure out what was right for me and I still, I admit I feel kind of guilty in some ways and I also admit that if there really isn't a God in heaven, if there's not a law, I know I probably don't have a basis for even making moral distinctions and all that, but if I go back to the law of God, all I'm going to do is be crushed. If you were crushed, if your life wasn't healed by obeying the commandments of God, it's because you didn't really obey the whole verse. You see what the solution is? The solution, as the Ecclesiastes writer is saying, is not keep his commandments, it's fear God and keep his commandments. And I challenge you to, I challenge you to this idea. If you were crushed, it was because you did not fear God, you just kept his commandments. You've got to keep his commandments out of a fear of God. That heals. Anything else will crush. Well, somebody says, what do you mean by fearing God? Jeff's already talked about it in the prayer. In the Bible, the word fear can be used two ways. First, torment. And that means there is a fear that means being scared of being hurt. And to be afraid of being hurt means you're self-absorbed. You're totally absorbed in yourself. It's to be totally wrapped up in yourself, to be frozen in self-consciousness. That's what fear of being hurt is. But there's another kind of fear in the Bible, and it's the main way in which the Bible uses fear. And the fear of God in the Bible is something completely different, almost opposed to the other kind. In Psalm 28, verse 14, it says, Happy is the man who feareth always. A fear that brings happiness? The more you fear, the happier you're going to be, says Psalm 28. Or Psalm 130 says, You have forgiven my sins. Therefore, what? I fear you. Now, if that sounds strange to you, if that sounds illogical to you, that's because you do not understand the fear of God at all, and the commandments of God will crush you. When the Bible talks about the fear of God, it means an inner state, an inner condition of awe and amazement and wonder before the magnitude of the love and the power and the greatness of God. It's an inner condition of awe and respect, the fear and trembling, you see, of amazement before not only the power and the holiness, but the love and the mercy of God. And the fear of God, not the fear of being hurt, the fear of God works in the exactly opposite direction. The fear of God helps you to forget yourself. Totally. God looks so great when you're experiencing the fear of God. For example, when you're fearing His love and His grace, your sins that look so big become little things, and you forget them. When you're standing in fear of His wisdom and power, your troubles become little things, and they go away. When you're standing in fear of His adoption and His care for you, then the criticisms and insults of other people become little. That's the joy of the fear of God. The fear of God means to have God look so huge, so glorious, so wonderful, to, in a sense, bow under the weight of His, the magnitude of His greatness. That it gets your mind blessedly off of yourself, and finally you're free. Psalm 119 says, the fear of God is clean, is clean. And I'm telling you here, and let me show you exactly how this works before we conclude, that unless you obey the law of God out of the fear of God, you will be crushed. Let me show you. First, you must obey the law of God out of the fear of His grace. See, until you are awed by the greatness of His grace, until your heart responds and leaps into obedience, you are not obeying out of fear. You must fill your mind with the greatness of God's grace until your heart leaps into obedience. The Ten Commandments were not given in Egypt. They were given in Sinai. That means God did not say to the Israelites, obey the commandments, and I'll save you. He said, obey the commandments because I've saved you. There's only two ways to obey the commandments of God. Now look, look, look at this. Which of these is you? Your whole life, your mental health, and your eternal destiny depend on your understanding of this distinction. There's only two ways to obey the law of God. You can either say, I'm going to obey the law of God so He will accept me, or you can say, I'm going to obey the law of God because through Jesus and what He did, He has accepted me. In one case, you obey the law of God to be your own Savior. In the other case, you obey the law of God to know and to please your Savior and to become like your Savior who is like the law. Those two different motives, one is out of fear of being hurt, the other is out of fear of God's grace. Those two motives, the same, with the two motives, trying to obey the very same set of rules, the commandments of God, will issue in two completely different experiences, two completely different kinds of people. If you obey the law of God, not out of fear of His grace, but out of a desire to save yourself and be acceptable, you will either become a smug, arrogant person or you will be crushed by the law and you'll join Fundamentalist Anonymous and you'll wonder what went wrong. But on the other hand, if instead you obey the law of God out of gratitude for having been accepted and been accepted, brokenness we're talking about will heal. Incrementally, but really. You see, if obedience to the commands, keeping the commands is the foundation for your acceptance, you'll be killed. But if your acceptance is the foundation for obedience to the commands, you'll be healed. And healed forever. Now that's not all, but we have to stop here. You see, you will not be able to obey unless you fill your mind with the greatness of God's grace. You also can't obey the law of God unless you fill your mind with the greatness of his wisdom. Fearing his wisdom. The commands of God are wise. One time I was in an airplane looking down and seeing on these little tiny back roads, I saw some poor car, you see, behind a truck. And because it was whining, he could never see when to pass. Once he tried to pass at the wrong time, he almost got killed. Other times he could have passed because I could see the whole thing, but he couldn't. And I was up there saying, you know, I've got wisdom from above. I can see the whole picture. If only I could communicate with him and I could tell him how to behave. Because I and only I know what's practical. See, when you listen to traffic helicopters, you're getting wisdom from above. You do what he says. Now, when you look at the law of God, it says things like, always tell the truth. That it says that sex will dehumanize you unless you use it inside an exclusive permanent covenant of marriage. It will say that you always have to forgive and love your enemies. It will say you shouldn't spend all your money on yourself, but you should give it away generously. And you look at that. Any New Yorker looks at that and says, that's ridiculous. That's impractical. And you're going to do that, and you're going to not be able to obey unless you fill your mind with the greatness of the wisdom of God. God is in the helicopter, my friends. And if you try to go on your own, decide what's right and wrong, it's like trying to pass without listening to the helicopter. He's got wisdom from above. The fear of his wisdom, the fear of his grace, the fear of his greatness. And unless your obedience is bathed in that fear, unless it's soaked in it, unless it's springing from that, you will find your life just as meaningless as the atheist. See, there's three things you can do. You can obey God without fear, and you're going to find life just as meaningless. Or you can try not to obey God at all and just decide that life under the sun is all there is, and I'm going to decide what I want to do, and you will also find life meaningless. Or you can fear him and keep his commands. Some of you say, I've been swamped by the law, I've been crushed by the law, and I say good, because the law's purpose, it's a schoolmaster to bring you to Christ and to show you. The reason Jesus wants the law to be too hard for you to fulfill is, well, you know what Jesus is saying to you? If you tried all your life to be good and it's never good enough, and you're just guilty and laid down, Jesus is saying, don't you see, I don't want your money, I don't want your obedience first. I want you. I want you to stop being your own Savior. I want you to go to the Father and say, Father, I'm not just, I'm sorry for my sins, I'm sorry for trying to be my own Savior. Accept me because of what Jesus did. And the minute that happens, you've begun to fear him for his grace, and you'll be born again. And Christian friends, there's a number of you, I hope, that will admit that your obedience actually has been kind of a grinding thing lately. You're doing things strictly out of a sense of duty, and actually it just seems your life is just as meaningless as the person who doesn't believe. You know why? Because you've got to go back to the sources, and you've got to resurrect and renew the fear of his grace, the fear of his love, the fear of his greatness. How do you do that? You can do it right here. You do it by going to the Word, and you start by repenting for the lack of joy before the greatness of who he is. You repent for the lack of astonishment and amazement before the greatness of who he is. You must do that, and he will resurrect and renew it. Psalm 1 says, blessed is the man who what? Who delights in the law of God, and upon it he meditates day and night. Do you want to live? Do you want to be healed? Fear God and keep his commands. Let's pray. Now, Father, as we come to your table, we ask simply that you would enable us to find you in reality. Father, there's some people here who probably do not need to take your supper. They need to pick up your son as their savior for the first time, and I ask that you would enable some people to do that today. I pray, like Lord, that there would be some people here who may have been coming for a while, and not until today have understood the difference between being a moralist and being a Christian. And I pray that you would enable them to cross that line, and to fear you, and keep your command. who know that our lives are lacking in greatness because of our disobedience or whose lives are lacking in joy because of our unwillingness to discipline ourselves to pray and to seek you and to resurrect and stir up our fear of you, that you'd help us to begin to renew our faith today as we take the bread and as we take the cup. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
