TITLE: Prostitutes Before You
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 21:28-39
TOPICS: Repentance Salvation God's Love
SERIES: The “Amens” of Jesus: The Challenge of the Cross
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/prostitutes-before-you/

============================================================

View the passage in the bulletin on which the teaching is based. We're looking for the few weeks before Easter at some of Jesus' own teaching about the meaning of his death. I'm going to read for you Matthew 21, verses 28 to 39. What do you think? There was a man who had two sons. He went to the first and said, Son, go and work today in the vineyard. I will not, he answered. But later he changed his mind and went. Then the father went to the other son and said the same thing. He answered, I will, sir. But he did not go. Which of the two did what his father wanted? The first, they answered. And Jesus said to them, I tell you the truth. The tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God ahead of you. For John came to you to show you the way of righteousness, and you did not believe him. But the tax collectors and the prostitutes did. And even after you saw this, you did not repent and believe him. Listen to another parable. There was a landowner who planted a vineyard. He put a wall around it, dug a wine press in it, and built a watchtower. Then he rented the vineyard to come to some farmers and went away on a journey. And when the harvest time approached, he sent his servants to the tenants to collect his fruit. The tenants seized his servants. They beat one, they killed another, and they stoned a third. And then he sent other servants to them, more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way. Last of all, he sent his son to them. They will respect my son, he said. But when the tenants saw the son, they said to each other, This is the heir. Come, let's kill him and take his inheritance. So they took him and threw him out of the vineyard and killed him. This is God's word. Sobering. There's a, as I said last week, there's a tradition, ancient tradition, that Christians in the church do some disciplined thinking about the death of Christ in the weeks leading up to Easter. And what we're doing is we're taking a look at some of Jesus' most solemn statements regarding his death. Now, in the New Testament, Jesus, with some frequency, makes statements that he starts with the word, Amen. He says, Amen, and then the statement. It's a Hebrew word, also a Greek word. It was transliterated into Greek and used in Greek. And whenever the English translations get to an Amen statement, they all scramble because they try to convey this in English. And, of course, the old King James Bible used to have Jesus saying, Verily I say unto you, or verily, verily I say unto you. Some of the modern translations say, Truly I say to you. The New International Version says, I tell you the truth. The problem is there is no English word. There's no English marker that can convey the solemnity. I mean, even today when we use the term Amen, when you hear somebody say Amen, usually that means I like that. But in the Scripture, Amen means this is God's truth. This is solemn. This is authoritative. This is crucial. See, this is critically important. And when Jesus says, Amen, what he's saying, and he says, I tell you the truth, he is saying, stop everything. Listen to this. Understand this. You cannot live without this. And right here, in the middle of these, sandwiched between these two parables, Jesus Christ says, I tell you the truth, and makes one of the most astounding and wonderful statements to me, I have to say, hopefully to you too. One of the most astounding statements anywhere in the Scripture. I tell you the truth, the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering the kingdom of God before you. And who's the you? He's talking to, you don't see it, but earlier in the chapter and later in the chapter, it tells us who he's addressing. He's addressing the chief priests, the elders, and the teachers of the law in the Bible. The religious moral leadership. Now, if we're going to understand this amazing passage, we have to see it framed by these two parables, and the second parable is directly about the death of Jesus. And in these two parables, we have some very interesting characters. We have the tenant farmers. We have the attacked messengers. We have the two sons. And we have the last messenger. And we're going to look at both of these. We're going to go back and forth a bit because, you know, they're both about vineyards, and they're both about the same thing, basically. We have the tenant farmers. We have the attacked messengers. We have the two sons. And we have the two sons. us is this. They're going to show us, number one, the tenant farmers are going to show us, we've all got a problem. Secondly, the attack messengers are going to show us that there's a counterfeit solution we should avoid, and then the two sons will show us the real solution, at least the beginning of it, and the last messenger will show us the ultimate solution. So, we have a problem, there's a counterfeit solution, what is the real solution, ultimate solution, as we look at each of these sets of characters, we're going to move right on through, find out what our ultimate human problem is, and what the solution is to it. First of all, let's look at the tenant farmers in the second parable. And the tenant farmers point to a fundamental human problem. And I wish, actually, I could spend the whole time just exploring this problem, but we can't. But who, who are the tenant farmers? Well, you take a look, look at the beginning of the parable in verse 33. There was a landowner. Now, the landowner is an investor, okay? This, some of you should be able to relate to this immediately. The landowner is an investor, and what the investor does is he buys a piece of land, he plants it, he equips it completely. Wall, tower, and wine press. You need a wall to watch out for predators and animals. You need the wall to protect it as well. You need the wine press to take the grapes and to make the wine and so on. And then he turns it over to tenant farmers, and it's their job, verse 34, to give him fruit, which means pay rent. You see? He gets a piece of the action. He gets a piece of the, he gets a return on his investment. He himself is not the farmer. He goes away. However, whenever he sends anyone for his rent, they attack him. And the reason they attack him is because they want to be the owners. Actually, we know from rabbinical writing that if you could, if you could actually avoid paying rent for three years, it was yours. And you say, that's a bad rule. That encourages, well, that's another subject. I'm not here to, but what they really were trying to say is if you go for three years and you show that essentially you're running this show, you're running the project for three years without any outside interference, in a sense you get the rights to it. The point was that these tenant farmers, though they were tenants, wanted to be the owners. And anyone who came along to remind them that they were tenants and not owners, they attacked. And the one who most reminded them that they were tenants and not owners, the son, they most attacked. Now, what is this pointing to? Now, the vineyard motif in the Bible is a very interesting one. There's quite a lot of references to the vineyard. And one of the places where the Bible brings this up is when God speaks to the children of Israel. He's brought them out of Egypt and they're about to go into the promised land. He's led them to it. He's done it all for them, right? And then he says this in Deuteronomy 6. He says, When the Lord your God brings you into the land, he swore to your fathers. When the Lord your God brings you to cities you did not build, houses filled with all kinds of good things you did not provide, wells you did not dig, and vineyards and olive groves you did not plant, then when you eat and are satisfied in that land, be careful you do not forget the Lord your God who brought you to this. Fear the Lord your God and serve him only. Now, what's that pointing to? Our hearts want to forget the degree to which everything we have is a gift and therefore we can take no credit for it. Why do we want to forget that? See, God is saying this is the way the human heart is you're going to forget that you didn't earn this. You're going to forget this was all a gift. You did not build this. You did not make this. You did not plant this. You're going to get it and you're going to forget it. Why? Well, you know, some years ago I had a conversation with a woman. If you've been around Redeemer for a while, you've heard me refer to it again every so often because it had a big impact on me. It really, it was what they call a paradigm shift for me. And she says, you know, this, all this talk about salvation by sheer grace is very threatening to me. Very threatening. I like the old way I remember that I've heard other, you're saved by being a good person. Salvation by grace is very threatening. I said, why? And she says, well, the implications of, of salvation by grace alone are that you, you have no rights. You have to do anything. If he saves you by grace, there's no limit to what he can ask of you. But you see, if I say, if I'm saved by being a good person, then there's limits to what he can ask of me. I've got certain rights. He owes me. And that's what's going on here. This is a vivid illustration of the condition of the human heart. And here's what that is. We all are tenants and we want to believe we're owners. We know down deep we're tenants, but we desperately want to... they want. They can do what they want with the vineyard. They can do what they want with the profits. And we don't, the implications of the radical grace of just creation. Why are you what you are? Some of you say, I've worked very hard to be what I am. Now, you are what you are because you were not born on an ice flow in the Hudson Bay in the 5th century A.D. I don't care how hard you would have worked if you were born there. I don't think you would have gone very far. You are what you are because of talents that you were born with. You are what you are because of resources that you were born with. The point of the matter is, what do these tenants get from the owner? Do they just get land and they plant it? No. Do they get land that's planted, but they have to build the equipment? No. They get everything. Everything. And they don't want to live as if they got everything. And this is the human heart. The human heart, deep down inside, knows that we're tenants, but wants to live as if we're owners. In other words, the human heart hates the idea of creational grace. Hates the idea that if I'm created by God, I owe him everything. Hates the idea that everything I have is a gift and therefore I can't live the way I want. And that's our big, that's our fundamental human problem. And the reason it's a problem is it creates. Now, this is where my temptation is going to come in, so I'll be careful here. I would love to go into this, but I won't. But this particular fundamental problem creates all sorts of intellectual and emotional conflict deep down inside. Huge emotional conflict. We know we're tenants and we don't want to know we're tenants. We want to, we want to believe we're owners. Huge intellectual and huge emotional. Intellectual, here's an interesting example. I read a review of this. I haven't seen the movie yet, but you know the movie that's up for a couple Oscars? It's the movie, where is it? With Laura Linney, it's called You Can Count On Me. Have you seen that movie? Some of you probably have. There's an interesting place in the movie where a kind of milksop, you know, small town minister who were, you know, were sort of led by the movie to believe is kind of a, you know, a kind of a big zero sits down with some very hostile young man named Terry and who doesn't believe in God at all. And at one point Terry says to him, he says, look, I don't even know why I'm here talking to you. I don't believe any of this stuff about God. I don't even believe in God. I don't believe any of this stuff like you do. And the minister suddenly surprises us because he goes for the jugular and he says, well, that's right. I don't feel that I'm a negligible little scrap floating around in some kind of empty void with no sense of connectedness to anything around me except by virtue of whatever little philosophies I can scrape together on my own. Can I ask you, Terry, do you think your life has got any importance at all? And Terry, Terry rather stunned says, yeah, I do think my life is connected to something important. Now what, you know what's going on here? Nietzsche and Kierkegaard and a few people who are really intellectually honest will admit the either or. In fact, Kierkegaard wrote a book called Either Or. Nietzsche and Kierkegaard will admit the either or. And here's what it is. If I'm not created, then I'm free. If I'm an accident, then I'm free. I own myself. If I wasn't created, I'm just an accidental happening in the universe, I'm free. But then I'm meaningless. What am I? It means basically, no matter how I live, I'm not built for a purpose. I'm an accident. There is no right or wrong, ultimately. How I live, eventually when I die, I'm going to rot. When the sun dies, everybody's going to rot. Nobody's going to be around to remember anything. Nothing I do makes any difference. In other words, if I'm totally free, I'm a negligible little scrap floating around in a kind of empty void with no sense of connectedness to anything around me. Or if I'm created for a purpose and therefore my life has meaning, then I'm not free because I was created. Then it's a gift. See, there's enormous intellectual conflict that goes on because down deep we know this. We know we're tenants, but we don't want to believe we're tenants. We want to believe we're owners. That creates all kinds of intellectual conundrums and emotional conundrums because these people, to say it, to put it mildly, these tenant farmers are very hostile. Anyone or anything that reminds them that they are not owners, they beat. Anything that comes into your life, any person, any circumstance, any preacher, anything that reminds you that you are not a tenant, you're not an owner, you are a tenant, you're very hostile because down deep inside we don't want to believe that. There's all this emotional and intellectual confusion. This is a major problem and the tenant farmers show that. What's the solution? Well, first of all, we need to see that the passage and Jesus Christ is teaching us to avoid. all sorts. I think maybe most people in the world believe that this is a major solution. What is the major solution that many people believe will solve our alienation from God? Our hostility toward God? Well, the answer is many people say, well, you should be, you should be, you should get religious. You should be moral. You should find God's word and obey it. And that will get rid of this hostility. That will get rid of, of, of this. Really? Well, what's interesting is on the one hand, it's fair to say that the tenant farmers point to everyone. Of course, it's fair to say that. But we can't miss the context. Next, these, this parable is spoken to moral and religious people. The average listener would have been very familiar with the image of the vineyard because in Isaiah 5, Psalm 80, all sorts of places in the, in the Hebrew scriptures, the vineyard is a metaphor for Israel, the people of God. And the tenants, farmers of the vineyard are the religious leaders. And here's what Jesus is saying. Who are these messengers? These are the prophets. These are God's messengers, of course. These are the prophets and the sages. You know, there's a place where Jesus says to the religious leaders, I keep sending you prophets and sages and you keep killing them. You keep beating them. And here's what Jesus is saying. And this is really radical and it's incredibly radical. He is saying that there is a pattern, that it's moral and religious people, moral and religious people who tend to be the ones who are the most hostile to the truth and the most hostile to the gospel. Marx and Nietzsche, who just mentioned a minute ago, at least Nietzsche, Marx and Nietzsche had a critique of religion that is amazingly influential still in the 20th century. Marx and Nietzsche both said religion is basically a way for people to get into power and stay there. That's basically the function of religion in our world. Well, how could that be? Well, it's very simple. It starts like this. First of all, religion enables you personally to feel that God owes me recognition, comfort, status, and power. Why? Because I have made sacrifices. I have sacrificed pleasures to do his will. I have tried very, very hard to be very, very, very good. I have worked and worked and worked. I have denied myself. I have disciplined myself. And therefore, the first thing is religion puts you in a place where you don't believe you owe God rent. You believe he owes you. Religion puts you in a place where you believe that you are owed recognition, comfort, status, and power. And then secondly, it puts you in a position of feeling like you can beat up anybody else who doesn't have, you know, your level of goodness or your truth. You know the Shawshank Redemption? I love that movie. Perfect example. Do you remember the movie? I mean, it's one of those movies now. It's such a classic. You know, you're going to see it all the time on television. And the warden is a perfect example of someone who uses his sense that I am morally and religiously superior to these prisoners to exploit them and to abuse them. And so Marx and Nietzsche said, you know, religion, the basic function of religion in this world is for people to use religion to get them to get into power and to stay there. To feel that God owes them recognition, comfort, status, and power, and that people, especially the people who don't have my truth and don't live the good life I live, also owe them that. And so Marx and Nietzsche said this, and you know, in the 20th century, this is incredibly, incredibly influential. But get this. Jesus was there first, Carl. Jesus was there first, Friedrich. He was there first. Jesus says this is the prevailing pattern. You know, I think, I've said this before, Carl Barth, the great German theologian, says something fair, absolutely fair. He says it is so bad and so wrong, but not only so bad and so wrong and so unfair, but it is so, it's so missing the point of the Bible to say the Jews killed Jesus. He says if you look at the story, you'll see you have Jews on everything. He said Jesus was a Jew. His followers were Jews. His opponents were Jews. They were all Jews. Who killed Jesus? The more moral, the more religious, the more you excelled at studying the Bible, the more you excelled at being moral and right and good and obedient in every way, the more likely you were to hate Jesus. Now, you know why this is? Now, here's the point. If the fundamental problem with our heart is we hate grace and its implications, we hate the implications that everything we have is a gift. If the fundamental problem is that we hate grace, religion is not only no solution to the problem, it's just another form of the problem. Because in religion, when you say, look at how good I am, look at what I've done. You owe me, you owe me. Okay. Religion is just one more way, in fact, it's probably the most insidious way to avoid the implications of grace. See, there's two ways that you can say, I don't want to have to pay rent. I don't want to act like I owe. I want to act like I'm the owner. There's two ways to do that. One way is to go completely outside of the moral box. One way is to go completely outside of the religious box, to be an atheist, to say, I'm going to decide how I want to live. But the other way to avoid grace, the other way to avoid the implications of grace and to avoid the fact that you're a tent, the other way to do it is to stay completely inside the box. See, there's one way to avoid the grace of God, which is to disobey. The other way is to obey. There's one way to avoid the grace of God and avoid the idea that I owe him everything and avoid the fact that I'm a tenant. One is to be completely disobedient to the law of God, completely irreligious. The other way is to be extremely religious, extremely obedient, compliant in every way. Religion is no solution to our fundamental problem, the deep problems that we have, which is we know that we're tenants, but we don't want to believe it. So, what is the solution? Well, there's two parts to this solution. And the first part of the solution we see in the top parable, the parable of the two sons. And here's what we have here. Now, notice it's about a vineyard. And it's a good thing they're together because it helps almost immediately understand what's going on. It says, look at verse 28. There was a man who had two sons, and he went to the first and said, Son, go and work today in the vineyard. Now, right away, we know something. Partly because of the second one, but also because we know something about, you know, this from the experts in history and so on. The owner of the vineyard was not the farmer. And the children of the owner of the vineyard would not have been farmers. They would not have done the manual labor. They would have not been out there because the owner of the vineyard was the investor. The owner of the vineyard was a man of means. And the owner and his sons would have not been in any way. They would not have done manual labor. And therefore, when he comes to his son and says, we got to work, you're going to have to work in the vineyard today. This was an unusual circumstance and would have been a very unpleasant one. It's obvious, by the way, that they didn't ordinarily work or he wouldn't have gone to ask them. I mean, if this was something they went every morning, he wouldn't have had to go ask them. All right? So what does this mean? It means this was something unusual. But here's what else it means. The first boy, he's got two boys, two sons. The first young man he talks to is amazingly rude. You don't necessarily get this because you live in America. You live in 21st century America. So, you know, a man says to his son, son, you have to go work in the vineyard today. And he says, I will not. And you say, okay, sure. He said, I will not. Do you know what has happened there? Some of you who are from more traditional cultures, you know what just happened there. Listen, in an Oriental patriarchal society, there is an awful lot of bowing and scraping and a lot of niceties. And at the very least, this young man should have said, with all due respects. But he didn't. He says, I will not. And the second boy, when he goes to the second son, the second son acts in the proper way in that culture. He says, I will, sir. And that word, sir, is the word kurios, which means literally, he says, I will, my Lord. Lord. He's calling his father Lord. And you say, oh, gosh, well, all right. Well, let's get into the culture here. The first boy is a bad boy. The first boy is a brash boy. The first boy is probably an independent, color-outside-the-box kid. And the second boy is the good son. The second boy is the perfect son. The second boy is the kind of son, not only in that culture you wanted, but even in this culture, to a great degree, you want. And therefore, almost for sure, the first son was the younger brother. Even though he uses the word first, it means the first one he went to. And all the experts in that ancient culture said he would not have gone to the older son first. In that culture, the older son had the pride of place, got the lion's share of the wealth. In fact, almost all the other children essentially worked for the oldest son. And therefore, he would have not gone to the oldest son. And not only that, on the basis of what we know from common sense, we know how birth order works, and we also know from the other extended version of this basic theme, in Luke 15, another much more famous parable. of which was the prodigal son, one of which was the elder brother. We know this. One of these guys is the one who was always obedient. One of these guys was always compliant. One of these guys was the one who was always there for the father. And the other one was always coloring outside the box, was always very brash. Remember in Luke 15, the younger brother is the one that goes off and squanders his inheritance, what he gets of it, with prostitutes. See, we're the prostitutes again. And yet, here's what Jesus Christ says. The outsider, the immoral, the brash, the independent, the somewhat more honest kid is the one who in the end is saved, pleases the father's heart, and it's the older son, the good son, who is lost. And that's exactly what happens in Luke 15. And, of course, everybody's going to listen to this, and they're going to say, you're kidding. What are you talking about? And, of course, Jesus says, well, let me make myself perfectly clear. The prostitutes and the tax collectors, the younger brothers of the world, get into the kingdom of God before you guys, the elder brothers of the world, the good people, the moral people. Have I made myself clear? And so, you know, they're going to say, you're kidding. Now, listen for a minute. You know what he's saying? Here's what he's saying. First of all, he's saying, look at the past of these two kids. Look at the past of these two kinds of people, tax collectors and prostitutes. We all know what a prostitute is. You know what a tax collector is? I'll give you, here's the best way for you to understand something about this. Tax collectors were collaborators with the, you know, with the occupying force of Rome. They were the, and they, and they used, they, they used the power of Rome to exploit their fellow Jews. Now, by the way, how, when the Nazis took over France, the collaborators, the French people who cooperated with the Nazis and oppressed the other French people, how were they viewed before and after World War II? Scum, spineless cowards, worthy of the greatest disdain, murderers, basically. And Jesus Christ says, prostitutes and tax collectors, good Bible-believing people of the true religion, the Jewish religion of God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses, all right? Look at your past records. Look at your past records. They mean nothing. Utterly different records, they mean nothing. All that matters is what? Repentance. Look, verse 29, I will not, he answered, but later he changed his mind, which, by the way, is literally the word for repentance. But then it makes it very, very clear down in verse 32. And even after you saw this, you, he's talking about the good people, you didn't repent. He says, listen, your records mean nothing. The difference between heaven and hell is not your records. It's not your past. Your past are utterly different and essentially inconsequential. The issue is repentance. That is the thing that will change what's wrong with the human heart. That is the thing that will heal what ails you. That is the thing that will get down underneath that's creating all the hostility in this world and all the misery and all the confusion in this world. That will solve the problem in our hearts of knowing deep down that we're tenants and hating the idea. That will solve it. And of course, you've got to figure that the listeners are saying, you're kidding. Repent for what? And I think this is fair. I hope you don't mind me using this language, but I think this is fair. They're going to say, wait a minute. Wait a minute. We don't take bribes. Repent for what? We don't sell our bodies. We're out here busting our butts to be good and you're telling us to repent? They're the ones that should be repenting. What are you talking about? And what is Jesus saying to them? Ah, then he mustn't be talking about that kind of repentance. Listen, prostitution is a bad thing. Bribery is a bad thing. Of course, you should repent for that, but that's not what he's talking about. That's not the kind of repentance that heals the heart. So what is he talking about? What do they need to repent of? Just this very thing. What is the fundamental sin that's being shown to us in these parables, especially the parable of the tenants? The fundamental problem with our hearts is we hate grace and the implications of grace. And therefore, there's a sin underneath all other problems. And that's it is, do you see that you hate the idea you're a sinner saved completely by grace? He is saying the thing that will heal your heart is not to repent for your bad things, but you need to see that the unconverted heart needs to repent for the reason you do all things, including good things, which is as a way of avoiding Jesus Christ as Savior. You don't mind him as an example. You don't mind him as a helper, but you avoid him as a Savior because you don't want the implications of radical grace. You don't want the implications that no one not a prostitute, I'm not a tax collector, I've lived a pretty good life. He says you're more into the problem than they are. They are much more, they know they're resisting God's grace. They know they're resisting me. You don't. And therefore you have the most insidious form of this problem. You need to repent. You need to repent. The repentance that heals the heart is to repent for the sin underneath all the sins, which is I hate the grace of God and the implications, which means I'm not my own, I'm bought with a price. He's saying the tax collectors and the prostitutes, the outsiders, the younger brothers of the world, the people who have left middle America to move to New York and left the elder brothers back in Peoria and back in Atlanta. Those people, Jesus Christ says, the people who live in New York are more likely to get this than the elders and the chief priests and the teachers of the law and the preachers of the Bible. Because what is the message? The message is, come to me, all ye who labor and are heavy laden, I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon me, for my yoke is easy, my burden is light. I am meek. I won't abuse you. Every other savior you look to, your morality or your sex or your money, in order to try to live in the illusion that you are owners, they'll strangle you. Their yoke will crush you. I alone, I alone am the savior. That burden is light. And so Jesus is saying, the sin under all the sin is the avoidance of grace. It's the only thing that when we repent of will really begin to change our heart. But somebody says, wait a minute, I got a problem here. I don't trust God. God, I see kind of what you're saying, but you're talking about a more radical surrender than the religious people make. You're talking about a more radical trust than the Pharisees, the religious, the good people make. Yes, I can't do that. I know why. Because part of what's wrong with our heart is that we don't trust God. Well, what has God done about it? Look at the last of the characters. Who's the last of the characters? The last messenger. Now, this is important. At this spot, the tenant seized his servants, they beat one, killed another, stoned a third, and then he sent other servants to them more than the first time, and the tenants treated them the same way. Last of all, he said, they'll respect my son. Now, at this point, by the way, almost all commentators and most intelligent readers say, this gets far-fetched. You know, these parables are things that really could have easily happened in real life. They're very, very, very close to familiar real-life situations that the people who are listening to them would have said, of course that sort of thing happens. You know, the beating, the beating of the messengers, trying to hold off from paying rent for three years, all that makes sense. But when the owner says, I know what I'll do. They've killed all these people. They've attacked all these people. I'll send my son. At that point, that's ridiculous. That's ridiculous. Who would do that? Helmut Tillich, who's a fine commentator and theologian, he says about this parable, he says, now the parable at this spot is stretched to the breaking point, and its features become improbable. Where would you ever find an owner of a vineyard who, instead of putting his foot down and enforcing the law, would keep on sending more messengers, and even his son, when he knew the danger? Isn't that right? Didn't you think about that? Have you ever thought about that? He said, this is ridiculous. Why would he do that? These guys have shown over and over and over again that they will attack, that they're hostile, that they can't be trusted, and now the owner has a record. They are clearly in violation of the law. He has the law completely on his side. All he has to do is send in the law, send in these soldiers, arrest those guys, and replace them. And therefore, there is no way that this owner is being smart. In fact, we can even say he's being irresponsibly stupid. If you want to secure your property, if you want to secure your property and your fruit, see, they're not giving him his fruit, you send in the law. Why in the world would you do that? Why would you risk your son's life? And here's the answer. That's exactly right. That means that God is not a businessman who is mainly concerned about his property. If he wanted his property, there's a better way to do it. But what is he after? He says, they'll respect him. What does that mean? He doesn't want the fruit. Of course, he does want them to pay the rent, but it's a means to an end. He wants them. He wants the relationship. He says, my son, maybe my son love to learn, and stay. Have a great day. I'm sorry. by sending my son, when they see how much I don't want to arrest them, when they see the respect I'm giving them by sending, surely then I'll be able to reconcile with them. In other words, this is a father after a relationship, not a businessman. Not a businessman after his property. And that's why Helmut Tillich goes on and says this. He says, where would you ever find an owner of a vineyard who instead of putting his foot down and enforcing the law would keep on sending more messengers? But this very impossibility, this gross distortion in the parable picture is totally intentional. For its purpose is to illustrate God's incomprehensible concern for man, the relentless attempts to win them over. And that's the way it is. As Thomas Mann says in Antonio Kroger, he who loves the most is always the one that suffers the most. The field of love is strewn with victims. Here's what God is saying. The way I am dealing with your resistance of the grace of creation is to give you even a greater example of my grace in redemption. I am willing to make myself, my son vulnerable. I'm willing to make myself vulnerable. I am willing to empty my heart of its greatest treasure to reach you. How could you not trust me? Why would you want to resist my grace now? In other words, you can't just repent in general in some abstract way, right? Of, you know, say, yes, I see everything in my life is God's gift and I ought to really give myself to him. That won't work. You've got to look at the cross. And if you do look at the cross, that will work. And you know the reason it'll work? And you say, well, wait a minute, in the metaphor, it doesn't work. And that's the problem. Every metaphor, the metaphor that's used here does tell us something. It shows us his love. It shows us his grace. It shows us that the way he responds to our resistance of creational grace is with redemptive grace, greater grace. On the other hand, it doesn't show us what else we know, and that is that his death does reconcile us. That his death reconciles God to us, pays the penalty of our sins so God can embrace us and still be a just God. It reconciles God to us and it reconciles us to him. It shows us that while we were enemies, hostile, he sent his son. He died for us. Only when you get that and you realize it's not my record, but it's a melted heart, seeing the real problem in my life, I hate the implications of grace, but surrendering to the implications of grace, that he accepts me surely because of grace of what Jesus has done for me. That will begin to heal your heart. I have to close by asking you a question. There's two kinds of, well, there's three kinds of people in the room. There's people who basically are absolutely still resisting the grace of God, and there's people who are not resisting the grace of God. But I'll bet you most of the people in this room are kind of in the middle. And here's what I want you to consider. How do you know that you're repenting? To the degree you've repented for the main sin of resisting the grace of God, there's two things you're going to have. These are acid tests. If you don't have these at all, you're not a Christian. If you don't have these enough, you need to grow as a Christian. The first is hopeful humility to prostitutes and tax collectors. One of the ways you can tell the difference between whether you're a Christian or just a moral person, how do you look? See, what's interesting is liberals think there's nothing, you know, prostitutes, you know, well, gee, we need to be understanding about that, okay? But those rapacious corporate raiders, those people who are gouging everybody to make a lot of money, they're the trouble with this world. And of course, the conservatives might look at it differently. Maybe the reverse. What's wonderful, Jesus Christ says, if you have really become a Christian, if you've really, really repented of the main sin, the sin underneath all the sin, your attitude toward people who seem so different than you, you'll have a hopeful humility toward them. You'll never look at anybody and say that kind of person would never become a Christian because that shows that you don't know what a miracle you are. You'll never look at somebody, you'll never look down your nose at people who are prostitutes and tax collectors because you'll say, who knows? There's really no difference between us. How do you relate to people like that? Do you get creepy around them? See, everybody's got somebody you feel just creepy around and superior to until the gospel takes hold of your heart. So there's hopeful humility. The other is there's deep security. If you are totally saved by grace, there's a deep security that comes. 6? Just a little further on at the beginning of Deuteronomy 7, God talks about the implications of being saved by grace. And there he says, I'll just find it, and there he says, Deuteronomy 7, the Lord did not set his affection on you and choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples, for you were the fewest of all peoples. But it was because the Lord loved you that he redeemed you from the land of slavery. Did you catch that circular reasoning? He says, God did not choose you because you were better than other people. He did not love you because you were better or bigger. It was because he loved you that he chose you. But you know what he's saying? He's saying he loved you because he loved you. Now, I want you to know that that's not, that may sound like circular reasoning, but it's the only thing that'll change your heart. I mean, if your spouse, if you get married and your spouse someday says to you, honey, why do you love me? And you say, I'll be very happy to tell you, you have this great figure. Or you make a lot of money. Or, you know, you are just, you know, you're so intellectually, you know, able. Is your spouse, he or she, is your spouse going to say, oh, no. I loved you because of all these wonderful traits. That's terrific pressure. That's unbelievable pressure. Because your identity is not secure. You know how easily you could slip. But if your spouse says, honey, your figure, your intellectual abilities, your talents, they were the occasion for my falling in love with you. But they're not the cause. I love you because I love you. I love you just because I love you. It's a mystery in many ways. I'm utterly committed to you. And then your spouse is going to finally say, oh, don't say I love you because. Say I love you because I love you. And that is what God is saying only to people who know I'm saved by radical grace. When I was an enemy, God came to me and opened my heart. When I was an enemy, God sent his son. Unless you understand you are saved by radical grace, you will not have the security that really, really heals your heart. Don't you see? This is an amazing thing that is being said. Right now, some of you are unhappy because God is sending you messengers. Things are happening in your life to prove to you you're not the owner. You're not in charge. You're a contingent, you're a dependent creature. Don't kill the messengers. Believe them. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you'd help us to see what it means to really know that we're saved by grace. How radical that is. It means the prostitutes and the tax collectors get into the kingdom of God first. It means those of us who have been very good need to recognize a deeper kind of repentance. But it really means that all of us now know that there is an ability for hopeful humility and deep security that it only comes when we understand the gospel. And this is the gospel. gospel that you sent your son and died for us while we were yet enemies. You sent your son and died at our very hands. And you did it because you wanted us, not the rent. So we will give you a rent. We will give you what you want because it's our way of giving you ourselves, which is what you really are after. And we ask that you'd help us to understand and live this out through the power of your spirit. In Jesus' name we ask it. Amen.
