TITLE: Psalter
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Gospel Spirituality (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/psalter/

============================================================

Now, you'll see at the top, I mentioned three books. And these three books, if you had them, and they're not that expensive, will go a long, long, long way toward... In fact, you know what? If somebody feels like going out and getting some coffee, you just go buy the books and you don't have to even stay for the next 35 minutes. But, a book by Eugene Peterson called Answering God, The Psalms as Tools of Prayer, a book by Tremper Longman, How to Read the Psalms, and the two-volume commentary by Derek Kidner on psalms in the InterVarsity Press. It's their little, they're paperback. And I want to tell you why the psalms are so important and how to use them. Okay? First of all, a little bit of history, just to try to impress you. I mean, Dick gave you some more practical ideas. I'm going to actually give you a little bit of the bigger picture and some basic strategies for using the psalms, why we need to use the psalms as tools of prayer. Hopefully, I can impress the importance of it on you tonight. But, historically, besides the gospel narratives, and probably more than the gospel narratives, the psalms are the main part of the Bible that people have used for developing deep meditation and contemplation in life. The Psalter was the Jewish book of common prayer. Now, what I mean by common prayer is, and actually this will be an important phrase tonight, what I mean by common prayer is, a book of prayers that everybody used. They used it in their private devotion. They used it in their public worship. They used it constantly as a way of making sure that we're all on the same page. We all know what prayer means. We all know how to pray. We're all doing the same prayers all the time. And it's a way of developing unity through using the same book of prayer. And it was used in synagogues. It was used in private worship. And because the Psalter functioned as a Jewish common prayer book, we know it was Jesus' prayer book, which is very significant. This was the way in which Jesus learned to pray as a human being growing up. Now, in three very different strains of the church, in the Catholic church, in the monastic movement, starting in the 4th century A.D., but it continues on down to now, the Psalms, in most monastic orders, is the basic way in which they learned to pray. In fact, the number one monastic rule, that means the policies for how the monastery works and how the monastic order works, is the rule of Benedict. Maybe you've heard of the rule of Benedict. And in the rule of Benedict, though I think there's obviously room for variation, get this, you pray or recite through the Psalter every week, the whole thing. Because now, in the monastery, you have at least three, and as many as seven, depends on how they want to work things out, at least three, and as many as seven services a day. See, some of you are ready to go, aren't you? They're all, I mean, most of them are half-hour services, and they are all day. I mean, like every three, obviously every two or three hours, you stop and you come into the chapel, and you work through that particular service. But the Psalms are scattered through there in such a way that you get through all 150 every week. You either read them privately, or you recite them, or you sing them, or you hear them read, or something. We get into the Protestant church, the Episcopal Book of Church, pardon me, the Episcopal Book of Common Prayer, I put down here, was originally put together in 1552. It basically came together in 1662. In the back of the Episcopal Book of Common Prayer, this is not news to many of you, there's something called the Daily Office. And the Daily Office is a set of psalms for both morning and evening prayer for 30 days, every day of the month. And the Book of Common Prayer divides the psalms into, and by the way, I have in your handout the Daily Office from the Episcopal Book of Common Prayer, where they divide all the psalms into morning and evening readings for 30 days. You can see where that is. It's somewhere, probably the second, no, probably like the, yeah, at the top of the third page. You see that? That's how they do it. That's the Daily Office. Now, you know, the Daily Office is done in a number of Episcopal churches around the city, if you're interested. If you ever see, I know St. Thomas, if you live in, if you work in Midtown, St. Thomas Episcopal, it'll say, I don't know when it is, does anybody know, 830 and 5 or something like that? They have what they call the Daily Prayer, the Daily Office. If you go in there, they'll be doing those psalms. You know what's, they know what it's done. That's what they'll be doing. They've been doing it for 300 or 400 years. And you can get through the entire Psalter that way. But even, not just the Catholics, not just the Episcopalians, but even the Presbyterians, have acknowledged something about the psalms. Calvin and the Reformed churches did not divide the psalms into daily offices, but what they did do in the early Presbyterian churches was that the psalms was 95% of what was sung at every service. of recast into metrical form, and they were put to music, and Calvin thought that the best way to get the Psalms into the people's lives deeply was to have it sung all the time, and so 95% of what was sung in all the Presbyterian Reformed churches for a long time was nothing but Psalms, and he put down here in his commentary on the Psalms, Calvin said the design of the Holy Spirit was to deliver the church a common form of prayer, so that's even Calvin. It's not the book of common prayer, saying the Psalms, he believes the Holy Spirit, by putting the Psalms in the Bible, was giving us the way for you to learn how to pray. This is the way. That's almost, that's a remarkable amount of consensus in the history of the church. D, down here, the Psalms are not used anywhere near like they were, and for various reasons, which I don't think I'm going to go into, I'll just say, first of all, there's a whole lot of things in the Psalms that modern people have a lot of trouble with, partly because, partly because there's some problems that are just hard to understand, theologically, partly because we live in a very comfortable world, and we, and to really see raw emotion, and to really see how people live was pretty hard, but there's an awful lot of stuff in the Psalms, and you really try to read through them, that offend you, upset you, disgust you, turn your stomach, and modern people have gotten further and further from being able to handle it. Secondly, there are some people who really don't believe you can read the Psalms as if Christ is in them, and we're going to talk about that. More people like that, that believe that to interpret the Psalms in a Christocentric way is a kind of imperialism of Christianity into the Hebrew Bible. Thirdly, the less theologically literate our culture gets, the less able people are to navigate parts of the Psalms. Fourthly, the Psalms are poetry, and I don't know if you ever noticed this. One of the reasons that Kathy doesn't like me to read poems in, I still do it, or recite poems in my sermons, is she says, she says, you know, you can't get a poem by listening to it. You have to reflect on it. You have to think about it. It goes by too fast in a sermon, so she always says, you know, keep it down. Don't do too many of them, and she's right. And the same thing is true about the Psalms. The Psalms can't be read like the rest of the Bible. You can't read the Psalms like you can read the Gospels, because they're poetry, and poetry is intense language. It's stuff that you really have to marinate in, and you have to reflect on, and we don't do it. We don't even know how to do it. So anyway, this is the reason why the Psalms aren't used, and I have, I'd love to see as the church, as Redeemer turns into more locally based communities. I'd love to see a place where we have weekly services where we use the Psalms more in prayer. But now, why use them? What's the big deal? I've made a little bit of a hoopla about this. Let me take you into some of the parts of Eugene Peterson's book called Answering God, and he makes an amazing case. And when I'm done with this, I hope some of you will say, I need to use the Psalms. Of course, once you dig into them, you'll find it's hard. But at least I'll get you motivated. First of all, why do we need to base and deeply root our prayer life in the Psalms? Deep, deep, deep. First, we don't choose God. God chooses us. That's the basic biblical teaching. Everything we do toward God is in response to God's initiative, right? You have not chosen me, I've chosen you. Prayer, therefore, and this is why I got this from Eugene Peterson, is primarily answering God, not seeking God. We tend as individualistic Westerners to think of prayer as me reaching out to God. But he says, no, it wouldn't be. Prayer is really responding to God's word. And that's the reason why, so for example, there's a great place in 2 Samuel, 2 Samuel 7, and you don't, most translations kind of make gloss over this. Like in the NIV, it doesn't say this at all. But in 2 Samuel 7, God has sent a prophet to give a revelation to David. And David turns around, and he responds, and he says this literally in verse 20, in verse 27, he says, O Lord, you have spoken, and therefore I have found this prayer in my heart. It's a very interesting phrase. The NIV translates this, therefore I have courage. But literally, in the Hebrew it says, you spoke, and I found this prayer. It's kind of interesting. I found this prayer in my heart. Now, the speech of God creates real prayer, and therefore the best prayer by far, now in some ways this is what the entire year has been, this whole year has been my way of saying to you, instead of just praying to God, meditate on the scripture till he catches fire, and then respond to God. And I think a lot of you already found that that's true. But see, with the Psalms, you have the ideal situation, because the Psalms are revelation and prayer. So you, in a sense, have a revelation of how to pray. You see the psalmist in a divinely inspired revelatory way responding to the real God. So you actually have a, you know, it's not the, you see, in many times, heart as we think it to be is seeking God as we think him to be. But in the Psalms, you've got real prayer in that you've got a person who, by divine inspiration, really understands his heart, and he's seeking the God who really is the one who's there. And therefore, unless you root yourself in the Psalms, you're not going to ever really understand what real prayer is. So the Psalter is the ultimate place to do meditation, because you actually have a divinely inspired meditation in front of you in most every one of the Psalms. Not every one, but most of them. So, like, for example, let me just read you a piece of, look at the second paragraph out of Peterson. This is very interesting. Peterson says, our personal experience in acquiring language is congruent with the biblical witness and provides an accessible lab for verifying what this, I'll show you what this means. Because we learn language so early in our lives, we have no memory of the process, and generally we would remember that we took the initiative in beginning to speak. But when you observe your own experience, we confirm the obvious. Language is spoken into us. We learn language only as we're spoken to. We are plunged at birth into a sea of language, then slowly, syllable by syllable by syllable, we acquire the capacity to answer. You know, mama, papa, bottle, blanket, yes, no. Not one of these words was a first word. Every word was an answer to another one. Question. Where, then, can we go to learn our language as it develops into maturity as it answers God? And the answer is the Psalms, the great and sprawling university that Hebrews and Christians have attended to learn to pray, the Psalms. So the first thing is, the Psalms give us a perfect example of what prayer is. Prayer is always an answer to God. Now, secondly, the Psalms not only do that, but specifically, the Psalms take us into our heart a thousand times faster than you would ever go on your own. The Psalms force you to deal with deep suffering and pain before you've gotten there. And the Psalms force you to deal with praise and thanksgiving when you don't feel like it. Kathleen Norris wrote The Cloister Walk. Have you heard of that book? A pretty famous book now. And she went to a Benedictine monastery, and she worked through the Psalms. And she's got a chapter in there. You know what? I should have looked at that chapter before I came tonight. It's been a long time since I read it. But in there, she says one of the most astounding things about the Psalms is the Psalms force you to pray when you don't feel like it, and to pray in ways that are contrary to your feelings. So very often, she says, you know, if I'm really feeling very sorry for myself, I get to this praise psalm. Now, ordinarily, I would never pray a praise to God under these circumstances if I was thinking of prayer as mainly my seeking God. But when I think of my prayer life as responding to his revelation, the Psalms force me to think of God's greatness and his goodness and all that when I don't feel like it. Other times when I'm feeling happy and feeling like my life is an oyster, I get into one of these laments, you know, one of these psalms that are the laments, the lamentations, and I see how hard life is. And I begin to realize, you know, this could happen to me. And it takes me off of my high horse. And so she's saying there's something amazing about the Psalms. What they do is, if you just follow your heart, you're not going to really see what your heart is like. And that's why I put down this little phrase here that's underlined, all exercise is against the grain. Got that? I mean, in other words, what is a workout? You're pushing against something that's resisting you. Psalms works you out because it forces you to pray and use muscles in your heart, otherwise you wouldn't ever, ever use. So the Psalms pull and push us emotionally down our normal capacities. Turn on over, excuse me. The Psalms are God's gift to train us in prayer that are comprehensive, not patched together from emotional fragments scattered around that we chance upon, and more honest, not a series of more or less sincere verbal poses we think might please our Lord. One of the things that is amazing is how much more honest the Psalms are than we are when we pray. And that's the reason why the Psalms are so important, because the psalmist knows his heart, and very often, you know, you might be upset or angry, or you get into a psalm and the psalmist is saying stuff you wouldn't have dared say to God, and the minute you see it, you realize, I do feel like that. Whoops. And that's why the Psalms are so critical. Thirdly, and this is most importantly, the Psalms force us to deal with God as he is, not as we want him to be. Now, this is very important. In a world of prayers that indulge the religious ego and cultivate passionate longings, the Psalms stand out with a kind of angular austerity, that's what that should say. Left to ourselves, we will pray to some God who speaks what we like hearing, or to the part of God we manage to understand. And that's very important. We tend to pray to the part of God we understand. But what is critical is that we speak to the God who speaks to us, and everything he speaks to us, the Psalms train us in that conversation. faith in the God who reveals himself to us. There is a difference between praying to an unknown God whom we hope to discover in our praying and praying to a known God revealed through Israel and Jesus Christ who speaks our language. In the first, we indulge our appetite for religious fulfillment. In the second, we practice obedient faith. The first is a lot more fun, and the second is a lot more important. What's essential in prayer is not we learn to express ourselves, but we learn to answer God. Now, look here for a second. The thing that frightens you, frightens me, is when I go through the Psalter, my prayer life is so different than things in the Psalms that that must mean that I really don't know much about God. In fact, when Christians first get into the Psalms, they actually get disgusted. For example, the cries for justice. We're going to talk about that in a second. They just seem so bloodthirsty. The real question is, why aren't we more outraged by social injustice? You know, those cries for justice are always saying, God, you know, dash the wicked's fangs. Look at what they've done to the poor. Look what they've done to the oppressed and all that. Our prayers are so far from the passion of the Psalms that it must mean that we really don't know our own hearts very well, and it must mean we really don't know God very well. And the Psalms just force us into that, and they just get you down deeper. You know, it's possible to pray not to the real God and not from your real heart for a long time unless you follow the Psalms. Now, here's some preliminary ways and means, that's all. Well, first of all, the hardest thing, there's three, I would say there's three theological issues you're going to have to get straight if you're going to get a lot out of the Psalms. If you don't get these theological issues straight, first of all, you're going to find at least a quarter of the Psalms just so turn you off you get nothing out of them at all, at least, and maybe more. Have you noticed that? Another thing that's going to happen, well, yeah, at least a third or a quarter of them, just about. You're going to get nothing out of them, so you have to deal with these theological issues. And here's what they are. Some of them turn you off, and some of them just sort of leave you bland. The first issue is the imprecatory Psalms, or maybe it's imprecatory, I don't know, but anyway, that's what they say. Imprecatory Psalms are the Psalms where somebody is crying out for vengeance. And if we have time, which we might, or even if we don't, if we don't have time, I have a kind of study in here of Psalm 137. Psalm 137 is a very famous psalm, in fact, but not the end of it. You remember God's spell? There's a song right near the end based on this psalm. But he leaves out the last verse. Listen, this is very short. It's the exiles in Babylon. Psalm 137. By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept when we remembered Zion. There on the poplars we hung up our harps. For there our captors asked us for songs. Our tormentors demanded songs of joy. They said, sing us one of the songs of Zion. How can we sing the songs of the Lord in a foreign land? If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand forget its skill. May my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth. If I do not remember you, if I do not consider Jerusalem my highest joy. Your butt. Remember, O Lord, what the Edomites did on the day Jerusalem fell. Tear it down, they cried. Tear it down to its foundations. O daughter of Babylon, doomed to destruction. Happy is he who repays you for what you have done to us. Happy is he who seizes your infants and dashes them against the rocks. And that's the end. So you're going to pray that in the morning for your quiet time. Go out singing into the streets. Well, you know, what do you do with that? Tell you what, let me just show you this. Turn over to the case study. We're going to come back to where we were. You see where it says case study? Sorry about how small this is. Those of you who are my age or older, you can't read it, but try. All right. The first, the middle paragraph, the middle big paragraph in the center. To what extent is the psalmist's attitude justified, and to what extent is it incomplete? Now, this is all from Derek Kidner, but it's very important to understand this, I think. First, it is right to refuse to sing on cue and expose the high claims of Zion to ridicule. Remember, the captors were saying, sing us one of the songs of Zion. You know, give us another one, baby. You know that. But there is also a danger here. Verse 4 goes on to question whether they can do corporate worship at all in a foreign country, and it implies that they can't proceed to live as a worshiping community until they're back on their own soil, with a temple and in a believing society. Therefore, the psalmist and the exiles he represents are unable to envision vibrant spiritual life there. The psalmist is not teaching an error, because verse 5 and 6 show that their loyalty to God and his salvation is more fervent than ever. no ability to concretely understand what form that hope would possibly take if they're somewhere else. Now, again, don't forget, they're not mobile, because they're not Christians. They don't understand, you know, if we're not back there with the sacrifices in the temple, I mean, how can we worship? So you're already beginning to understand one thing about the imprecatory psalms. They're not erroneous. They're not out of date. However, because the people don't envision Christ, they're right in their own era of redemptive history. But we have to translate them. And here's what Derek Kidner says. It's right to cry out for justice. The form of these verses is judicial. Notice carefully. In verse 7, the divine judge is being given evidence against Eden. Notice this is not just a vendetta. He's going to say, evidence is being given against Eden, which betrayed Israel to the Babylonians. Then in verse 8, an appeal is being made to the basic law of fairness. Because in verse 8, he says, happy is the one who repays you for what you've done to us. Now, look, this is interesting. One commentator points out the simple justice of 8.9. If any fair-minded observer is to ask the question, what do the perpetrators deserve? The answer would always be the degree of suffering that they impose. Therefore, it's quite important for modern readers to realize the reality of violence and injustice in the world and the necessity of redressing wrongs. Now, here's the great quote. Our response to such scripture should, we suggest, be to distill the essence of it, as God himself did with the cries of Job and Jeremiah. This raw wound thrust before us forbids us to give smooth answers to the fact of cruelty in the world. To cut this witness out of the Old Testament would be to impair its value as revelation, both of what is in man and of what the cross was required to achieve for our salvation. You see, if you look at this and you say, isn't it awful that they were so bloodthirsty back there? No, Kidner is saying, this cry for vengeance is absolutely just. It's just like, because they did this to us, they deserve this. Now, Kidner points out that they don't actually say, we're going to go do it. He's just telling God, God, mete out justice. But they have no concept of God's justice falling into the heart of a substitute. And that's the reason why, but you see, if you get rid of this cry for justice, you do not do justice, in a sense, pardon me, you don't do justice to the cross. I mean, why did God come? Why did Jesus have to die? Because this is true. These people do deserve this. We do deserve all this. Because we're unjust and inhuman, we deserve this. That's why Kidner can say, if we tone down this witness, if we cut it out and say, oh, we don't want to read that, it would be to impair its value as a revelation, both of what is in us and what the cross was required to achieve for our salvation. And actually, if you jump down to the, you can see the italics in the last paragraph, which is more of the quote. It's not open to us to renounce or ignore the psalmist, part of whose function in God's economy was to make articulate the cry of all the righteous blood on the earth, to borrow our Lord's phrase. But equally, it's not on us to simply occupy the ground on which they stood. This is very important. Between our day and theirs, our calling and theirs stands the cross. We then are ministers of reconciliation, and this is the day of good tidings. So this psalm takes its place in Scripture as an impassioned protest beyond all ignoring or toning down, not only against a particular act of cruelty, but against all comfortable views of human wickedness, either with regard to the judgment it deserves or to the legacy it leaves, and not least in relationship to the cost. To God and man of laying its enmity and bitterness to rest. When you read these incredible cries for vengeance, instead of saying, how bloodthirsty, they weren't Christians, were they? What you have to say is, this is not sin. This is in the Old Testament. Why is it here? Because injustice deserves tremendous judgment. And that judgment fell on Jesus. And that's the reason why now we seek reconciliation with the enemy. So if you go on back to my little guide, which I'm trying to get through before 8, I put down here, basically, this is what happens with the imprecatory psalms. First of all, we have to realize calls for justice are right, and they remind us of how important God's holiness and justice are. Secondly, we realize the psalmists did not have the justice of God completely satisfied in Christ. Therefore, we pray for our enemies. We don't wish them ill. But as Christians, we pray these psalms as longings for social justice and hatred against the power and principalities behind the world. So basically, what I do personally is I read these things as saying, Lord, thank you that the justice that should have gone on to me has gone into Christ. I pray for my enemies, but I hate the principalities and powers. I hate the injustice that's still going on. Deal with it. That's how you have to do. The second kind of psalm that is really difficult for Christians to work through are what I call the despondent psalms and the laments. Some of these psalms are really, really... I mean, the psalmist very often really, you know, next time you're in your Bible, you're a small group and you're praying, and if anybody in your small group starts to pray out loud and falls into the language of some of these psalms, you would stop and say, and rebuke them maybe, I don't know what you would do, and afterwards you say, she sort of lost the victory, hasn't she, you know, or I don't know what you'd say, but when you read some of the psalms, when you read some of these psalms, the people seem to have really lost it, and yet here it is in the psalter. Now, the great thing about this, oh, I, you know, in fact, two of them end without a note of triumph. Almost all the psalms that are laments, even the ones that just seem so dark and so bleak, almost always at the very end, he kind of comes out of it and he says, you know, but I believe I will praise God in the land of the living or something like that. But there's two of them I put down here, Psalm 39 and Psalm 88, utterly end in darkness. In fact, Psalm 39 ends like this. Psalm 39, this is the last verse, which is pretty amazing. Hear my prayer, O Lord, listen to my cry for help, don't be deaf to my weeping, for I dwell with you as an alien, as a stranger, as all my fathers were. So look away from me that I may rejoice again before I depart and am no more. And that's it. The last thing he says to God is, turn your face away so that I have a little peace before I die. And that's the end. Now, what are you going to do about that? That's another one that, you know, just make sure you don't end your quiet time with these psalms. But look, look what Kidner says. Kidner says, the prayer of 13a, that's the thing I just prayed, where he says, depart from me, get away from me, makes no more sense than Peter's saying, depart from me. But God knows when to treat that plea as in Luke 5, where, you know, where, you know, where Peter says, depart from me, I'm a sinful man. And Jesus, Jesus is patient with it. Or Matthew 8, which is another place where, in other words, God knows the difference between somebody who's committed to him and is in despair and somebody who really, really, really says, get out. I want to get out from under your clammy hands so I can live my own life. And, but here's the great line. Look at this. The very presence of each, pardon me. The very presence of such psalms and prayers in the scripture is a witness to his understanding. He knows how men speak when they're desperate. And when I read that, I just changed my whole attitude. I said, isn't that wonderful? It's the fact that God would put into the Psalter prayers like that means he understands. He understands. When we're desperate, when everything looks dark and bleak, those two psalms are now two of the most precious psalms to me because I realize you don't have to have, you don't have to have a Billy Graham ending. Remember the old Billy Graham films? No matter what happened at the very end, ta-da, he goes forward. She goes forward. You know, no matter how bad it is, at the very end they accept Christ. And it's great that there's two psalms in here where at the very end they don't, in a sense. I mean, they don't get it all together. And Kidner says, that's great. Isn't that wonderful? Isn't that incredible what reality God allows, you know, in the Psalter? Now, the third thing you have to understand, and this is very important, is you need to pray the psalms Christocentrically or gospel-centeredly. And I, what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you, this really works. This sounds awfully simple. And I would suggest you start right away. Now, most of this is based on Tremper Longman's chapter four. First of all, imagine Jesus singing the psalm in his humanity, his deity, his humiliation, his exaltation. Where might it fit? Now, this is not as hard as you think. When I say humanity, deity, in other words, think of him as divine. Think of him as human. Think of him as suffering. Think of him as exalted, reigning. And then say, imagine, where might he be praying this psalm? Where would this really fit in his life? So imagine Jesus singing the psalm. Like, for example, one of the things that's very interesting, and we won't go into it now, but in the Book of Common Prayer, the old 1929 Anglican Book of Common Prayer, they have readings for every day of the year, an Old Testament, a psalm, and a New Testament, morning and evening. And on Easter evening, on Saturday night, before Easter, they have you read Psalm 27. And I read Psalm 27. I said, why in the world Psalm 27? But as I read, I mean, Kathy and I read the thing together, and at the very end, you know, it says, don't turn me over to the desire of my foes. False witnesses rise up against me, breathing out violence. But I am confident of this. Eventually, he says, I know I will see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. I will wait for the Lord. I will be strong and take heart and wait for the Lord. I will wait for the Lord. Thank you. the cross. I'd never thought of saying, everything's going to happen to me, but I know that I'm going to be brought back into the land of the living, so I'm going to wait for you. Now, that's valid. Now, the reason it's valid, and I'm going to tell you this, is even though there are some psalms that are traditionally called messianic. Very famous messianic psalms you may have heard of, like Psalm 22 and things like that. The fact is, and I gave you a little indication, though you get it better in Tremper Longman's book. The fact is that Paul, in Romans 15 and other places, quotes psalms as saying, Jesus said this. In Romans 15, 8 and 9, he quotes Psalm 18, 49, and says, Jesus said this. Go back to Psalm 18, and you'll see there is not, there's nothing in that psalm that looks anything like, it's about the Messiah, nothing in there looks like a suffering servant, nothing in there at all. And the answer, why would Paul do that? Paul understands that the psalms are Jesus praying to the Father. Now, that doesn't mean that every single verse will sound just like Jesus. What I'm trying to say is, first of all, imagine Jesus singing the psalm, because I can tell you he did. We know, I mean, every historian will tell you he did. So imagine him in his humanity, did he imagine? And it's amazing. Very often, you'll suddenly get a vision. It's almost like getting into Jesus' heart, because you are thinking, wow, he did pray this psalm. I mean, you know, on the cross, he quotes Psalm 22. I mean, that's as bad as it gets. So he must have been completely saturated in Scripture. If at a moment like that, he's quoting the Bible, and he's quoting the psalms, which shows that they had just completely saturated his being. So first of all, imagine him praying it, but then secondly, imagine singing the psalm to him. If you can't imagine singing the psalm, him singing the psalm, you can always imagine singing the psalm to him. So for example, when you come to a lament, remember what he suffered. So this is a different way. You know, you think of him suffering. When you come to a psalm of refuge, remember that we hide in him, and he covers our sins from punishment, which is the only real danger you've got. You know that. Or when you come to a psalm of wisdom, remember that the gospel of Jesus Christ is the only way to make sense of all the ambiguities and vicissitudes of life. You're a righteous sinner living in the overlap of the ages, the already but not yet. When I get to a wisdom psalm, I say, Jesus, you're the ultimate wisdom. I get to a refuge psalm, Jesus is the ultimate refuge. I get to a lament psalm, I say, man, I have nothing compared to what you went through. And because every single psalm is about Jesus, Jesus. Some are easier to see than others. And that's why, here's a summary. Edmund Clowney says, here's the reason that psalms are all about Jesus. Because here's the great thing about Jesus. He's the Lord of the covenant and the servant of the covenant. He came as the perfect servant of the covenant, but he's also the Lord, right? That means if he's the Lord of the covenant, he's the object of every psalm prayer. And if he's the servant of the covenant, it means that he's the subject. He's the prayer of every psalm prayer. He's better than usually than the psalmist himself. But the fact is that that's the reason he's all through the psalms. And that is the secret to really, really learning how to pray the psalms. Now, my suggestion, here's the only method because the time's just about up. Here's what I do. I read the psalm. I choose one verse or text that strikes me, only one. If you're going to get through the psalms regularly, you cannot study the psalm. My suggestion to you, unless you really want to do it, my suggestion is that whatever your meditation and contemplation, whatever you're doing, do it. But take yourself 10 minutes at the most, five minutes better, every day take a psalm. And do this. This is a five or 10 minute thing at the most. You read the psalm, you choose one verse that really hits you, and you meditate on it with a T-A-C-S, the way we've talked about. What's the teaching? How do I adore Christ? How do I confess? How do I supplicate or ask for things out of this? Just meditate on it. It takes a minute or so. If you know how to do it, if you're learning meditation in all the other ways, this is a five minute to 10 minute thing. Then after I've meditated on that one verse, I ask myself the Christ question. How could Christ pray this prayer to the Father, or how could I pray it to Christ? And then I go back to the psalm, and in a sense I sort of read it, now I pray it. And the way I pray it is what's called stream prayer, which means you turn all the pronouns around. Because see, some of the psalms are really prayer. Oh Lord, you are great. But some of the psalms are not. The Lord, he is great. Well, you just turn all the pronouns around and pray it. So you read the psalm, choose one text to meditate on so it gets a little sweet. Think of Jesus, and then just take the text and pray it. And now what I do, and to turn over here, I'll just show you the daily office. You know, I don't have time for anything else. The reason the daily office works, you know why it works? I'll tell you why it works. Because you usually don't have time to do it. or not, what's really working for me is, if you're trying to read through the book of Genesis, two chapters a day or something like that, and you get behind, you just feel screwed up, and I better do four chapters today. The nice thing about this is if you miss two or three days, or even more, you always pick up the Psalms of that day that morning or that evening. And generally, you don't have time to do them all, but it's okay, they're going to come around in a month. So if you're supposed to pray 27, 28, and 29, and 27 really catches your fancy and time's up, okay, wait until next time. It'll come around again, and you'll really get to know the Psalms. So I really use the daily office. The only other thing to show you is, I have broken out. First of all, I broke out, basically, this is my journal. Because what I'm doing is, every time you come through the Psalms, it's kind of illegible for me, and I need to really get it out, otherwise the paper's going to fall apart. I'm not going to be able to read my own handwriting, or I'm going to die or something. But every time I go through, I write a few other notes down under these four headings. What's the theme in this title? What's the basic outline of it? How do I pray it? See, for example, here's Psalm 1, how I adore, how I confess, you see, how I make supplication. And then here's how I pray it with Christ. Here's how the Psalm reminds me of Christ. Now that's Psalm 1, and I gave you the outline of Psalm 2 and 3, and actually, I gave you a few more things, and then I realized, I'm never going to get this done. I mean, I'm never going to get this done in time to get to you. So what I did was, I started typing this stuff in, and I said, this is ridiculous, but you have some ideas. Because what happens is every time through, every month, you build it up. And what's really great is, if you worked on Psalm 27, you had a particularly rich time, you only have two or three lines to write. But the next month, if it comes around, you get out your two lines under Psalm 27, and it immediately reminds you of what sweetness you got out of it last month. And very often, you can pray it very quickly with the same kind of sweetness, and maybe even work on Psalm 28 that month. But anyway, the Psalms have been proven to be the best way for you to learn how to pray. So I really, really, between what I gave you here and what Dick gave you, I hope that's both motivation and a lot of how-tos that would get you into using the Psalms. I'm going to close in prayer, but first of all, before I pray, we need help because all these new, you know, people are moving around, we've expanded to three sites, we're short on volunteers every place. And Elaine and all those who help her would really love people to step into the gap right now. So read this, think about this, you know, bring it up to your small group. Let me close in prayer, and then we can go into our huddles. Our Father, I'm very, I'm more aware than usual. I'm more aware than usual of not being able to express the importance of what I was trying to say tonight. I pray that, I know that there is in this, in praying the Psalms, and a decision to praying the Psalms is life-changing power. I know that there are some folks in this room tonight who if they really get serious about this may be amazed and what a difference it makes in the whole rest of the course of their life. And I pray that, therefore, there'll be some, some of us here tonight that will take this, take this seriously, and will not pick up and try to do exactly what I said, but will, through some of the suggestions and so on, be led by your Spirit into a routine, into a strategy by which they can also learn to pray in this great sprawling university, the Psalms. And I pray, Lord, that more and more you would really make us strong people, people who are not up and down and are being blown about by our emotions, but rather we have learned to have a conversation with a God who really is. And that conversation will sustain us through anything. I thank you for this year in which I've been able to learn more of what you want me to know as well, and I pray all of us would become much more oriented to praying from the heart, the real heart, to the real God through the Psalms and through meditation on your word. Now thank you for tonight and help us to follow through. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
