TITLE: Psalm 110 – The Real Jesus (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Prophecy
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/psalm-110-the-real-jesus-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Psalm 110 is perhaps the most central, one of the most important passages of the Bible in the church, in the history of early Christianity. I actually didn't understand this as well until I began to study it. Of course, it's an Old Testament psalm. In the book of Matthew, in the book of Mark, we're told, and I'll get to this in a second, that Jesus made strong use of Psalm 110, forceful use of it. On the very first day of the history of the Christian church, the day we now call Pentecost, in the book of Acts, you can see that Peter, the Apostle Peter, preached on this text. And virtually the entire book of Hebrews in the New Testament is all based on it. It's extremely important, extremely central. But for most of us in this room, I think it'll be interesting to see it as bearing on a subject that's been getting a lot of news lately. Anybody notice that the first week of Easter, there was a picture of Jesus on every major news magazine? Time, Newsweek, U.S. News and World Report. Picture of Jesus. And if you went inside, you'll see that the news articles were not simply about how wonderful Jesus is, but the news articles were about something called the Jesus Seminar. And the Jesus Seminar is a set of scholars who, each year around Christmas and Easter, they come together, and they're very good at publicizing their work. They come together, and they say that by and large, we can't know the real Jesus because the early church read its beliefs back into its accounts of the life of Jesus. And the early church developed legends that justified its beliefs. And therefore, when we read the Bible, you really have the legendary developments and accretions of the early church justifying its belief system. And so we really don't know how much that we actually read there Jesus actually said or did. And when the Jesus Seminar get together, when the scholars get together, they vote with beads. Any of you read this? They put beads, plastic beads, in a bucket. A red bead means this verse was from Jesus. Jesus said this. And a pink bead means probably said this. And a gray bead means probably didn't. And a black bead means definitely didn't. And then that's how they vote. And they move through the New Testament. And at this point, only about 18% of the New Testament, they say, was authentic pictures of Jesus. So we can't know the real Jesus. But I think that Psalm 110 actually tells us something about the real Jesus that bears on that whole issue. Let me show you something about Psalm 110. In the Gospels of Matthew and Mark, we're told something that all scholars do agree with. And that is, when Jesus Christ's career was coming up and he was getting a bigger and bigger reputation as a teacher, the religious establishment was very upset and concerned that this fellow was getting too big for his britches. And the religious establishment came and decided to engage him in public debate in order to cut him down to size. And again, almost all scholars say that certainly must be the case, that Jesus was a teacher that was rattling the cage and was bothering the religious establishment. So they engaged him. And Matthew and Mark tell about how Jesus was engaged in these debates. And they came and asked him hard questions. Should we pay taxes to Caesar? What about divorce and remarriage? And you can read the things that he said. And in every case, his answers were incisive. They were penetrating. They were brilliant. He continually, in a sense, slam dunked his opponents in public debate. And then suddenly, now you read this both in Mark chapter 12 and in Matthew 22. Suddenly, Jesus turns. The meek, mild Jesus of your Sunday school lessons, Jesus turns and attacks. And he says, let me ask you a question. And he goes after Psalm 110. And he pulls it out. Now, why? In those days, the Jews expected a Messiah, a Christos. The Christos meant the anointed prince. And they read the Old Testament. And they saw Isaiah and Jeremiah and Ezekiel saying that someday, a descendant of David would come and would redeem Israel from slavery. And, of course, they were under Roman oppression. And so it was very popularly understood that some descendant of David would arise. The Christos, the Messiah. And he would be a political leader. And he would rally the people. And he would throw off the Roman oppressors. And he would be a descendant of David. And most everyone believed that Psalm 110 and many, many other places that talked about a Davidic descendant coming and so on and scattering the enemies and so on was about David. And Jesus turns to Psalm 110 and says, let me ask you a question. And he quotes verse 1 and says, the Lord has said, David, David saying in the Psalm, the Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand until I make your enemies your footstool. And Jesus looks at them and says, who is that? He says, how can you call the Christos David's descendant? How can you call him David's son? Who in the world would this speak? This is God speaking to this person. The Lord says to who? David's Lord. David's king. David is the ultimate king. Who in the world is David looking up to? Who is God speaking to and David is looking up to? And as you look down the rest of the Psalm, Jesus is pointing out, he's pushing this. Who in the world would David be talking to and calling a ruler? Who would David be looking at and calling my general, my king? Who would David be calling a priest forever, eternally the way to God? Who would David be saying was coming through whom God would judge the earth? Who is this? How in the world can you say this Christos is a mere mortal? How can you say the Christos is a mere human? You see, how can you say the Christos is simply a descendant? Now, what is Jesus doing? Jesus is being outrageous. Jesus is being in your face. Jesus is pushing. Jesus is actually forcing people into two extreme situations. Two extremes. Now, if you want to understand something about what he's getting at, I have to tell you a story. When I first moved here, I came to start a church. And starting a church is like starting any business. Very much, a lot of time, tremendous amount of pressure. And when you start a business, you have to make a covenant with your family. And you have to say to your family, look, for a couple years you're not going to see me. Not much of me. You just have to understand that's how it's going to be for a couple years. But then, after things are up and running, you know, I'll scale back. You'll see more of me. You'll have your father and your husband back. So if that's possible, I just want you to know that for a couple years you won't see me. So everybody said, fine. Family said, okay. Two years went by. Three years went by. My wife, Kathy, started saying, well, now, you know, where's the change? I said, well, you know, as soon as we get past this, as soon as we get done with this project, where's the change? She started to say, this is serious. This is serious. You're not doing what you said you ought to do. This is bad for us. This is bad for the family. Do you realize how serious this is? And every time she'd say that, I'd say, okay. Okay, yeah. Oh, I know. I know what you're saying. I know what you're saying. And she'd say it. I know what you're saying. One day, she said something to me along these lines. And I said, okay, oh, I know what you're saying. And she went to the cupboard, and she got out a stack of plates. And the plates were, I recognized them immediately. They were our wedding china, china we got during our wedding. And she took a stack, and she walked out to the balcony, and she sat down, and she took a hammer, and she began smashing the plates. She took a plate, and she smashed it. I ran to the door. I said, what are you doing? She says, you're not hearing me. And then she smashed another plate. I said, what are you doing? This is our wedding china. And she said, now, look, I want you to realize I'm not mad. She says, I'm not mad. I said, I said, but I am. And I was, and I wept. And I was hurt. And I even, at one point, said, I don't know, you know, that I'm going to be able to forgive you very easily for what you're doing to me. And she kept smashing it, and she said, listen, she says, you think you hear me? You don't. You think you know how unhappy I am? You don't. You think you know how serious things are? You don't. Because you're not doing anything about it. What I'm telling you, you've put into a little box in your brain, I'm breaking out of the box. What I have to say takes absolute evasive action. If you knew how serious my claims were, you would not be able to say okay and just go on from day to day. I'm breaking out of the box. I want you to hear me. Evasive action. Choose this day which way you're going to go. Now, you know, she asked me to tell you, she pointed out afterwards to me that she had taken all the saucers for which there were no cups anymore. So, and of course, you know, that we could at this point go off the side ramp and get into a whole other sermon. But Proverbs 31 says, a woman of worth is clothed with strength and dignity. And so I have given you this particular illustration, and it's a dangerous illustration. It's racy. It's funny. be distracted. Now you have to follow me. Please come with me. What Kathy was doing is a very, very dim and very, very faint echo and reflection of what Jesus always did with everyone he met. He came after them and he smashed plates. He said, if you can look at me and talk to me and walk away saying, okay, okay. If you can walk away saying, he's a good teacher. I can learn from him. He's inspirational. I am not inspirational, he says. I am devastating. If you just use me to get over the humps in your life, if you use me as an example, if you use me as somebody to refer to when you're in trouble, you have put me in a little box. I'm breaking out. I am not a mere mortal. I am the judge of the earth. I am the eternal high priest. I am the way to God. You have to eat my flesh and drink my blood if you're going to have life. I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father by me. That's outrageous. Now, that's what he's doing. He's smashing plates. He's saying, I'm breaking out of the box. You're not hearing me unless you take evasive action. Choose this day who you will serve. And at the very end of talking, see, he goes after and he says, who's David's son? This is David's Lord. How can you think that the Messiah is a mere mortal? I am he. I am not a mere mortal. I am not a mere political leader. I am not the Messiah you want. I am the Messiah you need. I am the Messiah you've got. And therefore, change. Jump up. Be afraid. Hate me. Or love me and serve me utterly and build your entire life around me. But I will not allow you to do anything in the middle. He was outrageous. He was in the face. Now, how do we know that's the real Jesus? You say, well, I just, I thought the scholars say that, you know, that who knows whether Jesus ever said or did that or not. But here's what I'd like you to think about for a moment. A small digression. One of the things that irritates me, frankly, a little bit about all the articles, whenever you have an article and they say, yeah, scholars have judged that, historical critical scholars have judged that many of the sayings of Jesus were not historical, but they never tell you under what criteria they're making these choices. Now, you can get their books. You can read their books and you can see. And you know what the main criteria is? The main criteria they use is what they call the criterion of dissimilarity. And here's how it works. Just listen to me for a second. They say, since we suspect that the early church has read back its teachings and its beliefs into Jesus' life, that it has put its beliefs on to Jesus to justify in these accounts. Therefore, we will only be sure that a saying is historical if it deviates, if it's dissimilar, if it contradicts the beliefs and practice of the early church. That's the criteria of dissimilarity. Because we suspect that they read it back in. The only way we can be sure that this is a historical teaching is if it contradicts the teachings and the practice of the early church. Now, you think about this for a second. That's a pretty incredible begging of the question. Because what they're saying is, they say, we suspect it. Therefore, we're going to use this criteria. But what they're really doing is, without proving that the early church has read their beliefs back into what Jesus said, they actually are assuming it without proving it at all. Without proving it, they're assuming it. And you know what? Can you imagine any leader of any stature who, 20, 30, or 40 years later, when the Gospels are written, has almost nothing in common with the people that he trained? It doesn't make much sense. But here's what I'd like to ask a question to. Besides that, that's the old logical fallacy of begging the question. Here's what I want to know. How do you account for the waves that Jesus made? Jesus Christ is the one individual who's made the biggest dent in history. He's the stone that has made the biggest splash in human history. No one has ever had the effect he's had. And let me just remind you, let me just suggest two different ways. All the early Christians, hundreds of thousands of the early Christians were Jewish. Jewish. Now, first of all, these Jewish people came to believe that this man was God. People that lived with him came to believe that this man was God. Do you know how incredibly unlikely that is? Do you know that Eastern religions believe in an infinite God, but not a personal God? And Western religions, the Greeks and the Romans and the Germans and so on, they believed in personal gods, but not infinite gods. And so both of those groups had never had that much trouble with the idea that God. in everything, and therefore everyone's got a certain amount of God consciousness, and they believe in avatars, they believe in human beings that express God. And of course, you know, the Greeks and the Romans believed that Zeus and Hermes, they were personal but not infinite. They could kind of take disguises on. The Jews believed, unlike the Eastern religion, that there was a God before anything existed, a God before creation, a God before the world began. And unlike the Western people, the Jews believed in a transcendent God. And as a result, the Jews' view of God was they wouldn't even speak his name. They wouldn't even write out his proper name. They were the last people on the face of the earth to believe that any human being could be God. But somebody lived among them, came under unbelievable scrutiny, and was immediately, within just a, immediately worshipped after his death as God. What turned Paul the Pharisee, absolutely Orthodox Jew, brilliant Jewish thinker, into someone who said, though he was in the very nature of God, this is Philippians 2, Paul writes, just a couple decades after Jesus died. Though he's in the very nature of God, he didn't hold on to equality with God, but he came down and emptied himself and made himself human and died the death of the cross. Therefore, God has exalted him and given him the name which is above every name. What turned Paul into that? The Jesus seminar says, all we know is that he was a wandering teacher. How in the world would a wandering teacher have this kind of impact? The only way, I believe, to account for what Jesus has done. We know that his followers died for the belief that he was God. They tore up the Roman Empire. They burned up the ground. They spread the news like lightning. Their lives were so radiant that people believed him. Jesus' life was so radiant that people believed him when he claimed, made these incredible claims. Now, here's what I want to know. What possible kind of Jesus could have can account for that kind of effect? And the only one I know is the one you actually see in the Gospels, a Jesus that gets in your face, a Jesus that says, my teaching is sane and my life is radiant, but I make the most outlandish statements that anyone has ever made. Buddha never said anything like this. Mohammed never said anything like this. Even, even what we would consider, the crazy cult leaders, tiny little movements of people who could never get most folks to believe they were God, even the people that have claimed divinity have never made this kind of claims. He said, I alone can forgive sins. He says, I will return to judge the earth. He says, before Abraham was, I am. I have never, which means I am beginningless. At one point, he says to the Pharisees, he says, I keep sending you prophets. I've been sending you prophets? Jesus Christ? He says, for hundreds of years, I've been sending you prophets. Jesus just speaks casually every page. He forced people. He said, I will break out of your boxes. You can hate me and fear me, or you can make me the center of your life. I will not have any, any, anything else. And if you, and most people don't do either. Most of you do not hate and fear him because his moral teachings are too sane. But you do not give him everything because you're not listening to him. He's breaking out of the box at every page, if you look at it. And that's the reason why at the very end of this great talk by C.S. Lewis, he puts it this way. He says, what are we to make of Christ? There is no question of what we can make of him. It is entirely a question of what he intends to make of us. You have to accept or reject his amazing claims. The things he says are different from what any other teacher has ever said. Others said, this is the truth about the universe. This is the way you ought to go. But he says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. He said, no man can reach absolute reality except through me. He said, try to retain your own life and you will be inevitably ruined. Give yourself away and you will be saved. He said, if you are ashamed of me, if when you hear this call you turn the other way, I will also look the other way when I come again as God without disguise. If anything, whatever is keeping you from God and from me, whatever it is, throw it away, he said. If it's your eye, pull it out. If it's your hand, cut it off. If you put yourself first, you will be last. Come to me, everyone who is carrying a heavy load, and I will set that right. And your sins, all of them are wiped out. I can do that. He said, I am rebirth. I am life. Eat me. Drink me. I am your food. And finally, do not be afraid. I have overcome the whole universe. That is the issue. Would you mind? I'm going to close the lecture in prayer, and then I'll. ask that if I've said anything here tonight that isn't true, if I've said anything that's exaggerated, if I've said anything that is not consonant with the way things are, I pray that people here who are listening might forget it, or it might not have a wrong effect on their thinking. If I've said anything here tonight that is true, if it is consonant with reality, if it is the way things are, I pray that anyone here, including me, would never be able to forget it. I pray that the truth would come in and have its way with us, until we can know the one who is the way, the truth, and the life, Jesus Christ, in whose name we pray. Amen.
