TITLE: Putting on the New Self
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:17-24
TOPICS: Doctrine Justification Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Lord of All
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/putting-on-the-new-self/

============================================================

I'll just ask those who are going to bring the offering, are you available? Are you there? I forgot something. Anybody lose a set of keys this morning? They've been here this morning. Anybody lose a set of keys? Are those yours, Marley? That's great. I found the person. You know, usually you come up and say, anybody lose a set of keys and nobody, who knows? All right? You even caught them. That's great. Okay. Gosh, this is going to be a great night. I actually found somebody that has the keys. She caught them. What more can go right? Let's look at Ephesians 4. Last time on these verses, last time. Why do we spend a month on these verses? Because we live in New York. Let's just look at verses 22, 23, and 24 of chapter 4 of Ephesians. You were taught, with regard to your former way of life, to put off your old self, which is being corrupted by its deceitful desires, to be made new in the attitude of your minds, and to put on the new self, created to be like God, in true righteousness and holiness. Why do we keep looking at this? Because this is one of those things that Martin Luther used to talk about. It's one of the articles on which the church stands or falls. Luther was very wise in saying, there are lots of articles of doctrine, lots of articles that we believe, but there's not much use in defending to the death everything you believe. You know, I believe that you can present infants to God in baptism. And a lot of other people believe that you shouldn't do that. Now, I don't think that that is something I should be defending to the death. I don't think I should be getting up here and spending four weeks trying to convince everybody that it's true. Now, maybe three. No, actually, I'll do it. I'll try my best because every bit of truth is important. If I think it's what God has taught, I'll try to explain it. But I'm not going to defend it to the teeth because, defend it to the death, because, as Martin Luther says, this is not one of the articles on which the church stands or falls. There are certain truths that if you lose them, if it's not there, then there is no Christianity. There is no faith. There is no church. One of them, of course, was justification by faith alone. That is, you're saved not by, as what Martin Luther would say, is unlike what the Roman Catholic Church said and unlike what other particular philosophies and religions said, you are saved by faith alone, though not by a faith which is alone, but by a faith which issues in good works and godly character. And the second article on which the church stands or falls is, therefore, because of the new life that's come within you, you can change. That's why we've spent four weeks on this. You can change. It's not good enough just to say, I believe in all the truths of the faith. That's what makes me a Christian. It also means that you must change if you're a Christian and you can change into what? Into the likeness of Christ. And that's what these three verses are saying. Now, let's just quickly review putting off the old self, then being remade new in the spirit of your mind, and then lastly, what we're looking at this evening is putting on the new self. Putting on the old self, putting off the old self, we said, was a comprehensive change. It doesn't say putting off this or that behavior. You notice that. When it talks about Christian change, it doesn't just talk about putting off this behavior or that habit. It says put off the self. It means this is a comprehensive and complete change. And we said the last couple weeks, what this means is to put off the old self means a Christian life is a totally examined life. You remember that? And it's a totally reoriented life. And I know people come and go and some of you weren't here. A totally examined life means, and this is what I just wish I could convey more. A Christian examines every part of the life. You no longer say, I do this because I'm an American. I do this because I'm a Mexican. I do this because I'm from Park Avenue. I do this because I'm from Bensonhurst. I do this because I'm labor. I do this because I'm management. You see, before you're a Christian, you do things because it's expected. This is the way we do things. the way it's done. And that's the only reason you do many things that you do, just because this is it. This is right. This is the way it is. When you become a Christian, you no longer can do that. You're lifted up out of your group, in a sense. You're lifted up out of your culture, and you have to ask yourself, does this please God? Is this in accord with his word? Is this in accord with kingdom values? You can't just go along and say, this is the accepted thing. This is the done thing. You can't do that anymore. It's amazing to me that people think of conservative, it's called conservative Christianity. What we have here is conservative Christianity. I reject that title. It's historic Christianity. I hate to call it conservative because, don't you see, a conservative mindset means the old ways are wonderful because they're old. The old ways are great because they're traditional. Nobody is more untraditional than a Christian. Nobody. Because a Christian is always saying, it doesn't matter whether it's been done this way before. It doesn't matter what it's like. It doesn't really matter what my background is. I want to please God right here, and every part of my life has to be examined. And therefore, we talk about that. We mention all kinds of examples of this. But you see, this is, for example, one of the reasons why Christians just don't fall into very good categories. For example, there's a liberal approach. There's people who are called liberals, and there's people who are called conservatives. And a thoughtful Christian just really resists those kinds of labels. Really resists them. Why? Well, look, here's the liberal party. When I say party, I'm talking about a mindset. There's a liberal mindset that goes like this. And that is, we have got to be accountable for what we do with our money. We've got to take care of the less fortunate. On the other hand, I can be absolutely free in what I do with my body, with my sexuality. I can be absolutely free in what I do. I should not be accountable to anybody else when it comes to what I do in my personal life. My social life, I've got to be politically correct. My social life, I've got to be multicultural. I've got to be unbiased. I've got to be absolutely equitable and just in the distribution of wealth and in my treatment of other races. And that's great. But in my private life, I can do whatever I want. Don't tell me whether I should be married or not. Don't tell me whether I should be gay or straight. Don't tell me. There's a conservative mindset that goes the other direction. The conservative mindset says when it comes to your personal life, your sexuality and your married life and all that, there you must go with traditional values. And we want to legislate personal morality. But when it comes to what we do with our money and whether we should care for the poor, we should be totally free. Nobody should tell me what to do with my money. So the conservative says, don't tell me what to do with my money, but if you want to, you can tell me what to do with my sex life. And a liberal says, don't tell me what to do with my sex life, but if you want to, you can tell me what to do with my money. Ultimately, you understand that? Sure, that's the difference between the village voice and the Wall Street Journal. You know, right? Legislate morality in one area, but not in another one. And see, underneath it tends to be basically an American individualism that says, don't tell me what to do in the areas that are really important to me. And a Christian says, I'm sorry, I have to examine every area of my life. I am accountable to be like God in every area of my life, both my personal life and what I do with my sexuality, and my social life, and I'm talking about my civic life and what I do with my money and how I treat the poor and needy. I am accountable in every area. Christians just don't fit into the old molds. And that's the reason why, when you're converted, if you're Jewish, a lot of your friends are going to say you're not Jewish anymore. If you're converted and you're Italian, a lot of people are going to say you're not Italian anymore. If you're converted and you're in the social register here in New York, and you get converted, people in the social register are going to say, you know, you're not social register anymore. If you're poor and you get converted, you won't be poor in the same way anymore. You leave. You're picked up out of your group. And you no longer say, well, we do it this way because this is my group because that's not where identity lasts anymore. Putting off the old self means you have a completely, totally examined life. And we said it's a totally reoriented life. That means, sure, there's many things you stop doing. Once you become a Christian, putting off the old self certainly means, on the one hand, to stop doing certain things. But it also means to do the things you've always done in a completely new way. We said last week that if you're a fisherman, if you're a or a brother or her dude, notFL. If you're a man, if you have a friend. Or if you have a car case, we're not to do that. stop doing certain things. But it also means to do the things you've always done in a completely new way. We said last week that if you're a fisherman, or a fisherwoman, who wants to be a fisherwoman? If you're a fisherperson, if somebody likes fishing, then what you do is, as a Christian, you're going to do it in a different way, with a different regard for nature, with a different sense of the stewardship of nature which God's given us as human beings. If you're an artist, if you're an artist before you're a Christian, why do you do art? Because you have to, because it's self-expression. And generally you think about it like that. You say, well, I have a vision and I need to get it out. I have something inside and I have to express myself. When you become a Christian, you rethink all that. And Christian artists know this, that whereas God is the creator, that they as artists are sub-creators. And that means that what God did, they are doing too, in a sense. God had truth in his mind and he incarnated it. He made the invisible visible. So what he did was, the beauty of his nature, when he created the universe, he made his invisible nature visible. And that's what you see when you look at the mountains and that's what you see when you look at the ocean. That's why the Bible says, the heavens are telling of the glory of God. Now, the greatest, everybody knows, as far as I can tell, everybody would agree that the greatest work of art in history is the world, the mountains and the oceans. And what are they doing? They are making visible the glory of God. That's what Psalm 18 says. A Christian artist begins to say, that's what I'm apt to do. I am doing incarnation. I am taking the invisible underlying reality and making it visible so it can capture people's imagination. That's a hard job. That's very difficult. Now, that means any aspect of the underlying reality and truth, anything that God says the artist is trying to express and incarnate. And of course, that means all kinds of things. The beauty of nature and the depravity of man and the tediousness of relationships. There's all kinds of things to express in art. But don't you see, once you become a Christian, you put off the old self. Does that mean you stop being an artist? No, not at all. You get an entire new reorientation. All of the skills you learned in art school and all the skills you learned through your experience now are suddenly being used in a different direction, with a different focus, from a different perspective. Put off the old self. What an adventure. Don't you see, there's a sense in which until you start to put off the old self. That's not a negative thing. Until you become a Christian, you're kind of like an animal or a robot because you do things because they're done. You don't have a way of rethinking everything. The Word of God, the Word of the King, the Bible, which is revealed truth that touches on every area of life. Now you have a lifetime adventure. You have a new lifetime career. And that is breaking out the incredible treasure chest of revealed truth from the King to you and pressing it not only into your own life but everywhere you go, into the life around you. And don't you see, before that you say, I do this because this is the way I am. This is the kind of person I am. This is my crowd. This is my race. This is my gender. This is my ethnic group. This is my neighborhood. This is how we do things. You were a robot. You were an animal. And now you're more of a human being than ever. Because now for the first time, you're free. You're thinking. You have a way to judge and evaluate everything. You don't belong to anybody but the Lord. Nobody else controls you. Put off the old self. And then it says, be made new in the spirit of your minds. We talked about that last week. And that means while you're putting off and putting on, this is not a middle step, we said, but this is something that God's doing inside. And I'm not going to go talk much more about this now. It's how the spirit of God takes and empowers you as you are putting off and putting on. The spirit of God comes on inside and renews the spirit of your mind, the attitude of your mind. What is that? It's like your imagination. It's the faculty with which you value something. So we said last week, remember Achan in Joshua chapter 7? It wasn't Judges chapter 7. It was Joshua chapter 7. Achan tells us that when God told him not to take any of the loot that he found when they were sacking Jericho. But he said, I saw the garment and the gold and I saw how beautiful it was and he weighed it in his heart, in the spirit of his mind. Remember that? And so his imagination was captured by the beauty of those things and then he coveted them and then he took them and then he hid them. And we said that what he needed at that point was to be renewed in the spirit of his mind. What he could have done at that point is begun to let his imagination be captured with what holiness of God and to remind himself of what God had released him from in Egypt, how he'd been a slave and now he was free man. And if only he had let that capture his heart at that point, he would have been able to resist the temptation. The key thing was he needed to be renewed in the spirit of his mind. We talked about that last week. What is this? This is where you let the truth of God sink down, not just into your thinking, but beneath your thinking into the spirit of your mind. Look, Martin Luther. Martin Luther prayed two hours every day like this. If you want to read more about it, you get a little teeny inter-Varsity Press booklet called Martin Luther's Quiet Time. I've probably referred to it before. It's a small, it's a compendium, it's a concise abridgment of a letter he wrote to his barber about how to pray. One day his barber said, Master Luther, how do you pray? Luther wrote him a 40-page letter on how he prayed. This has been cut down by Walter Trubish into a little inter-Varsity Press booklet. But it's great. He calls it Garland Prayer. By Garland, he's thinking about four strands. He says, when I look at a verse of scripture, or I take a particular word out of a particular verse, I first say, what is the teaching? Number one. Then number two, what here can I use to praise God with? Number three, what here can I use to help me confess? And number four, what can I ask God for or aspire to? So he would take a look at the first commandment, and he would say, okay, what's the teaching of it? How can I praise God for this? What can I confess from this? And what can I aspire to and ask God for from this? So what he would do is he'd take the Lord's Prayer, he'd take the Apostles' Creed, he'd take the Ten Commandments, and he says he would do warming up of his heart. What he'd do is he'd sit down and he'd write down in a journal and think along those four lines about every truth. You know, he'd take a verse and he'd find something to praise God, confess, and aspire to, and then he'd go to the next one and move along. He says, until, he says, the Holy Spirit would start to preach to me, and then I would stop everything and write down everything he said. Now, what's he talking about? Don't you know what that means? I sure hope you've had this experience. You read your Bible and you meditate on it and you pray about it, and you do that every day, hopefully, or often. And one day, as you're moving along, suddenly a particular verse or a particular truth just sort of opens up. You know, I always thought it was kind of cute, the special effects in the movie Cocoon about these aliens that are actually bright and brilliant and hard to look at because of their effulgence, of their glory, but they have these sort of human suits on. And every so often, you know, if they pull the little rubber mask off, a little beam of light would come out and strike you. It's really kind of cute and eye-catching. And in some ways, that's how the Bible will be. You're looking along and all of a sudden, out of one verse comes this ray of light and you say, why didn't I see that before? Look at that. My, there's a lot here to think about. Luther says, at that point, what's happening is you're being renewed in the spirit of your mind. Something that you never saw before is sinking in. It's penetrating. And whereas you were so worried, and you know, at the level of behavior and even at the level of thinking, it's hard to deal with worry, isn't it? At the level of, you know, for example, if you're walking around like this and somebody says, don't worry, well, how do you know I'm worrying? Well, because you're rocking on your feet. Oh, yeah. That helps a little bit. Take deep breaths. That helps a little bit. But that doesn't really get rid of the anxiety. All right. So what do you do is you argue with yourself. You say, there's nothing to worry about. Stop worrying. Worrying doesn't help. Worrying doesn't get you anywhere. And that might help, too. But we're talking about a lower level than behavior and even a lower level, in a sense, than just your thinking. What happens is you might be very anxious. And as you're studying the word, out will come a ray of light, like the day that I came across Isaiah 49, 15. And I was reading along, and that's the place, and you've probably heard me refer to it because it still is very radioactive to me, that particular verse. And the verse goes, Can a mother forget the baby that sucks at her breast? Yea, she may forget, but I will not forget you. See, you're engraved on the palms of my hands. It's a great verse, and it says, You know how much a child is loved by a nursing mother? You know how much the nursing mother has all these biological hormones that just make the woman feel so warm and so bonded to that child who's sucking at her breasts? And God says, you know, that kind of love, that kind of love is nothing. She may, you know, she may forget. My love for you makes her kind of love look like hatred. I will never forget you. You're engraved on the palm of my hands. I remember the first time I came across that verse and it just started to throb and it started to come after me and the truth began to shine. So what did I do? I started writing everything down that I heard. Everything down that came to my heart. Everything down that came to my mind. What was going on was I was being renewed in the spirit of my mind at that point. I was making myself as available as I possibly could. And in a significant way, a major part, like I said, that verse was radioactive and a major part of the tumors of anxiety that grew in my life were shrunk away because of the beams that came from that verse. Now you say, well, how does that happen? Luther was very disciplined about this. He went at it two hours a day and he didn't, you see, he was more like Jacob who wrestled with the angel and got ahold of the angel of the Lord. And the angel says, let me go. And, and Jacob says, I will not let you go till you bless me. You don't think God honors that sort of thing? Oh, you got to be careful here. I don't mean that you get ahold of God and say, God, I, I, I demand great experience. I demand great feelings. I demand wonderful thrills and comfort. I demand it. That's not how you ever get great thrills and comfort for God. You need God, not peace, love, and groovy vibes. And when you're after peace, love, and groovy vibes, you're not going to get them because they only come to people who want something more than peace, love, and groovy vibes. Not blessed is he who hungers and thirsts after blessedness, right? Blessed is he who hungers and thirsts after righteousness. Blessedness comes to those who want something more than blessedness, and that is God. So when you get ahold of God and his word and say, I need you, I need to be renewed in the spirit of my mind. The Bible tells us, and church history shows us from a guy like Luther, he became a great heart because he was disciplined about this, because he said, I'm going to work on this and I'm going to work through the truth. I'm going to chew on it until the Lord begins to preach to me and renew me in the spirit of my mind. And at that level, that's something that should be going on constantly while you're doing all this putting off and putting on. Understand that's not a separate thing. It's something that God does within as we're putting off and putting on. It's something he does through us. That's the reason we can put off and put on. It's the reason we can examine our lives. It's the reason we can reorient our lives. Now, what is putting off? We've seen that. What is putting on then? And putting on, first of all, means that we're aiming for this verse. It says, put on the new self created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness. This is one of the few times in which the translation I read from the New International Version, I think, fails me and fails you too. It misses something very important. It actually says here, put on the new self which is created in the likeness of God. Now, all the way through the Bible, wherever you see this term likeness, it's referring to what in the Old Testament is called the image of God, the image and likeness of God. When God created the world, he came to the sixth day and he was about to create human beings and he said, let us create man and woman in our own image. Now, people have been debating for many years what the heck that means, but it's clear it's what differentiates us from every other human, every other life form. In Genesis 9, there's this curse which is a little hard to understand. Maybe we'll go look at it sometime. There's a curse on animals who kill human beings. It says in Genesis 9, any animal that sheds the blood of a man, I will shed his blood or her blood because man was created in my image and therefore his life is sacred. Now, we don't really know what's wrong. Well, anyway, it's a curious verse, but the one thing that's very clear is that the reason that human life is sacred, unlike animal life, and let's not get into an animal rights, you know, debate right now, but it's very clear in the Bible that the reason that human life is sacred in a way that animal life is not is because human life is made in the image of God. Well, what is that? To be made in the image of God means, first of all, it means that we are like God in the sense that we're rational and we're personal and we can communicate. It means that we are like God in the sense that we're personal. We can reflect on who we are. Animals can't do that. And so there's a certain natural endowment. We're personal beings. We have personality. We can love and we can communicate. But that's only part of the image. The other part of the image is what's written down down here, and that is righteousness and holiness. is the ultimate expression of what the image of God should be, because Jesus is not only God from whom the image has come, but he's also human being, he's also man. And so we're told in the book of Hebrews, he is the perfect representation of the image of God. In other words, what does it mean to put on the new self? The answer is, it means to look at Jesus Christ, to be in love with Jesus Christ, and to become as much like Jesus Christ as possible, period. Putting off the old self is one thing. Putting on the new self means looking at Jesus and saying, that's what I want to be. In 1 John 3, we're told, we, beloved, we do not know what we will be like, but we know this, when we see him, we will be like him. And all those who hope for him in this way, John says, purify themselves as he is pure. And marvelous verse in 1 John 3, and it tells us that to even want to be like Jesus will make us like Jesus. The actual day that we meet him face to face, we're told, we will be immediately transformed into his likeness. We'll be like mirrors. C.S. Lewis puts it in a gorgeous way. He says, he can make the feeblest and filthiest of us into bright stainless mirrors, reflecting back to God, though on a smaller scale, which is what the mirror is, that's the image, reflecting back to God, yet on a smaller scale, his own boundless wisdom and righteousness and power and goodness and delight and nobility and creativity. Can you imagine? And Lewis says, we will become bright pulsating creatures, just overflowing with such greatness and power that if we saw ourselves today, if we saw pictures of ourselves, what we're going to be like, we'd be tempted to bow down and worship them. The image of God, on that day, we're going to see Jesus and we'll be instantly transformed into his likeness. And what do we see when we see Jesus? We see a perfect, functioning human being, only he's always surprising us. On the one hand, he didn't trust anybody. Isn't that something, John 2? He says he didn't trust people and yet, without reservation, he continually gave himself for people. He was extremely humble, yet unbelievably bold. He got angry quickly and he was as tender as possible. He trusted nobody and yet he was completely self-serving and vulnerable. What kind of person is this? It's a perfect person. He's the one you go to. And listen, we have a real leg up here because one thing that's finally breaking up our entire society, and I don't have time to go into it now, I'd love to talk about this some other point. Our society for the last 300 years has been built, Western society, has been built on this idea that you really can build a society and you can come up with values and morality for society without belief in God. In other words, for the last 300 years we were told, if you want to be religious, that's fine, keep it in your private life. But when it comes out to actually doing the work of society and building a moral value basis for society, we don't need God. We can do it through reason, we can do it through discussion, we can do it through science, we can do it through education. And that is now seen to be an impossibility. It's impossible. Because as soon as we start to say, well, look, we don't need to talk about religion, but we need to talk about freedom of expression. We need to talk about human rights. We need to talk about the value and dignity of the individual. Those are religious concepts. Science and reason can tell you what is, but never what ought to be. Never. It can tell you what's happening, but it can never tell you what things should be. It can tell you what's normal, but we all know what's normal isn't good enough. We want to change human beings, but change them into what? As soon as you say, this is what a good human being should be like, and as soon as you use the word should, and as soon as you use the word ought, you have begun to put in there religious values. You're talking about what human beings are like and whether we're going to live after, live along, live after we die in another life. You're starting to talk about what's right and wrong. There is no basis for even developing a society unless you do it on religious grounds. More and more people are seeing that. You can't go to a counselor and ask him or her to change you, and if they say, well, here's what a human being ought to be like, they cannot tell you that on scientific grounds. Science can't tell them what you ought to be like. They're giving you a religious opinion. They may say it's scientific, but it can't be. It's a religious opinion. So say, what are the religious beliefs underlying this opinion? They say, I'm sorry, I'm not talking religion to you. You can press them and say, you have to be. You have to be. For example, if you decide... no right and wrong in the area of sexuality, that's a religious decision because you're saying it's right as long as it's right for you. Where do you get that? Do you see what I'm saying? At that point, you were imposing relativism on me and saying, that is good. And for you to tell me that this kind of sexuality is right and wrong, that is bad. So what you're doing to me is exactly what you told me I can't do to you. You can't get around value statements and you can't do that on the basis of science. You're talking religion. And so one of the big problems we have in every field today, sociology, psychology, urban planning, politics, is nobody can agree on what a human being should look like. Nobody can agree on it. We have descended into a society full of very vociferous, loud, yelling, special interest groups that have nothing in common so we can't communicate. What should human beings be like? Everybody has their opinion. They're all religious opinions. The Christians have far and away the most coherent and the most attractive answer. We should be like Jesus. We were created to be in his image and his likeness. Now, therefore, that's what we're trying to do when we put on the new self. But how do we put on the new self? Look, first, it's a lot like putting off the old self. You put on the new self by reminding yourself of who you are. On the back, I think, of your handout. All right? Third, I'll just push this out. Second, look at second. Putting on the new self. It's not a new habit or a new practice we're talking about. Though, of course, there'll be new habits and new practices. We must never do the work in compartments. Putting on the new self is not just changing yourself in this area, changing yourself in that area. That would be to contradict the whole principle. Putting on the new self is not just putting on that new habit. It's changing the reigning and governing principle of the whole of our lives. We think of ourselves in a new way, in a completely new way. It's to get a whole new identity. It's essentially, then, done through preaching to yourself. For example, you have 1 Peter 1.13, gird up the loins of your mind with the truth. That's an interesting passage. You know what it means to gird up the loins of your mind? If you were, you know, everybody wore big, long robes. If you had to run someplace or do some heavy work or lifting, you would pick your robe up like that, which was down on the ground. You'd pick your robe and you would put it into your girder or your belt. Therefore, to gird up your loins meant to get ready for action, to pick up all the flowing pieces of your robe that you could trip over and put it all together. You're basically in a miniskirt, essentially. You were ready for action, so you could run, so you could jump, you could fight. That's what it meant to gird up the loins of your mind. And Peter starts talking about this, not gird up the loins of your body, but of your mind with the truth. It means to take the truth and put it on like armor. It means to remind yourself of who you are. It means to continually rehearse the truth. Colossians 1.16 says, let the word of Christ dwell in you richly. And Paul is continually talking about it. Right here, it says true holiness, the new self created to be like God in true righteousness and holiness, but literally it says the holiness of the truth. And it probably, he's probably talking about the holiness that comes from girding yourself with the truth. The Christian understanding of truth is different than any other religion or philosophy. Every other religion or philosophy says, there's the truth, applaud it, apply it, uphold it, fastidiously study it, scrupulously obey it. And of course, Christians say all that, but Christians go much further than that. The Bible tells us that the truth is alive. Hebrews 4, it's alive and active. The truth is something to be eaten. Can you imagine studying about food, studying about wheat bran, learning all about it, figuring out how it operates, studying it, looking at it under a microscope, figuring everything out, but if you never eat it, you've missed the purpose of it. In fact, you might be the world's expert on wheat, but suppose you'd never tasted it. Wouldn't you think that a five-year-old kid who eats wheat, you know, for breakfast or eats wheat bread, in a sense knows more about the wheat than the expert? It's not enough to study the truth. It's not enough to even study it and learn it and even obey it. You're supposed to take it inside you. So it begins to actually bear fruit inside. Paul talks about it all the time using the word reckon. He says, alive to God. And it's not the Texas way of saying reckon, I reckon, like means I hope or I think. The word reckon means to account. It means to treat as if it's true. Listen, in the New Testament there are tons of places where Paul says, or not just Paul, that the writers write to people who are suffering. They're suffering. And they say, think about the future. Someday you're going to be with him. Someday you're going to rule and reign with him. Right now you only have five senses, touch, taste, hear, see, smell. When we get there there'll be a hundred senses. There'll be a thousand senses. Imagine what it's going to be like. The way in which you right now compared to, the way you are now compared to the way you will be now, you're vegetables. You're tomatoes out there. You're turnips. You've got five senses. Eventually you're going to have a thousand senses. You're going to rule and reign with him forever. Now, Paul constantly says reckon. Think about this. Screw it in. Act as if it's true. The early Christians who read these books that were written to them by Paul and by the writer of the Hebrews and by the, and John in Revelation. It worked. They took the truth and they spoke to themselves about it. And as a result, they suffered in a way that the world had never seen. They went off to the lions. They went off to the, to the, uh, uh, they were burned at the stake and they went singing. And the reason for it was they sat down and they reckoned the truth to be true. They thought about who they were. They said, look, look, you know, I'm about to be burned at the stake. Well, I've been, I've been here for 40 years, but I'm going to live forever. I'm going to live forever. And the reality of that forever, because they were continually thinking about and putting on the new self and reminding themselves of who they were. Then what happened at that point was they were able to face it with courage and they went and they, it worked. The things that Paul was saying, the things that John was saying, they worked. Therefore, Christianity isn't a mystical thing. It's not some kind of power that zaps you. It's a truth. Do you believe that Jesus Christ died? Do you believe he was raised from the dead? Do you believe he, he rose, uh, and, uh, passed through the heavens? Do you believe he's now reigning at the right hand of God? Do you believe he's your advocate? Do you believe that right now when God sees you, he sees you through Jesus Christ and therefore loves you, is absolutely perfect in him? Don't you see how that affects you? If you believe that and you continually rehearse it and tell yourself the truth, then there's tremendous comfort for you. If you don't believe it and you don't rehearse that truth, there's nothing but darkness. Put on the new self. Remember what I said last week? One of the things that R.C. Sproul used to say every so often when he was preaching or teaching, he'd say, you know, if somebody looked like they were scared of something, he'd say, who cares about the approval of the serfs when you have the honor of the king? What's he doing at that point? What he's doing is he's saying, remember who you are. Reckon yourself alive to God. Put on the new self. Are you doing that? Do you understand how to do this? Some of you might be saying it's, it, it, it seems in a sense too easy, but it's not because inside God is renewing the spirit of your mind. Therefore, don't you see that every other kind of approach besides the Christian approach is terribly mechanical, terribly mechanical. This is organic. Christianity is not just a bunch of rules and regulations that we're going to, I'm going to work, I'm going to apply this one today and this one tomorrow. It's organic. Of course, we do have to work very hard to overcome temptation and to obey the rules. Some of you just aren't getting anywhere because you simply will not put in 20 minutes of prayer and Bible study every day. You just won't do it. You haven't done it. Some of you have been Christians for years and you're just not consistent with it. As a result, there's very little putting off and putting on going on in your life. So there's a discipline. There's something that you just have to grit your teeth and do it. But you see, when you look at the whole, Christianity is not a matter of do's and don'ts and the rules and regulations and the little disciplines. It's not like losing weight. It's not like being in a gymnasium in that sense. It's something organic. It's something wonderful. Because for Christians, truth is not just something to be applauded but to be applied, to be taken inside you so that it changes you. And here's one more thing. This approach to change shows that Christianity alone of any philosophy or religion has a lot of things to say to failures. A lot of things to say to failures. A lot of you know that you have failed. You've tried to change in a certain area and you have failed. Then you haven't really tried Christianity yet. You may have tried a version of it. other kind of religion and philosophy comes to people and says, summon up all of your strength and do it. Here's the way to go. You know, they all look different. Buddhism says this is the way to go and Islam says this is the way to go and various New Age movements say this is the way to go. And they all have different ways they're pointing to you to go. But they all agree on one thing. You've got to do it. You've got to summons up all of your might and strength and do it. And what happens if you fail? They have nothing to say to you. They can't understand you. They say, oh, you failed. Sorry. Try again. You say, I have. Christianity alone says, I love. God says, I love failures. I start with people like you. In Matthew 11, when John the Baptist asked Jesus, how do we know if you're the Messiah? Jesus says, look around you. The lepers are cleansed. The blind see. The deaf hear. The lame walk and the poor have good news preached to them. What? See, no other religion has anything to say to the lepers and especially nothing to say to the poor. Nothing to say to the people who have failed. Nothing to say to the people who are weak. Nothing to say to the people who are down. Nothing to say to the hard cases. Christianity alone says they're the ones in which God loves to start. That's the reason why Paul, when he writes the Corinthians, he says, consider your calling, brethren. Not many of you were rich. Not many of you were noble. Not many of you were able. Not many of you were well-known. Not many of you were successful. But God chose the weak things to shame the strong. God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the lowly and despised things, even the things that are not, to bring to nothing the things that are, so that no flesh may boast in his presence. You see, Paul says God usually starts with the people that other religions have nothing to say to. If you participate in the principles we've talked about, if you put off the old self and put on the new self, meanwhile looking all the time to God to renew you in the spirit of your mind, you can change. It doesn't matter where you are. It doesn't matter where you are. The only thing I can say is, and I know there's people out there who say, you know, in spite of everything you talk to me about, you've given me a new slant, you've given me some new tools, but you know, I've been trying this Christianity stuff for a while, and I've fallen down an awful lot, and I do feel like a failure. And I really wonder how this really is going to be any different. And the answer is exactly what Jesus, the answer is exactly what Philip said to Jesus. When Jesus said, Philip, are you going to stick with me? Everybody else is turning away from me. And Philip says, where else do I go? You have the words of eternal life. You can't stand still, and you can't go back if you're a Christian. And the only way to do it is to pick up verses 22, 23, and 24 and go forward. If you stand still, you're going to die there. You know that. Jesus Christ has you. Now are you going to start to work with him? Are you going to start to work with him finally? It takes discipline, but it's not merely mechanical. It's a life-giving, vital thing. Grow in grace and the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Let's pray. Father, we look at these verses and we realize that we can change. On the one hand, we're hopeful. That means there's no hopeless cases, but on the other hand, that means there's no excuses. And a lot of us realize that there's been very little change in our lives for a good long time. Father, let everybody here see what has to be done if they're going to put off the old. Let everybody see what has to be done if they're going to put on the new self. When that happens, oh my Lord God, then the world will see us as an inexplicable people. Then the world will see us as a mysterious people that cannot be ignored. They will see that the communities around us changing. They will see the poor having good news preached to them. They will see people with insoluble problems by the world standards cutting right through them. Families made whole. Broken personalities made whole. Father, make us display trophies of your glory. We want that more than anything else. Show us what we have to do for that to be affected. We give ourselves to you, and we pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
