TITLE: Q&A With the Kellers and Close Friends
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Marriage, Sex and Singleness Conference with Tim and Kathy Keller
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/q-a-with-the-kellers-and-close-friends/

============================================================

So, we're really privileged. One of the thoughts I had was not only, a goal this weekend was really for a lot of you, probably many of you have maybe even seen Kathy with Tim before, or seen them together talking about these things. So a lot of this was to really get to know them. But I think what was really neat and exciting for me was also, if you've read the book, Meeting for Marriage, you see on one of the very first pages, the book is dedicated to five couples. And we're really privileged today to have two of those five couples that their book is dedicated to. The Frasers and the Midwoods, who I'm going to let Tim and Kathy introduce a little bit more. But I thought it would be really neat for us to see Tim and Kathy in the context of long-term friendships. They say in the book they've known these couples for four decades and have been in community with these couples and doing life together, being married, having families, and living life together together. So I thought it would be really great to have them as a resource up here too. So the questions will go to Tim and Kathy. I'll let them deflect onto their friends as well as they want to. But it's really a privilege to have the Frasers and the Midwoods here to join us today. And I'm going to let Tim and Kathy introduce them, tell them a little bit more story, and then we'll launch into the Q&A. What? What? What? What? Sorry. Giving stage directions. Am I supposed to be introducing our friends? Okay. To my left is Louise Midwood and her husband David. Eat the mic. To the left is my friend Louise Midwood and her husband David. I've known Louise since high school where we suffered through civics class together. Although she's a New Yorker, more or less, because her dad was stationed at Fort Hamilton. And she and David and I and Tim and I, all of us were at seminary together, Gordon Conwell Seminary. To their left is Jane and Wayne Frazier. I'm not forgetting. I'm just taking a breath. How would I forget? These are our closest friends in the world. And what is funny about that? All right. All right. When we were at seminary, the way this all sort of got started is that on Sundays it didn't have any cafeteria open. And so you had to find out what you were going to do for a meal after church. And we all got together on Sundays and had eggs and waffles. Everybody would bring some eggs or some flour or something like that. It would end up in my apartment sometimes. And the women would all end up in the kitchen praying and talking theology. The men would all end up in the living room watching the game du jour. They finally became friends. But we've been friends for decades and decades. Before the age of the Internet, I know it's hard to imagine such a thing ever existed. We started a round-robin letter amongst the women, which meant that you put your letter in the envelope, send it to the next person, which I sent to Jane, and she puts her letter in and sends it to the next person. And when it gets back to you, you take your old letter out and put a new letter in and keep it going. Okay? That was a big innovation back in the day. I mean, we call now and we email and we go on vacations together. But we've kept the letter going for over 40 years and been through, gosh, burying children, raising children, all kinds of joys and sorrows and grieving and weeping and stuff and vacations. And I just can't even tell you. They kind of sprung this on me, so I didn't prepare a great introduction, which is what I'd like to give them. But anyway, they're a heart of our own hearts and they know where all the bodies are buried. So part of their function up here is to, when Tim and I are answering a question, to supplement or say, but don't you remember? Or I remember a time when, so they've kept us honest for years and part of that's what's happening today is they're going to keep doing it. And also from their own pastoral experience, David and Louise have, and also the Frasers have been in the pastoral ministry for 40 years as we have. And have a wealth of experience of their own to draw on. So if you want to actually address a question directly to them, that could be, well, no, they've been texted in, right? You're not taking them from the audience. All right. Well, we may, if we happen to know that somebody over here has more to say on it or better insight than we do, we may just toss it off to them. Anything else you want to add? What did I miss that you would have liked me to have said? You introduced me to my husband. I, yeah, didn't I introduce you? Okay, that's the, all right. Louise Midwood, David Midwood, Jane Frazier, Wayne Frazier of Massachusetts and Charlotte. Thank you. Kathy. Oh, I, oh, you, senility is setting in, dear. That's the new phase, is the senility we go through. Yes, I am, the one successful matchmaking attempt I have ever done in my life is David and Louise. One, one. Whereas the story about Jane and Wayne is that when my car was pushed over a cliff by vandals, Wayne chased the guys who did it, tackled one of them, and carried him up the hill to the security officer. And I think that made him a hero in Miss Jane's eyes. So, anyway, do your worst, Brent. All right, let's launch some questions. Good for you guys. I received over 100 questions over the night last night. Even at 2 o'clock in the morning I was getting questions. So, thank you. But to that end, we will not get to every question in this session. But we will get to your questions. So, we will be sending some follow-up emails, and we will actually try to, there's a lot of the same similar themes, and we will get to these questions. So, expect in the next couple, in the next week or two, give me a few days, we will get back to you with answers to some of these questions that we don't get to here on stage. We want to start with talking about singleness. We've heard from a lot of you that we've felt, and actually this is really neat if you don't know this, almost to the number, we are 50-50% single and married at this conference this weekend, which I think is really great. Because it really reflects our church, and I'm glad that single people came to a marriage conference, even though I'm glad singleness was in the title, we wanted you to come. But I'm hearing from some of you, we felt, some felt like it was a little more way toward marriage. So, I asked Tim and Kathy to, and others, to speak to a little bit. So, here's a question, kind of a two-part question. Based on kind of what we've talked about, is it unbiblical to be single? And also, then how do we live well and thrive being single, particularly in New York City? Can't be unbiblical to be single. Jesus was single. I mean, how unbiblical is Jesus? Very little. Well, there you have it. 99 more to go, 99 more to go. All right, let's go, let's go. 35 seconds, a question, we'll get through them all. We can. So, how do we live well and thrive being single? We should all be able to weigh in. You have mics, too. Yes, and also, we're all. This is about New York City. Yes, it is. It's about New York City. On the other hand, we've all been in ministry for a long time. What Kathy is saying is right, and that theologically, Christianity was the first religion that came along and said that it's okay to be single. You can be single your whole life and still be a full person. The fact is that most other religions of the world tend to either directly say or imply that you're really not a whole person until you're a member of a family, until you have a spouse and you have children and so forth. When you have both Paul and Jesus, who together, certainly, you would say, would be the founders of the Christian faith, both being lifetime singles, then you can't say, to be fully human, you have to be a Christian. Kathy's right. That's the slam-dunk answer, which is if Jesus Christ was the perfect human being and he was not married, then it must be impossible to be completely, eat the mic, fulfilled. However, I'd say the reason for that, and this is actually very important, the reason for that is because the ultimate Christian family, according to the Bible, is God's family. If you're adopted as a son or a daughter in God's family, that's the most important family to be in. This is the reason, by the way, I know this is kind of mixing the two subjects together, but you know what I'm going to talk about. But on Sunday, on Wednesday night, I was part of, John Piper and Anthony Bradley and I were part of a discussion about race. I used an illustration that Kathy helped me, I think, devise. Oh, can I please set it up, please? I wish you would. We were from the north, okay, and we were taking over this really small southern church in a small southern town, and there was some suspicion as to what our agenda was. Also, the early 70s. Also, 1970s. 1870s? It didn't say 1870s. It didn't say 1870s. Okay. They were a little concerned about what our agenda might be, and so every so often someone would work up the courage. This is the first meeting all the time we were 31 ago. How long will this bekat? Yeah. 1970. Okay, they were a little concerned about what our agenda might be, and so every so often someone would work up the courage to come to Tim and say, Pastor, what do you think about interracial marriage? Don't try it, Kathy. Don't. No, don't. What do you think about interracial marriage? And they would be ready for Tim to, you know, come up with some northern liberal answer, and he would go, oh, the Bible is completely against interracial marriage. Okay, now. Now you can tell. Oh, all right, I'll finish. And they would be a little surprised and taken aback, and he would say, well, but you do know there's only two races in the Bible. There's the children of God and the children of the devil. And so if your daughter marries the black quarterback who is a believer, she has not married interracially. And if your son comes home with the head cheerleader who's not a Christian and is the same skin color as you, he has married interracially. And that's why the Bible's against it anyways. Well, the reason... That would really confuse people. The reason to pull that together. We loved doing it. The test is this. What I would say is, the test is, I would say to white people, I would say, be honest. If you had only two choices, that your child could marry either a non-Christian of your race or a Christian of another race, what would you be the most comfortable with? And they'd get very quiet. And I said, if you really are saying, I'd really rather the person marry somebody of my race, even if they weren't Christian, that shows that race is more important than grace, that your blood family is more important than your spiritual family, that Jesus Christ is less important to who you are and your identity than your race. And I think the Bible says very, very clearly... The reason I bring this up is the idea that God's family is the ultimate family. If you're in that family by the grace of Christ, if you're in that family, that's the most important family to be in. What that means on the one hand is, you can be a single. You've got all these brothers and sisters. You've also got mothers and fathers. You've also got sons and daughters if you're in that family. And that's the thing you really need more than anything else. There's no other family you need to be in, in some ways. Which means you can be a fully single person. It also means that race is not ultimate. It means if you're in that family, that's what Kathy was trying to... We would try to push people back then. If you were in that family, then race has got to be second to that. And so those are all some of the reasons why the family of God being the primary family means that you as a single person can be perfectly fulfilled and fully human, even if you never get married. I don't want to drag out all these questions so that we don't get to as many of them. But there's one other thing I want to say about that. It also devalues, in a good way, the nuclear family. In our country, in Western civilization, the nuclear family has become, in many ways, an idolatrous thing. You know, nothing is too good for my kids. And nothing is, you know, our family against the world sort of thing. The Christian family takes precedence over your nuclear family in some ways. Yes, you have responsibilities to your kids and to your spouse. And that's, those are important bonds. But you can have an idolatrous view of what your nuclear family is. Have you guys run into that in your churches at all? I mean, Mike, use the mic. The head nod is not... Would you all like to add color? Color commentary. I would just add that that is very much the case. And you don't not only have American individualism, but you have individualism in the family. You know, my family and its priorities, and its education, and getting our kids into the best school, and all those things take priority over the Christian community. And I think that's pretty rampant from what we experience in Charlotte. It's lonely to be a single person sometimes. I think what Kathy's trying to say, there are some temptations as a single person you don't fall into. And that is to get just sucked into your family so that you really have, you don't have time for other people, you don't have time for other things. The family becomes an all-consuming priority. And so, we're not trying to idolize being single and say there's no downside. There's huge downsides to it, too. Any practical daily suggestions for how to live and thrive, live well and thrive being a single? Oh, practical. Gee whiz, Brent. Sorry. Any thoughts? I'm a pastor. Table of experts, any thoughts? You've all got grown adult children who have recently been single or are single? No? Living singly? I'm thinking of your daughter, Lydia, who is single. I think the best foundation for singleness or for marriage is friendship. So, if you have a solid friendship and you... the other person, this is the best foundation for marriage. So on that first occasion when Kathy introduced Louise and I, that began a fight. That was very interesting, but I explained to Kathy later on, this is the angriest woman I've ever met. Please, please keep her away from me. And I gave her a copy of Dietrich Bonhoeffer's book on community. Rebuttal, Louise. And I said, isn't he a heretic? Little did I know. Yes, well, that is part. It was interesting, actually, that you bring that up because at seminary we were all sort of milling around in a pool of friends. And the combinations and the permutations were kind of all up in the air, like who was going to settle with who. And it was fine because we all had strong friendships. It would have worked out in a number of combinations. Isn't that funny? It was, it's true. It was Tim and David in the front seat and Kathy and I in the back. And we tooled around and talked about how we could just pretty much date anybody. Either, you know, we could sort of, I don't know. This is to say friendships are the basis of what later turns into romance. Yeah, and I'd like to add, you might remember last night, if you were here last night, I mentioned that when social scientists try to figure out why it is that married people, they're healthier, they save more money, they drive more safely. And across the board, even when you control for the, uh, a married and single person, the same age, same ethnicity, same education, everything. I mentioned that the science, social scientists say there's this thing called marital social norms, which is that your spouse can hold you accountable for self-discipline in a way that nobody else can. Now, that's what you, we've just been telling you about the advantages of being single, that there's some ways in which singleness keeps you away. I mean, Paul talks about the anxieties of, of being married and there's, there's great advantages to being single. The downside is that nobody holds you accountable, that nobody has got the right to look you in the eye the way your spouse does and say, uh, you are living wrongly in this way. You've got to change or I don't know what's going to happen. Um, and therefore I think the biggest problem, especially for men, by the way, the single women tend to get pretty close to other single women so that you do let each other into your lives. I'm not trying to let you off the hook completely, but I would particularly think the men have a problem with this. If you're single, you've got to have some people around that you give a hunting license to say, you're a friend of mine. I'm a friend of yours. And I really want you to come after me on these things. It's not rude to tell me you got bad breath. You know, your spouse will tell you that, but like nobody else will usually. And, uh, and, and more serious things too. So anyway, uh, these are some ways in which some ways there are advantages to being single, but probably I think David was absolutely right in nailing the number one thing you need in order to thrive besides being in a great Christian community. So you actually do have fathers and mothers and sons and daughters and, and brothers and sisters, but you also need to really have some friends that as much as possible, hold your feet to the fire, exhort one another daily, lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin and so forth. So the only other thing that I think is, um, I was thinking service as you all were talking and the quote from Frederick, I'm going to miss say his name. So help me, uh, about how my, uh, deep, uh, my great passion meets the world's deep hunger. And so if as a single or married person or divorced or widowed, I am able to find a place where the passion that God has given me is something I can use to bring joy into others' lives, then that brings, that brings a whole rich depth to my life that might not be there. You both talked about this, I think a little bit, both in the men and women, but I thought in one, in a greater altogether. How does a single person in the city deal with normal, the normal need to physical intimacy for physical intimacy without compromising their beliefs? Say that again? The normal. Sure. How does a single person in the city or in general deal with the normal need for a physical intimacy without compromising their beliefs? Define normal need for physical intimacy because I have a, okay, okay. have a thousand different definitions depending on who you're talking to because some people i was addressing the women this morning some people are getting the message that unless you are having an active sex life life is not worth living you're not even human you're not even fully human and other people would say a normal need for intimacy would just be touched i can remember my first semester of college the hallways were wide it wasn't like high school where everybody changed classes at the same time so you were just bumping into people i didn't know anyone and come from a christian fellowship where there was a lot of hugging and there wasn't any christian fellowship and i came home at christmas realizing i had not physically touched another person for four months and i went downstairs and just petted my dog for about 45 minutes just to touch a living thing something with warm blood going through it because i had such skin hunger and i think a normal need for physical intimacy would certainly include meeting the needs for just touching another person for for being hugged for having somebody pat you on the back for just connecting on a physical level that doesn't mean that the normal i would not consider the normal need for physical intimacy meaning that everybody's got to be having intercourse or you're not even a human being because jesus christ obviously was fully human and he didn't as far as we know as have any sexual life until he's married which is still to be announced in the future so would you add to that no my function is to babble until somebody thinks of something really intelligent to say we've worked this way for years no you're catherine you're right in saying that to if the person was here we'd say what do you mean by normal physical needs but i think you you're i think you're fair in running the gamut there are normal physical needs i think happen through friendship and through christian community where there is there is non-sexual touching there's the kind of touching that should happen in a family but uh if if it means normal need for intimacy that is a western myth that you've just got to be having sexier not a full person it just most people most places most times in history most cultures most centuries have not felt that at all and uh for you to universalize that and say well that's just everybody knows that is is really quite ethnocentric of you and chronocentric as well but don't ask me to define those things it sounds makes me sound so smart to say them there seem to be some need for clarification we talked a lot about last night about compatibility um and some people ask what are the most important characteristics to look for in a partner if we're not looking specifically for compatibility well now let me just i think we can all weigh in on this one because the word is is very flexible what i was trying to say is as it is today defined and uh kathy mentioned the e-harmony uh ad the reason listen when you do an e-harmony tv ad that thing has been tested as as getting at at the at the heart of what most people mean by compatibility and that is you accept me just as i am and you don't try to change me and i don't try to change you and all we try to do is we have common interests and we like each other and we enhance each other and we don't uh go at it we don't hold each other accountable don't say you got to change in all these ways we don't have conflicts see compatibility means to people today no conflicts no arguments not trying to change me if that's compatibility you don't need that in fact there is no such thing as that that's why you'll never get married so i've had people come up to me and say so we're not looking for compatibility and i i just want to say not the way it's defined after that however the idea that there should be common interests common spiritual um beliefs uh as kathy said i think last night uh something that we together both want to give to the world that the world needs right now in in those if you redefine compatibility um i wouldn't use the word but if you redefine well what do we have to have in common what do we have to have together of course you need to have things in common starting with your faith so let's talk about this all of us as to what you need in order to get married bear in mind we dedicated the book to these two couples and to three other couples yeah five couples and part of the the reason for it and if you've read the book where i talk about why we did that it's because on the surface we wouldn't have looked compatible to each other well we didn't look compatible to each other i mean nobody would have said oh yeah those two great match i mean it was nothing like that want to go for the deep stuff that to be compatible because the superficial stuff wears away we've been married for 35 plus 740 years nearly a bunch of us and all that among kathy among the uh louise and i added it up on the subway last night you know what what do you do on the subway and we came up with 219 years among the among the among the six couples we have 219 married years only in calendar years we didn't compute the you know stress and emotional the years that felt like decades yeah there are those years that count twice or four four times i've had a couple of them but um what what would you call the stuff that's more important than the superficial compatibilities i mean i i told you all last night that you know rachel ray's program they were saying oh yeah we always check you know i won't date anyone who doesn't like garlic they have to like garlic well that's not really something that makes your marriage last forever david gave louise bonhoeffer when he should have given her charles hodge that's right and that and right away he said i'm not compatible i'm not compatible he did not give me but what david did give me was a vision of what joy and friendship and that kind of uh love that c.s louis talks about when the day is over and everything you know the horrors or the pleasantries of the day are done and you sit side by side in front of the fire and you don't have to say a word you're you're with your best friend and you can just look at each other that's what he gave me and there was a joy in that because it has a gospel component i thought after we got married you know i got oh this man who just brings laughter and love and joy to every part of the room that he's in i thought there now i've got it now now we can work on the stuff that i thought marriage was going to be which for me were two my two passions are ballet and baseball and i thought okay red socks fan she has a blog even except except except come on now twice with the giants okay enough already i thought you know honey we can do ballet together he goes sure go get season tickets to the boston ballet i go great come the first performance i said come with me he goes okay within 20 minutes this was my husband's reaction to the ballet and for about three seconds i thought the marriage is over and then baseball i now have my own room with my own shrine with all the baseball stuff and you know that he calls it the panic room where i watch sports and it works for us but that was you know the compatibility is that we are compatriots together in the gospel and he loves jesus he loves jesus more than anything and that covers a multitude of you know those little things that like other deficiencies you know for jane and i the uh you're talking about you know what's the stanley hirewass quote you know you always marry the wrong person and um i think you know jane had questions about me from the beginning and then i really had questions about her after we got married because the first two years we kiddingly say now they're pitched hand-to-hand combat and it was because i mean there were so many things in my life that i'd allowed to slide uh wasn't particularly concerned about and here was a woman that really loved me wanted the very best for me and and so she was critical of me but but here's something that happened to me is that from my family of origin my mother had criticized my father a good bit during my teenage years and i thought it was somewhat disrespectful my mother has grown out of that she's a godly lady and it's just really neat to see that but what happened was is that whenever jane would bring up something i would react and what i was doing i was reacting to my mother and one day jane said i am not your mother and i said thank goodness and but but it was a breakthrough that i began to realize the reason i could not take the needed feedback that would really help me be more of a godly man is because i was reacting to my family of origin jane would you add we'd be frank about that adding value issue that i think a lot of people when they one of the reasons i'm resisting using the word compatibility is is the kind you have something to say to that. Well, a few people in Charlotte, not very many of our friends, but a few people know that our name ended up in the front of this book. And I'm kind of like, what was that about? And I have said to them that in reading Tim and Kathy's book, I found out why Wayne and I have had a great marriage for all these years. We're best friends as well. And it's been a great thing to be married to your best friend. But I did not want to date him. I did not want to marry him. I loved talking to him. He was my very good friend. But he did not, I didn't see that he added value to my life. And so we have talked about this over the years and struggled through it. I wanted someone who had gone to at least as good a college as I had or better. And I didn't value his that way. I was a snob. That's what it says in the book. And I gave those words to Kathy. But so that spoke to me so much. And I really have said to Tim and Kathy, I think that's a really incredible concept. And it made me realize we knew this about ourselves, but we didn't know what to call it. But what is it to add value? And think about that hard. Wayne's nephew said to Wayne, was my dad cool growing up? And Wayne said, we were pretty short on cool at 2421 Clearview Drive. But you know what? That wears thin. And there are other things that wear well. And so I would look for not so much who adds value to your life as what's going to wear well over years. And who's going to be my best friend when I have been the third person that my husband has been married to or whatever, fourth, fifth. So just a thought there. All right. We're making progress slowly. We are. We're making progress. So what, we have 87 to go. You've actually covered two or three in one. That's really good. This is actually a follow-up to the illustration about the czar last night. So what is the line between paying for someone's debt and enabling someone's continual sin? I don't like that. I don't like that illustration for that very reason. Let me just be honest with you. I think that that illustration blurs the line between paying for a debt and enabling a guy to just keep on with his gambling habit. I've never told you that, but here it is. Okay. So, sweetie. The czar should have left a note saying, I think you should kill yourself. Now that your hangover is over, here it is. I put a couple extra bullets in the revolver just in case you missed the first time. Answer the question. It's not loving. It is not loving to make it easy for somebody to sin. It's not even loving to make it easy for someone to sin against you. Sometimes you feel like, well, I'm just going to let the person keep on abusing me, manipulating me, exploiting me. How is that loving? How is that loving? How is that loving? If you're humbly repenting and forgiving each other, then you make progress out of your sin. The czar, frankly, the czar illustration is a picture of Jesus. But even there, Jesus doesn't just justify you. He sanctifies you. And so we always say that if Jesus, we say you're saved by faith alone, but not by faith which remains alone. Which means you're saved not by your works, you're saved by grace, but if you are saved by grace, you will change. You'll have a gratitude. You'll experience a liberation. You'll want to please the one who did this for you. So just as in your relationship with God, your free grace issues in a changed life because God loves you enough to... condemn you and destroy you and beat you up. Nevertheless, he insists that you change. I think you have to do the same thing. There's a way of forgiving your spouse and never actually being harsh and condemning, but at the same time, continue to hold the person's feet to the fire. You've got to change. You've got to change because I love you too much just to let you stay the way you are. This might be the place to insert this little soundbite. We are well aware that a conference like this is going to bring a lot of stuff to the surface in your relationships. If you're married, if you're dating, if you're not either, that a lot of stuff's going to rise to the surface surface and create some degree of havoc in some cases, that there will be disagreements and open argument and whatever. This is a good thing. You can't deal with stuff until you know what it is that you're dealing with. And so we don't want anyone to just feel like this conference had nothing but negative effects on you. The stuff that comes to the surface that might be revealed when you're talking about, well, I heard this said, and that's exactly what you do. And, you know, I've always told you about that, that sort of thing. This is an opportunity for you to consider counseling. Redeemer's got a great counseling staff or there are other counseling places. It's a good opportunity for you to, to maybe read some books together or develop a prayer life that you've never had together. But we don't want you to feel like this is like a one-off, come to the weekend, get all these things roiled up and then, you know, go out and fix it yourself because that's not always that easy. So there's, there will be resources available. There are resources available and not enabling someone to consider, continue sinning in a marriage. It's a fine line because sometimes it's just like me being real irritable against him. It's not like he's really sinning. It's just like he's, you know, stepping on my particular irritability thing. And it's not something that he has to change in order to be more godly. It's something I want him to change to be easier to live with. And that's not really a valid enough reason. But there are other things in which you really do want to have iron sharpening iron. And in that case, sometimes you need the company of friends. Sometimes you need counselors. Sometimes you need a prayer life when you haven't had one. But you're supposed to be leading each other into glory. And that may mean a few sparks along the way. Great. Before the fall, Adam was in perfect communion with God. If so, why was it not good for him to be alone? That speaks of singleness and marriage. Oh, I know that one. Because he was created in the image of the triune God. So he had a need for relationship. The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, you know, have a relationship with each other. He was created in the image of God. And so he had a relational capacity that his relationship with God didn't meet. And God meant to be that way. And this is, here's, I think, an opportunity to get us, again, all involved on this. Kathy's right in saying that because Adam was made in the image of a triune God, he had to be put into a community in order to reflect God. So even though he'd been created in the image of God, it wasn't complete, or he immediately felt something, some incompleteness, which is very interesting, that's paradise we're talking about here. Paradise. And yet there was something not good in paradise. And it, so community. Now, in comes Eve. But I think I'd like to press this, even though I think this is a fair way to go here, is Kathy and I would certainly say, and it's one of the reasons why we have some of our best friends up here. Kathy and I would say that just being married to each other does not complete your need for community. And that having married friends, and here's what I think I'll ask all of you, including you, Kathy, but I'll ask everybody else here. In what way did our friendship over the years actually make, help our marriages? Not just, oh, you know, the guys kind of liked each other and the girls had liked each other and we like doing things together. But I mean, how did it actually help our marriages? I'm trying to get across this idea that we wouldn't have been good in our marriages if we didn't have other married couples that we were friends with about our marriages. I mean, I admit usually the women are freer in talking with each other about their marriages than the men are, but we did, we have talked about our marriages a lot, the guys too. So in what way have we actually support each other's, the quality of each other's marriages by being friends over the years? How's that, how's that worked? And I'm trying to, I'm hoping. community of other married couples that you can be absolutely frank with over the years and you can walk together this way. I, I mean, I could talk about, and even in the book, some of the things that Tim and Kathy reference, the fights happened in my house, um, happened in cars that we were in together, driving around. But the thing that, I mean, you could talk about the big catastrophic stuff, but the thing for me, Tim, that I remember most is it was some years into your marriage. And I think you were constantly throwing your shoes into the closet and scarring the wall. And Kathy was talking to you about that and pleading with you about that. That didn't make it into the book, but you remember that, too. No, it didn't. No, and that, but, but this made it into my book. No, that, that's exactly what I'm trying to get. Go ahead. Tim, Tim made a little note for himself and he crawled down on his hands and knees and put it down on the wall so that when he went to do this, he could see the note and say, don't throw my shoes. I think, you know, Kathy, I want to make Kathy happy. Kathy hates it. And I remember David saying, uh, Tim was telling that to David and we were talking about it and saying, it's the little things in life, as Elizabeth Elliot used to say, it's the little things in life that will crack you up. And it's the little things in life that sort of go in to make a marriage. And I've just never forgotten you, Tim, that you would make a sign for yourself, get down on your hands and knees. And that helped our marriage. That was, I can't believe you remember that. But that's fair, that's fair. I have something that I thought of that goes back to the singleness, because in some of the time that the round robin letter was going around, um, a couple of us were single for part of that time. And I know for me, even being married, um, we've lived in places where, when you move to a new place, you don't know anybody. And it really takes years to get heart friends. Uh, and a letter like that, I realized at some point along the way, friends that didn't have that and moved, they just were lost. And because I had a group of women who read the same books I read, uh, understood about ministry the way I did. I had ideas that helped me grow and expand my mind as well as my walk with Christ. That was a huge risk, richness for me. So I would encourage single people to look for those kinds of friendship, even if they're not here. Maybe there's somebody that you know in your country of origin, if it's not America that you're close to, keep an email, um, relationship going with that person, uh, even as a single person, so that you have this richness of friendships and ideas and challenges for you. That the other thing is, if any one of us had had trouble, you would have come to find me in my marriage to tell me, you know, encourage me to do the right thing. If any one of us had trouble, if, no, wait, wait a minute. No, this is a true story. You have to hear this. The, all the years I was in and out of ORs with my Crohn's disease. One time in particular, Tim was due to leave to speak to a thousand ministers in London the next day. And that night I realized I had to go to the emergency room and have emergency surgery. And he was supposed to leave at five in the morning. I woke him up and said, have to get me to the ER and I don't know what you're going to do about the conference. And I called Louise and said, Tim has to go to England and I have to have surgery. And she walked out of her house with her purse. Her daughter drove her to Logan airport and she flew down and just took over my house, my life, everything. I mean, and all of us would have done that for any of us in that situation. And you'll, I hope I don't need it again, but thank you. I hope I get to be on the giving end rather than the receiving end. But I mean, that kind of support system, you can't value that highly enough. I think that the value of friendship in the long range of 40 years of friendship and marriage, one of the places that that has impacted my life has just been on the ability to give and to receive correction. If you've heard Tim's sermon on Nathan and David, when Nathan came to David with correction, part of the application of that is what have you done to the Nathans in your life? Who has permission to correct you when you're wrong? As Tim's already said this afternoon, who have you given a hunting license to that can come after you and say, it seems like you're being a little bit harsh. It seems like you're being a little bit harsh. It seems like you're being a little bit harsh. already said this afternoon, who have you given a hunting license to that can come after you and say, it seems like you're being a little bit harsh with your wife or can apply some other correction early on in our relationship. Actually, it was the day before we got married. We'd made a terrible, I had made a terrible mistake in terms of trying to move into our apartment, get back to where we were going to be married later in the weekend. And I just remember at some point in my green pinto snapping and saying something I shouldn't have said to Louise. And her best friend, one of the bridesmaids in the wedding was in the back seat. And she just said, a gentleman never corrects his lady in public. Now she could have just reached over into the front seat and slapped me in the face, but I've never forgotten it. And so thankful to God that we have had friends who have sustained us in relationship at points when we've needed correction. People who've loved us asked us enough to say a word spoken that really made the difference. And I really have forgotten it. I have completely forgotten that. I have. It must have been somebody else. Kathy, this is a question directed to you. You may have said this in the women's session. I'm not sure, but this person said they heard you explain once this great metaphor. Can you share with the group again about the husband like this, I think was the picture they drew. He covers her and she supports him. Does that ring a bell? I don't remember that, but okay. Yes. What's the question? It was a visual, it was actually a picture drawn of a hand like this over a fist, a metaphor to use that he covers her and she supports him in terms of gender roles that without, I can't remember, without that, she is unsafe and without her, he falls. Is that correct? I don't think that was my illustration, but I'll be happy to accept credit for it. Take credit for it. Take credit for it. All right. Any advice for couples who have different sexual histories entering a marriage? For example, one's a virgin and one is not. If two people are coming together and getting married, one comes in as a virgin, never having had sex before. The other comes in with a pretty, maybe heavy or varied sexual history. Actually, I get asked that quite a bit. I mean, anybody can weigh in on my, my first response is, um, the gospel is a huge help. I did write a book on elder brother and younger brother. They, I mean, the whole, in some ways, the whole point of the parable of the prodigal, the prodigal son is that the younger brother who's been out having sex with prostitutes, the elder brother who stayed home and has been absolutely compliant. They're both lost without the gospel. They're both lost without, without God's grace. And so they stand before the father really equal, both needing the father's love and forgiveness and so on. Um, that's extremely important to remember, especially the one who comes in as a virgin should not come in feeling, well, you know, I, you know, I, I just said, no, I kept myself pure all this time and I've gone on this hard work and you should, there should, you've got to be very careful about that superiority, uh, feeling. Hopefully that won't happen, but use the gospel. I guess the second thing would be, um, a concern on the part of the, the person coming in as a virgin that the, uh, either maybe, I don't know, uh, just a, I think jealousy is probably not quite the right word there, but a, a bad feeling about this person who's now my spouse having had sex with all these other people. Um, that just bothers me. It hurts me. I can't seem to get past that. I've spoken to folks like that too. Um, I don't you think that would be a failure of the gospel in that person's life to see that forgiveness really is. Well, that goes back to the first principle. The first principle is that your sins, though they're not sexual sins are every bit as lurid in God's sight. So maybe if you use the gospel again, the only other thing I would suggest there is to remind people that actually just sex, unmarried sex, isn't the same. That tends to be frivolous. Yes. We wanted to talk about this. We do. Unmarried sex is not the same as marriage sex. Unmarried sex can have, and any kind of illicit sex, any kind of, um, kinky sex has a kick to it that marriage sex might by comparison seem boring. We were talking about this over lunch. Unmarried sex. about this. Just let them know. It's a little window into our life, honey. We were talking about this earlier. And I think it needs to be said because people can be, if they have a sexual past of some kind, and then they get married and they say, oh gosh, this is a lot more boring than, you know, my former life, which was, you know, wild and crazy. Yeah, it's sort of the difference between eating a lot of Halloween candy and having a balanced diet. On the one hand, you get the sugar rush, but you can't sustain life that way. And in the end, it's really not very good for the tooth decay and the dress size and all the rest of it. To have a balanced diet is a little more boring than having only Halloween candy to eat, but it is also more varied and it has a lot more, I don't know, it has a lot more nourishment and sustainability. Remind me of what we were saying because we were talking about this earlier. The analogy that I use, it's a little bit different, but I think what the world does and with movies and so forth and TV, it just gives us the sense that every sexual encounter should be just, I guess the word Tim used, volcanic. Volcanic. Right. And, you know, and you just can't maintain that, you know, over 40 years of marriage and so forth. But when I'm counseling with folks, I use, because I'm like Louise, I like baseball, but I'm a pirate fan. So, you know, don't ever worry about us. 1960 was the last time the pirates came to age. So, yeah, Kathy and I suffer through that. But what I say to couples is what the evil one wants to do is that he wants to make us dissatisfied. And so what I say to couples is that the faithfulness to have sex, you know, on a regular basis and to express love and intimacy to one another, it's sort of like a baseball game. You know, sometimes it's a home run. Sometimes it's a triple. Sometimes it's a double. Sometimes it's only a single. But you know what? That's great. You're on base. And that is something. I can't. I did say that. But that's just the importance of 1 Corinthians 7, you know, is that you're, you know, we're not to abstain from sex over an extended period of time. Kathy, you said to me once that you were talking to your boys and you said there are only so many ways you can do this. So you're going to have to go deeper and find the depth of a sexual relationship. Am I quoting you right there? Yes. I wrote a letter because none of our boys would ever sit still to be talked to about sex. So I wrote a letter and made them read it and read it out loud, actually. So that I knew that they read it. I said, one and only time you will be forced to do this. Then we won't answer any questions. And after that, it's in your court. But that is one of the things I said is, you know, everybody asks, where do you draw the line, you know, between what behavior is okay and what behaviors aren't okay in the physical realm? And I said, well, here's the thing, draw the line earlier than what you think it might need to be because here's a skill set you're going to have to learn in marriage. Once you're married and there is no line, anything goes. There are only so many things two human bodies can do together. There's really a finite number. And after you've done them all, then what do you do? Do you lose the thrill and you have to find another person to get the thrill back? Or do you, I mean, what do you do? Well, what you do if you're smart is you go back and you start putting more meaning and more tenderness and the experience that you've accrued in your life and the sorrows you've been through together back into those same physical gestures and abilities that you've had before. So when Tim and I hold hands now, it's different than the first time we held hands. It has a lot more meaning into it. So if you're going to be line drawing in the sort of things you're doing, this is going back to singleness. It's not exactly where the question started. It doesn't matter that, you know, you say, well, we're going to draw the line of what we do in our relationship here because you can just keep inventing new levels of meaning and depth and messaging in the behaviors that are considered acceptable. You don't have to keep upping the ante to get a new thrill because someday you're going to reach the ceiling and then what do you do? is obviously none of us are just married up here right so um and um a question that seems to come up in articles and tv shows is um maybe you hit 40 and there's no more sex and so if you want to have a fully fulfilling relationship on into your 60s and 70s and we've talked to wayne's parents uh they kept a really wonderful sexual relationship going for many years and so if you want that then you're building even as a single person toward that long range tenderness depth down the road yes and one last thing i don't know that it fits exactly into this question but i may not get another chance there are lots of kinds of sex inside marriage and i heard it described this way using a gastronomical illustration is there's the quick snack sort of sex that's okay there's the meat and potatoes kind of sex that's okay very nourishing and and not especially exciting but fine and then there's the gourmet weekend mom has the kids we've gone off to a hotel with rose petals in the bed kind of sex and all of them are are fine and acceptable and you shouldn't privilege one over the other that this is better than that and you know because i don't have a great thrill um movies as as wayne was saying are very unrealistic two people fall in bed and you're given to understand that they know exactly how to satisfy each other immediately when we were getting married rc sprawl and did our wedding he and vesta had been married 15 years and he said we're just beginning to get the hang of it and i thought 15 years and you're just getting the hang of it he was actually about right years and years okay now we just said a lot of very important things i'm trying to remember i'm trying to remember the the original question and the original and the original thinking of it as a jumping off i know but the original i would sum up you answered about 10 and that yeah we answered about two we answered two or three questions but the original question i think is a you come in as a virgin your spouse is this history i'm having trouble getting past that kathy's right in saying that the um it's a failure of the gospel for you to not be able to to see your own sins were as lurid as your as any sexual sins but the other thing that i think was germane here to that is that uh sex in sex in this is a generalization but sex outside of marriage in general you're not giving yourself you're having a thrill you're having sometimes an incredible thrill physically but you haven't given yourself and because you haven't given yourself inside marriage sex is a very very different thing and what that's the reason why these last couple of comments had to do with the fact that um the the infusion of deeper meaning and the infusion of more you actually can and this isn't easy to describe right off the bat unless you've done it you can put more of yourself into the very same sex acts that you did not only earlier in your marriage but even with somebody that you weren't married to and it it's almost like a very it's almost like a whole different it's a different planet so you need to say that person your your spouse if that person they've been married they've had a lot of you know sexual escapades and so on you need to forgive it you need to not see yourself as superior you need to use the gospel on yourself and you need to realize now you're giving yourself to each other and in some ways that's never happened to either of you and that that should be some consolation but we probably need a new question to direct ours to direct redirect us well we're going to jump a little bit around because i want to make sure we cover um could you speak for a few minutes um we had a question that says the view that marriage is between men and women is being undermined by the gradual onset of states adopting gay marriage how would you state the bible's view about why marriage is between men and women okay i'll tell you what because i'm a nice guy i will take this myself okay not make anybody else stay here um yeah you can't have a even even a uh a weekend like this in which we're talking about the biblical view of sex and and our culture today and not at least address same-sex marriage is a big issue in the culture today it shouldn't be hard here's what i would say and i have said to people who say well can't uh two men or two women get married what's wrong with that i say the christian understanding of marriage has got a number of components but i mentioned this last night one of the christians under chris part of the christian understanding of marriage is it's a it's a um it's a bridging of the gap between the genders in the christian view one of the it brings people together of different genders, which, who are very different. The genders clash and mesh because they're so different, because they're so fundamentally different. Sometimes we just cannot understand each other. On the one hand, that's good because we clash. We, we, uh, we have conflicts that are largely rooted in our gender differences. And what that does is that brings about a member of the gem tumbler from last night. It, we, we, we, uh, knock the rough edges off of each other. We, we become wiser. We become deeper. We come to understand more. So on the one hand, the clashing of the different genders is something you need for your own character development. Secondly, the meshing of the genders means that in many cases, the person of the gender is better than you are at something. And so you actually become a team and you're able to, there's certain, you compliment each other. So you clash and you mesh. Marriage pulls two, the two genders together. You embrace each other and brings you into a whole partnership that is extremely important for raising children, for a character growth center. That's the Christian view of marriage. And so when I say to somebody, the Christian view of marriage is that you bring the genders together. So no, the Christian view of marriage does not envision or allow two people of the same gender to be married because it defeats one of the whole purposes of it. Now I've had people come back and say, I don't think that should be, and that sounds valuable, but I don't think you should require that. Now you, maybe you're getting into public policy. I mean, the real question is to what degree should the laws of the land reflect Christian values? I don't want to go there. That's not what we're here to talk about. I'm here to just to say that the Christian view of marriage does not envision marriage between two people, the same gender. That's all. And you may say, well, I, I have a, I have a view of marriage in which that is not important. Okay, well, fine. And I don't know what's going to happen in the law, but the Christian understanding, the biblical understanding of marriage does not allow for it. So it doesn't allow for same sex marriage. And I think that's all we're here to do is to talk about what does it mean as Christians to build a marriage. So that's it. We talked about a lot about friendships, cultivating friendships. Interesting question. How do single women cultivate friendships with the opposite sex without getting stuck in the friend zone? Over to you, everybody. Yeah. Somebody asked me this morning about the cheap girlfriend illustration and explain the men are here now. And so the women who are hearing this the second time, I apologize, but Tim and I came up with that term a long time ago, cheap girlfriend to describe a phenomenon where a man and a woman are friends and the man is having all of his relational needs met at the level of friendship. Somebody to talk to when he wants to, someone to go out to an event with when he wants to, someone who will listen to his troubles when he feels like talking about them and won't bother him when he doesn't feel like talking about. Whereas the woman is interested in a commitment and moving on and having a family. So he's getting what he needs with no downside. She is his cheap girlfriend. No. And this is not even thinking about sex. No, not even talking about sex. This is just a woman who is his friend and his needs for, uh, female companionship are being met at the friendship level, whereas she is ready to move on into a more adult, may I say more adult romantic relationship that would be, uh, you know, moving into marriage. That kind of thing can't really be sustained over a long period because what it does is it injures the woman because the fact that he could be choosing her and promoting her to the status of a girlfriend and saying, let's move forward into a romantic relationship, but he's not feels to her like a daily rejection. The guy may not have that in his head at all. He's just thinking, I haven't behaved dishonorably. I've never promised her anything. I never gave her to think that there was anything romantic going on in our relationship, but as the woman, you're thinking he could choose to make this romantic, this relationship. We have this friendship. He hasn't chosen. That means he's weighed me up and found me wanting. I experienced that as a rejection that happened in Tim's in my relationship. We talked about this. Okay. Have you, did you talk about the pearls? I did the whole pearls before his wine story. Yes. For the women. And it's in the book. Isn't it in the book? Did we put it in the book? Yeah, it is in the book. Read it in the book so I don't have to go over it again. I, can I, can I just, can I just add, I don't think this, you've got to be a little, we have to be careful to make clear. If a man and a woman are friends, Kathy's talking about the level in which the man is starting to share in a way sometimes you can share to a female that you wouldn't want to share. you have guy friends, you're a guy, and you find that this woman you're getting to be friends with, and you're sort of talking more candidly, you're able to unload a little bit, get more consolation from her in a way you're not getting it from your male friends. That's when you're getting to this area of exploitation, that you're in a sense getting a girlfriend or almost a spouse without really having to come up with a commitment on your end. That's what we're talking about. We're not talking about just – you can be relatively good friends with somebody of the opposite gender, of course. We're not trying to say, no, you can't. But it's when you find yourself sharing like that. You should, actually. You need that. You need that, brothers and sisters. We've got to have siblings, spiritual siblings. But I guess I'm thinking when you find yourself sharing at a level with the woman, if you're a guy, that you can't share with your guy friends, I think that's when you probably move. That's my test of starting to exploit her. Any wisdom from the bench? I was in a relationship like that where I was the cheap girlfriend for seven years. In fact, it was like a bad marriage without the piece of paper. And I left it finally. I got the courage to get out and go north to New England saying, well, I'm never going to be treated like that again. In fact, probably I don't want to be married. And met Kathy at seminary. You know, I had known her from high school. And she said, oh, I've got a guy you need to meet. You know, you've heard the story. It was David. And never thought that I was, you know, that I would be worthy of getting a marriage. You know, I thought I've sort of had my marriage and I blew it. And it was, I'd only been a Christian for a year. So I had to learn what being a new creation in Christ is. And the old really is gone and done away with. And David made me feel like a whole new person. But if you are in a cheap relationship, I just want to say, get out. It isn't worth it. There are friendships out there between men and women. And they are glorious. But they have perimeters and safety nets built in so that it can be free without being exploited. And I'm just so glad you came around and took me. I love you. I think perhaps this is complicated also with the just the epidemic of pornography that just a casual friendship with some woman would satisfy that level of relationship. If you're having sex with your computer and you are being dated by computer by beautiful, exciting, gorgeous women. And one of the complications here is that very average looking guys are deceived into thinking they are really hot because this woman wants them. And so recently talking with a fellow about he was just about thinking that this gal was the one and just on the verge of commitment. However, she really might not be the perfect pen. And I just had to say, listen, you are not Matthew McConaughey. Get over it. But I think that's a new level to this whole I'm getting my my social needs met by this woman. And I have a whole beauty contest going on with my computer and having sex with my computer. And I think that complicates this and makes it a little bit more difficult. The boundaries that Louise is talking about that can really safeguard a healthy friendship between men and women, I think Tim mentioned it and we kind of flew by it. Brothers and sisters. I mean, not everybody has great relationships with their siblings, but maybe, you know, somebody who did. If you didn't exactly have a great relationship, there can be really fun relationships with your brother or your sister. And to have a cross-gender relationship that partakes of that kind of comfortableness of there's no sexual chemistry going on at all. But you're comfortable with somebody and you're comfortable talking and doing stuff together. You just keep thinking, brother and sister, this is my sister, this is my sister. And the Bible actually says the younger men should treat the younger women as sisters. And I think that is the boundary line that we're supposed to draw mentally. If you're going past that, then you should at least have the courage to say, I am going to treat you as an object of romantic love and not as my sister. And not like just trying to sneak around the boundary. advice on how can I apply particular biblical principles of marriage we've talked about this weekend to my marriage to a non-Christian? If, like, in 1 Corinthians, it talks about that if you are married, you become a Christian, and now you find yourself married to a non-Christian. I'm not sure. Do you want to reread the question? Sure. How can I apply biblical marriage principles to my marriage to a non-Christian? Yeah, in that situation, I think we actually talk about it someplace in the book, where I say that if only one of you says, I'm going to treat marriage as service, I'm going to treat marriage, I'm going to decide the actions of love lead to the feelings of love, I'm going to, in other words, the fact is you can practice pretty much all of them. They do not work as quickly, and they may not work as well if the other person is just not thinking along the same lines. As I mentioned before, if both people are repenting and forgiving, you know, it is vastly easier to forgive somebody who's repenting, by the way. Has anybody ever tried it? So, I like to forgive you for your sin. Oh, I'm so sorry I did that. It gets a lot easier than you say, I want to forgive you for your sin. Well, I didn't do anything wrong. Sure, if it's your problem, tough. So, obviously, if you are trying to forgive somebody who won't repent, is that harder or easier than forgiving somebody who is repenting? Of course it's harder. On the other hand, if you forgive somebody who's not repenting, and yet that person begins to see, that person probably at a certain level knows, well, she's unhappy with me, and yet sees you working at it, trying, not holding things against you, it can soften. So, I mean, you've got nothing to lose. You've got nothing at all to lose. To, you know, take all the Christian stuff and say, I'm going to be the Christian spouse, even if my spouse isn't on board and not doing the same thing, not being reciprocal and all that, you may win the person over. And the Bible actually says, who knows, Paul says, you might win them over. Without a word. Without a word. Yes, you cannot nag someone into justification or sanctification. But it's not a guarantee, because Peter actually says, who knows? So, all I can say is, if one of you is doing it right, that's got to be better than if neither of you are doing it right, but not as good as if both of you are doing it right. One of the things I said to the women this morning was that one of the pillars of counseling is what? The only person you can change is yourself. And so you don't actually need the other spouse's permission to begin serving and loving them the way the Bible suggests. You don't have to go and say, may I please be self-sacrificing and serving? You can start changing yourself without any permission from anybody else. Surely you've dealt with people like that. Anything to add? You did a great job. I did a good job. Thank you so much. For those people who are married with young children in our community, the vast majority of our families have children or have young children. So this is a great, we can gain a lot of wisdom from the six of you. Young children. How do you keep the spousal relationship primary in the marriage where you have young children? When you have little kids. Yes. Over to you, everybody. We all have something to say about that. How do we keep, how do we put the marriage central when the children? The round robin letter we keep referencing that we kept sending about. We've, we've gone through young children and older children and rebellious children. And grandchildren. And grandchildren now. We all have grandchildren. I can remember early on one of our friends who isn't here, Adele Calhoun, talking about how she had come to the insight that once she had a child that she was taking care of and you're bathing the child and changing the child and hugging the child and kissing the boo-boos better, et cetera, you are getting your skin hunger needs met all day long. And your husband comes home and you're all full. You're, you're, you're skin hunger, and he's not all full. And therefore the danger is that, you know, your, your relationship to the child, whoever is the primary child care person is having their skin hunger needs, their, their needs for touch and love and cuddling met through the child. And the other spouse is feeling like an onlooker and left out. You have to be cognizant of that. Start with recognizing that dilemma and making sure that the spouse that's not getting the huggies all day long is, is still being loved and hugged and given the time that is due them. That, that. write the book, when we all dig out all of our letters that we've been shoving in the door for years, that should make it into the book. There's much more to say on the subject. That was just the best thing I had. How do you keep the marriage strong when the kids are little? Prevail upon your friends to take your kids off your hands and go somewhere. Hang on for dear life and just think, you know, at some point they're going to go to school. The times when you remember, I should have locked the door and I can hear them coming. Quick, hurry, get up, get up, get up, get up. Remember to lock that door. They go, what you doing? Just, I don't know what to say after that. Well, we did just very predictable things. We did dates. We had parents on both sides who would watch the kids overnight so we could go into Boston to a hotel on a special. We traveled without our kids. So getting away from the children was a regular part of our routine. And so we were blessed with parents on both sides that helped us. We utilized babysitters so that we could go out and have meals together without interruption. Remember one more thing, and I wish more parents would really think about this. We consciously decided not to really fight in front of our kids from the get-go. The other would be disagreements and tensions. But I grew up in a family where my mother, you know, she would hurl oranges and slam doors just for emphasis, for exclamation point. And I thought, that's how you fought. You know, you just... And that scared him. That really scared him when we were first married. I see a connection with the love of baseball, Louise. Feels so good. But we decided not to do that. And I can't tell you how many times our kids have come back and told us, wow, you know, go over for a sleepover at somebody else's house and said, boy, the mom and dad were just screaming at each other all night long. You and dad don't do that. And I said, we do do that. We just don't do it in front of you. You know, I would second what David and Louise said. And it's so important. You know, children are just like us, born in sin. And the world is centered around them. And so what I see is an incredible problem in the home today is that when the husband and wife, the marriage is not first. You know, if you think of Ephesians 5 and 6, the priorities are there. First, your relationship with Christ. Then your husband and wife. Then your children. And then finally, you know, slaves and masters. That's employers, employees. And so Charlie Shidge says, if you really want to love your children well, you've got to love their father or mother better. And so I think that's something that you're really not doing any service to your children because they think the world centers around them. And so that, I think, really encouraged. You know, we were not always successful, but you always have got to work on your marriage. And, you know, because that's good for your children. And the one thing that really caught my attention is our son was in the Marines. He was in the Marine Reserves going to college. I think he was about 21. Jane and I, he was coming home from a drill weekend. And we were in the kitchen. Jane was cooking. And I was, I don't help out a whole lot in the cooking, but I'm great on cleaning up. But anyhow, we were just hugging. And here he is, 21, 6'3", and he comes in and he hugs us. And it's like it's a group hug. And what it says is, is that my mother and dad love each other all as well. And that's why you've got to work on your marriage, because that's, that's, what's the security of your children comes from a father and mother that love each other well. And you've got to work on that. So, I think this is a great question. I know we've not even skimmed the surface, but we will work to get to these questions and get to you. But I think this is a great question to end our Q&A on today. If marriage is being eroded socially, culturally, legally, I should say if marriage and singleness is being eroded socially, culturally, and legally, what should the response of the church be? Besides having a higher view, deeper study of, and greater understanding of marriage, sex, and singleness, I'll add, what is the church's role, and maybe even our church's role, in renewing marriage, sex, and singleness in our culture? the things that are done inside the church, should we be doing things outside in terms of laws and votes and politics? However you want to take that question. He's just the messenger. I think you could start. I'd love to have us all weigh in on this last week. I mean, I'm thinking of Redeemer, but I'm not. I'm thinking of any church. Are we countercultural? Some of you have heard me say this before, so I'll say it again. Actually, I was very encouraged by some of the questions in the men's group we had upstairs. In general, the world is telling you to find a perfectly compatible person, defining that as somebody who won't change you. The men are, generally men are excessively concerned about superficiality, especially looks. Women are, tend to be, I know there's a stereotype, but there's something to stereotypes. Women are probably excessively concerned about superficiality, which have to do with security, financial security. As a result, you look out in almost anywhere and you see almost nobody that you think is a really good prospect for you. As soon as you start to think in terms of comprehensive attractiveness, as soon as you start to think of marriage as you're looking for a good friend, best friend, counselor, person who will help you grow into what God wants you to be. As soon as you start to think about looking for things that will get stronger as the person gets older, not weaker, all this stuff we're talking about. Suddenly, the pool of potential marriage people expands enormously. It's all around you suddenly. I mean, if any church would really be countercultural like that, a place where people aren't afraid of marriage, begin to recognize and treat one another not as sex objects or as ATM windows, but as people. If we can be countercultural and truly countercultural, when by and large I'd say Redeemer, and most churches I know are pretty much, in the way in which men and women treat each other, extensions of what's happening outside. They're having sex about as much, they're pressing each other on that, they are looking for the superficialities, and then they're adding, I mentioned this last night, I know I'm being kind of hard-hitting here at the end, but I think I should be. On top of that, you're adding everything else the culture says you should be looking for in a spouse. You're accepting it, you're just swallowing it whole hog, and on top of that you're saying, yeah, I really ought to marry a Christian too. And you put that on top of it thinking somehow that makes it better, but it doesn't. You need to rethink the whole menu of stuff that you're really looking for. If we just had 25% of the people inside a church that were operating on those principles, it would be such a countercultural community. But you know it's not. You know that by and large, it's not as rapacious, it's not as graphic, it's not as bad as the single scene out there. And yet you know that by and large, we're an extension of what's outside. For any church to start to really be different. The real problem is there are churches that try to be different, and then they're cultic. And their understanding of sex is a throwback 200 years. It's frankly prudish. And they also very often push extremely rigid gender roles, going way beyond what the Bible says. And it says women can never do this, and they have to dress like this, and men always have to do that. So the only churches I know that really make an effort at being countercultural get cultic. And so for church, we could be a sign of the kingdom if we both resisted what the world says you've got to be looking for in marriage, mate. But at the same time, didn't get into legalism and culticness. So I pray for that, and Kathy and I have always wished that Redeemer could be more of it than it is. But I'm not just thinking of Redeemer. I'm thinking of all churches. So that's my Jeremy ad here at the end. Ad. Or not, but ad. Any other suggestions? No, we shouldn't go out on that. Can't we say funny things and happy things? Like we have the last hour and a half, you know, lighthearted things. Make everybody laugh instead of me dumping on everybody. Let's not end like this. Kathy, do you have anything? Guys? Girls? People? Okay. As Jane was referring to, some people know that we know the Kellers. The Kellers know us. We know the Kellers. know we got some calls and emails about oh your names are in the book and so what but sometimes there's a temptation to for people to think of us as the concierge to the kellers and so there's young people that we know that was oh can you let tim and kathy know that we're coming to new york city and we're looking for a job and we want to be no no our job is to protect them and love them but sometimes we'll have conversations with people especially in the family about tim and inevitably my oldest daughter jess to our kids tim and kathy are just aunt kathy and uncle tim that's all they are and jess will go yeah uncle tim when they were staying with us once i opened up the door to the bathroom and he was in there oh but did you know that oh yes tim said excuse me but be that as it may they know that if anything ever happened they would go to aunt kathy and uncle tim in a heartbeat so we just want to thank redeemer for letting us come and like letting you get to see your pastor and his wife as the real people that they are that we know and you know put put some skin on as we say so thank you and i would say that um louise and i had this conversation and every so often somebody don't say what are the killers like and i say tim's the guy first one to take the garbage out of the beach yep so you know we're very thankful to be here thank you all for letting us come down from charlotte and be a part of this as well so thanks thanks tim and kathy great to have you all here tim do you want to wrap up anything and kathy you want to say anything else before we i was just going to say see you guys at the beach anything you want to say to wrap up you want to no i already did it i think thank you all for being here as well it was a privilege to have you here too thank you they're headed to la gordia right now so that's why they're leaving they have a flight in about two hours they're headed to la gordia but tim close us in prayer we'll have some i'm going to close in prayer but then don't immediately run out brent's going to give you some uh announcements follow up okay let's pray our father uh thank you for this uh the evening and this morning and this afternoon uh we do remember that in the end we when it comes to the most private issues of sex and seeking marriage and being married and uh we really need a community there's a tendency for us to just not want to share our inmost fears and thoughts uh about these things even once we are married we really can't do it without a community and i think we've seen that here today in particular we do pray that uh the lord i'm so grateful to redeemer as a community always been supportive of me and my marriage and i pray that you would make us uh increasingly uh fertile soil for the growth of wonderfully great relationships uh not only a great place to find um to seek and find a spouse but a great place to be married and to thrive and to raise children so i i ask that you would make this a blessed place for many things of course but in particular for that for the growth of marriage and family and i thank you for uh the people who put this uh this on and i pray that you would increase we don't know where we are going to go from here but we do know we need to be better than we've ever been before considering the state of our culture in supporting um healthy relationships between men and women and healthy marriages and healthy families so help us to be that kind of community and thank you for giving us this time together we pray in in jesus name amen in jesus name amen in jesus name amen
