TITLE: Questions About the Bible
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Questioning Christianity (2014)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/questions-about-the-bible/

============================================================

So, well, we're in the middle of, well, we're near the end of our series of seven sessions. And these last three sessions are hard for me, and I'm going to tell you why. If you can sign up for these groups, it would be a great idea. Because I have been very impressed that these last three weeks I'm trying to look at the question, the macro questions last week, can we believe in God? This week, can we trust the Bible? And next week, can we have faith in Jesus? So we're really looking at all the objections and arguments and counter-arguments for belief in God, arguments and counter-arguments about trusting in the Bible, arguments and counter-arguments about Jesus and who he is. And there's so many of them, I'm not doing justice to them. I'm running through them. Last week, I particularly felt I was just zipping through them. I'm trying to show you, I'm trying to get to all the various issues, do as much as I can to show you that there's been a lot of great discussion, and there's actually some really great answers to many of the questions that you may have heard, or you may have. But we can't really do justice in these last weeks to all the issues, and therefore I really would urge you to consider being part of a group which is going to meet for another eight weeks and process these things. And probably a better way to do it is, it's always nice to have some talking head up here that you can respond to, but actually probably the best way to work through a lot of these things is in a community of other people that you feel like you can go back and forth with and argue with and counter-argue to. But tonight, I want to talk about whether we can trust the Bible. And you see, last week by talking about God, I was being kind of generic, even though I'm a Christian minister and I'm a Christian, I'm talking more about God in general. But by going into the Bible this week and talking about Christ next week, I'm trying to home in on questions more around the truth or untruth of Christianity. When it comes to trusting the Bible or not, I think there's three basic areas or three basic objections to the Bible's authority. Most people, unless you're Richard Dawkins, most people think there's a few good things in the Bible. Most people think there's some great stuff in it or some good stuff in it. But for three main reasons, so many people today feel like, well, we just can't really treat it as authoritative. We can't do that because there's some parts of the Bible that are seriously wrong. And those three areas are this. Some people say, and by the way, these aren't all equal for everybody, but some people say we can't really trust the Bible because of science. Science disproves a lot of the things that the Bible says. Secondly, many other people say, or sometimes the same people also say, that the second reason we can't trust in the Bible really is because of cultural values. The Bible's regressive. The culture has moved on. The Bible has a lot of values in it that we have grown beyond or gotten beyond, and we can't follow the Bible in those areas. And then thirdly, there's the question of history. Many years ago, people thought everything in the Bible was historically true, but now we know lots of legends and stories, and it's not necessarily historically reliable. So science, cultural values, history. We can't trust it historically. We can't trust it scientifically. We can't trust it culturally. And underneath each of these three, unfortunately, there's a ton of other kinds of questions. And I'm really going to just take a half an hour and survey them and try to give you at least some idea of why I think there's actually great questions, great answers to these objections. So I do think you can trust the Bible. Just might as well go on record here at the beginning. I do think you can trust it. Anyway, let's talk about the Bible and science. And here, there's two objections under this issue. One of them is this. The Bible, we can't trust a lot of the Bible because it's filled with stories about miracles. And science has disproved miracles. That's one way to put it. Science has proven that miracles don't happen. Or maybe you want to be a little milder and say, there's just no scientific evidence for miracles at all. So how can we trust the Bible with all these accounts of miracles? Let me tell you, let me give you four, four responses. The first response is, science could never prove a miracle, even if a miracle happened. Why? Empirical science is based on two assumptions. The first is the regularity of nature. Science can never establish anything that can't be replicated. If somebody says, did I happen, did I happen, how are we going to science? The regularity of nature. Science can never establish anything that can't be replicated. If somebody says, da-da happens, da-da happens, how are we going to scientifically prove that? You have to be able to replicate it. Under the same circumstances, it's got to happen again. Otherwise, it's scientifically unproven, right? Replication. If you say, we've discovered that if you put X factor in mercury, then it boils at this temperature, at this altitude. But if you have the X factor out, it doesn't boil at this. How are we going to prove that? You have to replicate it. Miracles are, by definition, not replicable. Right? For a moment, for a moment, let's grant that a miracle really happened. Let's grant that God has actually done a miracle. Right in the presence of a scientist. Can the scientist say, I have scientifically, you can't prove anything if you can't replicate it. And a miracle, by definition, is an interruption of the natural and normal way that things happen in the world. The other thing, by the way, is that science not only has to replicate it if it's going to prove it, science always assumes a natural cause. You know that. If I was in front of a bunch of scientists, and I had one finger, because years ago I lost a finger, and I said, I'm going to show you a miracle, and a voice came out of heaven, I healed thee, Tim Keller, and right in front of everybody, my finger grew back. Right in front of them. Would that prove there was a miracle? Of course it wouldn't. Why? They would just assume, because they're scientists, that even though we don't know how it happened, there's got to be a natural cause. That's their job. And they would never say, this has been proven. You can't say that every natural cause possible has been chested out, because you could never know that. In other words, if miracles really occurred, there'd be no way to scientifically prove them. So to say, there can't be a miracle, that's point one. So point two is, to say that scientists disprove miracles is impossible. Even if miracles existed, science by definition couldn't disprove them. Got it? Thirdly, logically, the only way you could be sure that miracles can't happen is if you were sure there was no God. And that gets us back to last week, and I'm not going to go there. But the point is, unless you can prove that God can't exist, and I tried to show you last week that all arguments that try to say, all arguments that argue it's impossible to believe in God fail. They might have a lot of power in them, they may be true to a great degree, but to actually disprove the existence of God is impossible. And if you can't disprove the existence of God, then you can't disprove the existence of miracles, because if God exists, then miracles can exist, and if you can't disprove God, you can't disprove miracles. Bang. One last thing. Therefore, I just have to throw this in because it's kind of fun. Therefore, to say miracles can't happen is not a scientific statement. It's a philosophical statement. You have the right to it. You know, it's an act of faith. It's a statement of faith. And I've got my statements of faith, so there's no reason why you can't have your statements of faith. But don't say it's a scientific statement. It's a philosophical statement. And sometimes it can get you into some trouble. C.S. Lewis talks about an interesting incident from ancient history. In a certain, you know, whatever, so many, I forget what century, in ancient times, Sennacherib, who was the emperor of Assyria, an overwhelmingly powerful empire, invaded Israel and besieged Jerusalem. And it was an overwhelmingly large army. And yet, it's a historical fact, as far as everybody admits this, that within a few days after surrounding Jerusalem, it went home with a tail between its legs. Now, 2 Kings 19, the Old Testament says that what happened was God sent angels down, and the angels went through the camp and slew people, and they slew many, many soldiers, and that's why they left. Herodotus, who was a Greek historian and not a believer in God, Herodotus said this in Book 2, Section 141. Everybody's trying to figure out why this happened. And he said, he believed that he had heard that the Sennacherib's army was stopped by a lot of mice who came and ate up all the bow strings of the whole army the night before. Now, this is what C.S. Lewis says. He says, when the Old Testament says the Sennacherib's invasion was stopped by angels, 1 Kings 19, and Herodotus says it was stopped by a lot of mice who came and ate up all the bow strings of the whole army, Herodotus, Book 2, Section 141. Unless you start by begging the question and philosophically assuming that miracles cannot happen, there is absolutely nothing intrinsically unlikely in the action of angels to do that. But honestly, mice just don't do such a thing. See, unless you say angels can't exist, acting like that. If God tells angels to go slay a bunch of invading armies, angels do that sort of thing. But mice don't do the things that Herodotus said. So anyway, and by the way, you still have a... See, scientifically, you're going to say, well, it wasn't the mice, obviously, and it wasn't the angels. I don't believe in angels. So who knows? And it shouldn't trouble you. But it's interesting that if you philosophically rule out the possibility of miracles, as we're going to see next week, there's a number of things in history that are really, really, really hard to account for. And Lewis is trying to say sometimes to not agree to miracles makes you have to come up with theories of how this or that happened, which are even, well, they're extraordinarily difficult to believe. But we'll look at that next week. Miracles. There's no particular reason why miracles can't happen. You can't say miracles can't happen. Now, the second basic objection from science to the scripture is the issue of creation and evolution, and particularly the account of creation in the book of Genesis. So what many people would say, the objection goes like this. Science disproves what the Bible says about creation in Genesis chapter 1. Genesis chapter 1 says that God created the earth in a few days, pretty much like this, and only a few thousand years ago. And if you don't take Genesis 1 literally, if you try to get out of it by not taking Genesis 1 literally, then why do we need to take any of the Bible literally? That's the objection. Okay? So the idea is that science has proven evolution. Evolution doesn't fit in with Genesis 1. If you try to get out from it by saying, well, we don't take Genesis 1 literally, then why take anything in the Bible literally? And therefore, why believe the Bible? Got it? So let me just give you three things, three answers to that. Number one, this whole idea about taking the Bible literally or not is a bit of a red herring. For example, in Judges chapter 4, it tells us about how Deborah and Barak led an Israelite army to fight against the Assyrians, led by Sisera. So you had the Israelites and had the Syrians and Syria was oppressing the Israelites and they basically rebelled and they had this big fight and the Israelites won and Sisera was defeated and he was killed. That's Judges chapter 4. And as you read it, it looks like a regular historical narrative. When you get to Judges 5, though, Deborah sings a song about the battle. So Judges 4, there's an account of the battle. Judges 5, Deborah sings a song about it. And when you read the song, it's obviously poetry. Hebrew poetry has certain characteristics. Rhyme is not one of them. Obviously, for many people today, poetry means rhyming, though you know it doesn't have to. Hebrew poetry never rhymed, but it did have parallelism. It would say the same thing over and over again. So anyway, there's parallelism and there's repetition and there's a number of things that were the marks of Hebrew poetry. So when she sings about the battle, there's the marks of Hebrew poetry and there's a lot of metaphors used. So at one point, for example, in Judges 5, it says the stars and the heavens came and fought against Sisera. So the Israelites were fighting against the Syrians, but the stars in heaven came and fought against him. The stars in their courses came and fought against him and defeated him. Okay, question. Read Judges 4, read Judges 5. Are you going to take Judges 4 literally and Judges 5 literally? Judges 4 says nothing about the stars coming. Judges 4 sounds like a rather normal battle. Judges 5 gets all these kind of supernatural elements involved. Okay? It's not a problem for reading the book of Judges. It's very easy to tell that whoever wrote Judges intended Judges 4 to be a historical account and intended Judges 5 to be the record of a wonderful song, which of course used metaphors the way song does and the way poetry does. So there's really no problem. Judges 5 must not be taken literally. Why not? Because the author didn't want you to take it literally. Why not? Because he signals that it's poetry at every level. There's lots and lots of places in the Psalms, for example, which is, again, a lot of poetry where it talks about the mountains skipping and the hills, you know, decking themselves and singing for joy. And everybody knows it's, you don't take it literally. not taking the bible literally um if i write you a uh a letter and say my boss was so upset i just could have killed him next thing you know there's a you know police at the door and uh say we understand that you have made a death threat against your boss and um you know what you you'd say to your friend who called the police to say uh you why did you take me literally so i gotta take you literally i'm trying to take you very seriously look literally that what you want to know is what is the author's intent you it's not always easy to tell this let's face it sometimes you can't tell but generally speaking you know when the author is speaking metaphorically not in the bible there's not that much trouble but there are a couple of places where frankly it's not that easy to know what the author's intent is one of them is the book of ecclesiastes i'm not going to go there and don't ask me any questions about the book of ecclesiastes tonight okay good because because you don't really care and i don't want to get into it i know that you would just be throwing that in just to just to make me squirm but the trouble with genesis one is that if you read it as a hebrew scholar and hebrew scholars have been for many years it has some of the marks of poetry and some some and and in other sense it has some marks of a historical narrative it doesn't seem to be straight out poetry it doesn't seem to be straight out historical narrative there's a lot of repetition but there's no parallelism and you know there's parallelism and repetition of the two marks of hebrew poetry and what that means is there is a question there is a question a big question i think about whether or not you should take genesis one literally and in no way when i say that does that jeopardize somehow the authority of the rest of the bible or or does it make the rest of the bible obscure here's a second thing to tell you secondly people say but doesn't the bible teach that uh the world wasn't created very long ago i said oh yeah really where where does it say that well there's these genealogies in the bible and the genealogies if you add them up go back you know to adam and eve and it's only like 5 000 years ago and uh so the bible's wrong well one of the problems of course is that hebrew scholars have told us for years that the the genealogies are not complete that when the bible says uh john begat joe is that you you you and i tend to think that john must be joe's father john begat joe right the trouble is the word begat means generate literally means generated and therefore john could be joe's grandfather or great-grandfather or great-great-grandfather the lines are just you know the lines are being traced but not everybody's in in them and therefore the genealogies are no way to tell us how old the earth is genesis one does not necessarily say that uh the earth was created in six 24-hour days and what this means i think that's number that's one two and here's the third thing what it means you know in the end is that i don't think the bible necessarily tells you how god created the earth it tells you the meaning of the creation it tells you that god did do it uh it does mean that evolutionism the idea that we can account for absolutely everything in the human person through evolution that you're everything about your brain everything about your moral intuitions everything about your desires are nothing but the product of natural selection christians anybody who believes in god would reject that i think because we do think we have a soul and we have the image of god and that god has has given us those things but how he has done it and how long ago he has done it and what processes he's used actually i think that there's a lot of room for discussion there without necessarily contradicting the bible because the bible doesn't go there there's one man named david atkinson in his commentary on genesis puts it this way he says if evolution is elevated to the status of a worldview of the way things are that explains everything then there's direct conflict with the biblical faith but if quote unquote evolution simply means a level of scientific biological hypothesis it would seem there's little reason for conflict between the implications of christian belief in the creator and the scientific explorations of the way in which at the level of biology god has gone about his creative processes you want to ask me more questions about that you can now let's move on to the bible and cultural values because here's where things get hot but i'm going to start with the general before i get i'm going to do i want to talk about three areas where people say oh we can't believe in the bible because one is holy war one is slavery one the idea is that the bible condones slavery one is homosexuality but before extraordinarily important. If you find that there's something in the Bible that just offends you, you say, it just offends me, I can't believe in Jesus, I can't believe in God, or I can't believe in Christianity, I can't believe in the Bible because there's some things in the Bible that are culturally offensive to me, they're regressive, they're awful. Let's just talk high level for a second. I would say when people come to me, and I've talked to people like this for years, especially in New York, who have said, well, I can't believe the Bible because this offends me, or I find this thing outrageous, or just unacceptable, unacceptable. Number one, are you sure you're understanding what the Bible teaches? Several times, I have talked to people who said, the Bible is so regressive, I said, like what? He said, well, the Bible condones polygamy. The Bible condones polygamy. I said, really? The Bible says, yeah, the Bible supports polygamy. I said, okay, where? Well, look, there's a whole book of Genesis. Abraham has more than one wife, you know, well, has one wife, but then has a, you know, slave woman, you know, Isaac, Jacob has, you know, they all have multiple wives. Robert Alter, Jewish expert on biblical literature. He wrote a book some years ago. He taught at Berkeley for years. And he's a remarkable, remarkable expert in Hebrew literature, Hebrew narrative. He wrote a book called The Art of Biblical Narrative, which is a classic. One of the things I remember reading in there, he said, he says, if you read the book of Genesis and you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, you read their stories of their lives and how they did have, you know, multiple, they had children by multiple women and multiple wives and so on. And you see how absolutely miserable they are. And all the fighting and the jealousy and the anger and the lying and the deception. He says, anybody who thinks that the narrator, the writer of Genesis, was promoting polygamy does not know how to read a story. How in the world anybody can say, well, look at all these Old Testament saints. Clearly, you haven't really read the story. You have heard that they had, or maybe you've read a little piece of it. But if you read, how do you decide what a text is saying? You've got to read it. And if it's a narrative, you need to ask, okay, what is the narrator trying to get across? In no way, no way can you get out of the Old Testament that the writers of the Old Testament are promoting polygamy as an okay thing. No way. And that's why sometimes, and that's just one example. So sometimes people think I'm offended. And I'll say, I don't think the Bible says that. By the way, secondly, sometimes you get offended by an intramural Christian teaching. What I mean by an intramural is there's Orthodox, there's Catholics, there's Protestants, and there's Baptists and Presbyterians and Episcopalians. I know this is very confusing. And sometimes you run into some Presbyterian Christian, which we have three or four around here. And they are trying to talk to you about Christianity. And they're going to load a lot of their Presbyterian beliefs into their talking about Christianity. And you might get really offended and really upset about it. And sometimes I'll talk to somebody and they'll be saying, I don't like this. And I say, well, you know, I believe that too. But you know what? Most Christians don't believe that. And so there's no particular reason why you have to reject all of Christianity just because you reject that. For example, and again, don't ask me this because it's not germane. I'm a Presbyterian. I believe in some forms of predestination. And some people say, I can't believe that. I say, okay. That's okay. Most Christians don't believe that either. So please don't make that one of the central things. It's not in the Apostles' Creed. It's not one of the main things. So the first thing, if you get offended, maybe you misunderstood the Bible. Second, if you got offended, maybe you're just offended by that particular aspect of Christian teaching. But you're not really, it's not part of the gospel, the central message. It's not part of the, you know, the main thing. And don't worry about it. But here's the third thing. Would you do a thought experiment with me for a minute? If the, just like what I did with miracles, let's assume for a minute that the Bible really is the word of God. God, let's assume that it's not the product of any one human being or even a bunch of human beings. Let's assume for a second that it's not the product of a particular culture. Let's assume for a second that God inspired human beings to write what he wanted them to write. Now, if it's a product of not one culture but God, then it would have to offend every cultural sensibility somewhere. Got it? Thank you. Western people and didn't offend Asians, that would be a really bad sign. If it only offended Asians but not Western people, that would be a bad sign. So for example, I was telling Susan about this, I think I'll leave the races out, but some years ago, I was talking to a friend who said he had tried so hard to win his grandfather to faith in Christ. And his grandfather said, let me ask you a question, his grandfather had been through a war, and his grandfather was actually quite unhappy with a particular other country. And he said, are you telling me that people from that other country who did all that oppression, all that nasty stuff, all that awful stuff in the war, that if one of them, even after a whole lifetime of violence and oppression, if they repent, and they ask for forgiveness, that they won't go to hell? And my friend said yes. He was talking to his grandfather. And he says, well, I can't believe in any kind of, I can't believe in any kind of religion that would let anybody from that country out of hell. Now, he wasn't kidding, and he was oppressed, and you know, I laugh too. I mean, I don't mind you laughing. But the point is, he was very, very serious. Now, you and I, as Western people, the idea of forgiveness, the idea that God would forgive you no matter what you've done, does not sound offensive. But in a shame and honor culture, which we talked about last week, it is crazy. It is absolutely crazy. The idea that you're supposed to forgive your enemies, you're supposed to forgive them 70 times 7, the Bible says, that no matter what a person has done, whether they're, even if they're, if they've been a hit man for the mob, and they've been killing people left and right, and they, and they ask for forgiveness, they get forgiven. You and I, well, I might be a little squeezy about the hit man for the mob, but by and large, we like the idea. And yet, there's people in other parts of the world find that utterly repulsive, and they say, that offends me, I can't believe in Christianity. Now, here, much of what the Bible says about sex and gender is offensive. I'm going to get to this in a minute, but not yet. Because I want you to see that we're extraordinarily offended, but here's what I want you to see. See, if the Bible really is God's truth, then it would have to be offensive to you somewhere. Got it? It wouldn't make sense that it would make sense at every point. If it's, in other words, if it's offending you right now, it's a, if anything, it's a sign of its truth. See, if you do the experiment, the thought experiment, if the Bible's really true, the word of God, it has to offend you somewhere. So, here's my question. How can you reject the Bible because it offends you? It doesn't make any sense. One person wrote it this way. To stay away from Christianity because part of the Bible's teaching is offensive to you assumes that if there is a God, he wouldn't have any views that upset you. Does that make sense? Let me read that to you again. To stay away from Christianity because part of the Bible's teaching is offensive to you assumes that if there is a God, he wouldn't have any views that upset you. Does that make sense? Does that belief make sense? Let me help you with that. No. I don't think. I don't think you think so either. Okay. Let's take a look at the three, you know, offensive parts of the Bible. And I still have to have time to get to history. So, holy war, slavery. I think I can be fast, even on homosexuality. In fact, I want to be fast. I just hope you'd be sympathetic to me about every one of these. The holy war thing is there's a lot of places in the Old Testament where God does say to the Israelites, go and wipe out that group of people. There are places like that, especially when they're going into the promised land, you know. And that really gives us, it gives us chills, and not good chills, by the way. Because it says, oh my goodness, here you have a Bible. Here you have it sort of being condoned in the Bible. And certainly people who believe the Bible will say, if you've got God on your side, then you'll feel like you can do holy war too, that you can wipe out the infidels, right? Well, here's three or four things that are very important. And you have to read the Bible as a whole. It is by no means fair to go take one chapter somewhere. In other words, if you wrote a novel, wouldn't you want people to read the whole novel? Wouldn't it be awful if people only reviewed? I just read the middle three chapters, and then they read an Amazon review, you know. And you would say, wait a minute. No, you can read the whole. It's a story. Okay, well, the Bible has a narrative arc too. Here's what you need to remember. Number one, in the Old Testament, often, often, when God tells Israel to wipe out a group of people, and he says, because they're brutal, because you are going to be an innocent person, give this the willies, but he really tried to say is, I'm going to, I'm punishing that group of people because of their violence, and I want you to be the rod of my justice. Okay, that still scares us. But even then, even at that early stage in the Bible, it's interesting to see that God ordinarily says, you cannot take any plunder. You cannot take any plunder. You can't take the cattle. You can't take the money. You can't take anything. Why? Because this is not an act of imperialism. You're not supposed to be just enriching yourself at the expense of other people. You're not supposed to be enslaving them. Oh, no, you're supposed to be an instrument of my judgment. So even at that early stage, you've got that sense of judgment. That's number one. One, if that's all there was, I'd be upset too, by the way. Number two, God says when Israel starts taking slaves, when Israel is oppressive, he starts to war against them because God is not a tribal deity. God is on nobody's side. God is on the side of good. He's against injustice. And if you start to do injustice, he comes against you. Number three, near the end of the Old Testament, the Jewish prophets, because Israel was always being oppressed, were longing for a Messiah who would come and fight against evil. One of these figures is in Daniel 7. There's a prophecy of this great figure that's going to come. He's called the Son of Man. And he's going to come in war against evil. He's going to be a warrior against evil. Jesus appears. And he calls himself the Son of Man. And his disciples say, here's the Messiah. And so they expect he's going to start to, you know, sharpen his sword. Instead, he tells people to love their enemies. It's all through the Sermon on the Mount. He spends all of his time not politically, not raising an army or raising a war chest or running for office or anything like that. He spends all of his time healing people all over the place, you know, and caring for people. And then at the climax of his life, when people come after him to try to execute him and try to arrest him, one of his, you know, apostles takes out his sword. And Jesus says, put your sword down. He who lives by the sword dies by the sword. And he goes to the cross and he forgives his enemies. He dies forgiving his enemies. Why? Because he knows he's overcoming evil with good. He is the divine warrior. He is coming to overcome evil with good. But if he'd come with a sword in his hand and say, put down the Roman oppressors for the Jews, all that would have done is create a little bit of social justice for a few years in one little spot. But by going to the cross, Christians believe he came to destroy sin and death itself. He came to pay the penalty for our sin, we think. So someday he can come back and end all of evil without ending us. And what that means is that Jesus Christ now has changed the idea of what it means to war against evil. And in Romans 12 and many other places in the New Testament, we're told over and over because of what Jesus did, we're supposed to, Christians are supposed to overcome evil with good. How do we overcome evil? How do we defeat evil? By loving our enemies, by forgiving our enemies, by overcoming evil with good. And so when you get to the end of the New Testament, this is a scholar wrote this. The Bible as a whole has a coherent understanding of divine warfare. In early times, God's opposition to evil was expressed in the world through military action toward brutal people, groups, whose violence had to be stopped. But in Christ, God's opposition to evil is elevated to a whole new level. There is no contradiction between a supposed New Testament loving God and an Old Testament wrathful God. The deepest longings of the Hebrew scriptures for a divine warrior who destroys evil is fully realized in Jesus Christ, the suffering Savior who overcame evil with good. And now we walk in his footsteps as Christians. You want to ask me more about that if you want to? Slavery for a second. I will make very short shrift with this, but people, especially lately, in the last 10 years, this wasn't something I heard years ago. I'm old enough now to know that these various objections to Christianity kind of wax and wane. In the last 10 years, I've had many people say, well, the Bible was wrong about slavery. It's probably wrong about other things. I said, what do you mean it's wrong about slavery? Well, it condones slavery. Well, one of the problems we have is translation. So, for example, in the Hebrew Old Testament, the word for slave or servant is the word eved. If you're transliterating, it would be e-b-e-d. It looks like e-bid, but it would be pronounced e-ved or something like that. And it meant a servant. It meant a slave. It meant a slave. It meant a slave. It meant a slave. If you're transliterating, it would be E-B-E-D. It looks like E-B-E-D, but it would be pronounced E-V-E-D, or something like that. And it meant a servant. It meant a slave. But let me tell you something about what the Bible says about slavery. First of all, if you fell into debt, you had to sell yourself into slavery until your debt was paid. Secondly, kidnapping. Slavery through kidnapping was a crime punishable by death, Exodus 21-16. The only slavery that was allowed is not what you and I would call slavery. I'll get to that in a second. It was indentured servanthood. You fell into debt. There was no bankruptcy. You had to work for somebody else. And you were their slave until you paid off the debt. Involuntary slavery through kidnapping was not allowed, Exodus 21-16. Listen to this list. If you strike a servant and he loses a tooth, he has to go free, Exodus 21-26. If you kill a slave, it's a capital offense, Exodus 21-16. Slavery was never for life. At the very most, it could be seven years, Deuteronomy 15-1. If a slave came to a master with a wife, the wife had to be taken and the wife had to be released with him. The master was never allowed to break up a family. Here's another one. The slave, the so-called slave, had the right to go to court and sue his or her master in pursuit of rights. Job 31, 13-15. But here's the most interesting thing. Deuteronomy 23 says, If a slave flees from a master, it's wrong for you to try to return him or her. Because if the slave has run away from a master, it's got to be because probably there was abuse. And therefore it says, if you find a runaway slave, you must not send him back, but you must, wherever he likes him, whatever town he chooses to live, help him live there. You contrast that with the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 in America, where it said, if you find a fugitive slave, if you don't return, then you're liable. Now, when you say, if slavery is not based on race, it is not permanent, the slave has rights, the slave can sue, the slave never lasts longer than seven years, if you hit him and knock out his tooth, he goes free. If he runs away, you're not allowed to return him because it means abuse. Does that sound, kidnapping is always wrong. Does that sound like slavery that you and I know of? No, it's not really slavery. It is slavery because we actually don't have anything like this anymore. But one of the problems is, in the Bible, slavery is not African, race-based, permanent slavery, where the whole person is the property of the master and can do whatever he wants. That is actually forbidden by the Bible because of kidnapping, because of all these other things. And therefore, that's the reason why, no, the Bible doesn't condone slavery. It condones something. And many places have had indentured servanthood before, and we don't have it in our capitalistic system. We have bankruptcy and things like that. In fact, even before bankruptcy, we had debtor's prison. In other words, we got rid of the indentured servanthood way of dealing with debts. But for you to look at what the Bible says, see the word slave, and there are places where it says slaves obey your masters. Ah, there we go. The Bible is wrong about slavery, and therefore, it's wrong about other things. No. Okay, homosexuality. Now, I would like a little sympathy because nobody anywhere in this country can say anything about this subject at all without creating a social media firestorm and getting a lot of people really upset. So, let me just say this. Number one, I do think this is one of the places what the Bible teaches is offensive to our culture. I took a fairly long time to try to show you that you shouldn't be too put off by that. The Bible says, here's Jesus Christ. Here's what he said he was. Here's what he said he did. Here's, you know, the evidence for the resurrection. You can't say, because I don't like what the Bible says about sex or gender, therefore, Jesus couldn't be raised from the dead. Does that make sense? No, of course it doesn't. And so, you've got to get things in perspective. You've got to say, all right, what Tim's about to say probably is going to upset me or offend me, but that doesn't necessarily mean, therefore, Christianity is a crock. It can't. Because it's going to offend somebody somewhere. My friend's grandfather, I wish my friend's grandfather wouldn't have been offended by the idea of forgiveness, no matter what the crime. But he was. And he let that keep him from anything, from seeing anything else in the truth. And you could say, well, that was kind of narrow-minded. But what makes you think that our culture is more right than his culture? You know, you may think so, but don't forget, three-quarters of the things you believe right now are stupid. You know that. And you don't know what those things are. Some of the things you feel right now, all smart people, including me, all smart people, all sophisticated people, we all believe this, and that doesn't fit with the Bible. At least three-quarters of those things are going to be seen by your great-grandchildren as stupid. Just like you think that that man's grandfather was wrong, you mustn't take your cultural sensibility and say, therefore, Christianity can't be true. I tried to show you that if Christianity is true, it would offend you somewhere. Now, 99.99999% of all the people, Christians and non-Christians, Christians, Richard Dawkins, atheists, and Pope Francis, believe that the Bible says that homosexual acts are sin. In other words, 99.999% of all the people who read the Bible, because every time it's mentioned, it's a prohibition and heterosexual relationships are held up. In other words, everybody I know, both people who don't like the Bible and who do like the Bible, people who do like Christians and don't, almost everybody's always said the Bible says that that's wrong. And therefore, I think so too. And it's very few people who think you can get out of the Bible that it's not. I know that most of them live in New York City, but they're a very small number can spread out across the world and spread out across history. So they're that. And that's, that's offensive. Okay. But I say two other things. They're very important. One is basically the Bible doesn't so much knock homosexuality. It doesn't mention it that often, as people often point out. What it does say, it has, I think has an exalted view of sex, a remarkably exalted view of sex, because it says sex has two purposes. The sex access has two purposes, according to the Bible. Now, the first purpose is a way of giving yourself completely to somebody else. It's a way of saying to someone else, I belong completely and exclusively to you. It's not a means for self-fulfillment. It's a means of self-donation. And it's a means of creating a community that lasts called a family. It's like the glue. So it's not a way of getting fulfillment. It's a way of giving yourself. It's a sacrament almost in the sense that what you're doing physically has got to represent what you're doing with your entire life. And that is being vulnerable to a person. And Christianity, the Bible would say, if you're vulnerable physically with somebody, but you're not vulnerable by marrying the person, by, in other words, by, you might say, committing yourself emotionally and socially and financially and legally, if you're only going to be vulnerable physically and not vulnerable in every other way, the sex is not doing what God made sex to be. Sex is a way of giving yourself to somebody. So that's the first thing. Secondly, sex is a way for the diverse glories of male and female to be reunited and mingled. That there's a certain incompleteness, that there are certain unique beauties and glories that each gender has that the other one doesn't have, and that sex is a way of remingling those. Homosexuality is only ruled out not because the Bible's down on homosexuality so much as it doesn't fit in with this exalted view of sex. And lastly, the parable of the Good Samaritan teaches this. We're supposed to love our neighbor, no matter who the neighbor is. So the parable of the Good Samaritan is Jesus gives a story about a Samaritan who finds a Jew beaten in the road and vulnerable. And instead of just leaving the Jew, instead of riding over the Jew, the Samaritan and all Samaritans were enemies of the Jews, and the Jews were enemies of Samaritans. They hated each other. Yet the Samaritan comes and picks the man up and bandages up his wounds and takes him to an end and heals him. Recuperation is at his own expense. And Jesus says, in other words, what he's saying here is, it doesn't matter who your neighbor is. It doesn't matter what your neighbor's belief is. If you're a Christian following me, you have to love your neighbor, no matter who your neighbor is. Any Christian who has abused gay people or is just cold to gay people is contradicting that parable. And there's no excuse for it. No excuse at all. And Christians need to own the fact that there's been that history of marginalization, surely, and take responsibility for it, and do absolutely everything they can to bring the church's attitude much more in line. I think that's what the Pope's trying to do. He's trying to say, the attitude has got to be in line with who is my neighbor. It doesn't matter who my neighbor is. I'm supposed to love my neighbor, and I'm also supposed to work together. the person believes like me or acts like me or not. Now, what I'm going to do here is I'm going to end, and here's the reason why. I told you I was going to get to, can you trust the Bible historically? And that actually fits into next week, because when we start talking about Jesus Christ, right away the question is, how do you even know who Jesus is? Because after all, you can't trust the Bible because, you know, the Gospels are filled with legends. We'll start with that, and then we'll move into the other things about how we know who Jesus is and what he taught. But right now, I'm going to end my time on the Bible because I know that I have thrown the stone into the bush, and there's all these snakes coming out. And the real question is, will I be able to kill them all before the night's out? All right, now is your opportunity to respond with questions for Dr. Keller. So if you do have questions that you'd like to ask, please do see the phone number and email above me and text them in or email them in, and we're going to get to as many as we can in the next 25 or so minutes. Yes, we are. I've been looking forward to this week. During the whole course, I just wanted you to know, so. It really has. All right, the first question about the Bible is, and I've actually wondered this myself and had this question, something like it, asked in the past. God is so different in the Old Testament and the New Testament, cruel and harsh versus kind and forgiving. How do I know which is the real God? Well, this is one of the few places, if you were asking me questions about science or a lot of other things, history, I'm kind of an amateur, you know, just like a lot of you are. But when it comes to understanding the text of the Bible, that's the one area, that's my job, is to read the Bible. I do not grant that the Old Testament God is more wrathful than the New Testament God. When Jesus dies on the cross, he wouldn't be dying on the cross if God was just shrugging at sin and evil. In the Old Testament, God judges sin and evil. Bang. In the New Testament, the judgment comes down on Jesus so that by believing in Jesus, we're pardoned. What that does is it just changes the landscape. It's the reason why the New Testament appears to be so utterly different. I already gave you one example of that, and I even gave you a quote. The New Testament transmutes the idea of warring against evil into overcoming evil with good. You know, we have a hymn that we sing. It's called, Lead on, O King Eternal. And the last line goes like this. It's a Christian hymn, and it goes, but not with swords loud clashing, nor roll of stirring drum, but with deeds of love and mercy, the heavenly kingdom comes. Got it? In other words, not with swords and drums, but with deeds of love and mercy. So, Paul actually says in Romans 12, following Jesus Christ, Jesus overcame evil by loving people and dying for people and returning not evil with evil, but evil with good, and not answering violence with violence. And that's how we overcome evil now. You say, well, that's not in the Old Testament. Well, I think it is. The Old Testament was looking for a God who would overcome evil. And Jesus changes that. The Old Testament God believed in judgment. Well, Jesus wouldn't have gone to the cross unless there wasn't a need for judgment. The cross means he was getting the punishment we deserve. It's not like the Old Testament God punishes people. The New Testament God says, oh, it doesn't matter. Let bygones be bygones. Boys will be boys. Hey, you know, who am I to judge? Well, there's no reason for Jesus to die on the cross. He went to the cross because there was a penalty to pay. So, I would also, the Old Testament is filled with foreshadows of Christ. And so, I wouldn't grant that. I think the Bible is a coherent whole. And it's, I think you could see that as you read it. And therefore, there's only one God. And I think that's the God you should look to, not try to choose between the two. Can a homosexual be a Christian? Well, see, it's, of course, short answer. Because what makes you a Christian is you believe in Jesus Christ. The trouble, of course, is, as you, I think you know, that if you read Michel Foucault, who was gay, of course, who was the great postmodern French... ... ... ... on the history of sexuality in which he says, up until about 180 years ago, you would never talk about homosexuality as an identity. And he's, Foucault says the idea that homosexuality is an identity, that I am gay or I am homosexual is a new idea and it will probably go away. Homosexuality is a behavior and the Bible talks about behavior. It doesn't talk about inter, you know, it doesn't actually talk about homosexuality as an identity. So what is, we're simply saying this, that if a, if you want to live the Christian life and you find yourself attracted to someone of the same sex, you should not act on that. Now, there are people who say, like W.H. Auden, who was a, you might say a homosexual Christian. Um, he believed what the Bible said and he tried very hard to adhere to it and he constantly talked about not being able to adhere to it. In the end, what, uh, you are saved by your belief in Jesus Christ, not in, uh, you know, this is, by the way, an issue, we shouldn't be talking about homosexuality here. If somebody says to me, I'm a Christian, but I'm not living the way I think I should be living. Am I really saved? The answer is you are not saved by your behavior. You're saved by your faith in Jesus Christ. But as time goes on, if you don't follow him, you will lose a certain amount of assurance that you have really believed. So I would say to anybody, uh, I, your, your, your salvation is based on faith in Christ. First, the reality of that faith will eventually show itself in the way in which you live. Uh, depending on how you define homosexual, the answer is sure. There's many people who say, I'm not acting on it. I'm following Jesus Christ, but I'm still homosexual because I have the feelings. There's other people that would not use the word for themselves anymore. And that's the reason why I don't know how you're using it in the question. And that's the reason why it's a little difficult for me to give a perfectly good answer. It's the reason why I've danced a little bit with the question. But the short answer is you're not saved by being heterosexual and lost by being homosexual. You're saved by being a Christian, by believing in Jesus. You're lost if you reject the idea that you need a savior. That's the key. And then whether or not you're living the right way, eventually that should shake out. But ultimately, it's not how you live that saves you. It's what you believe. More easy topics here. Does the Bible teach gender inequality and condone patriarchalism? Yeah, I didn't go there partly because there was just not enough time. You really could make a pretty good case. I think you can see it in the New Testament is that by and large, the New Testament, a book, Rodney Stark, who wrote a book called The Rise of Christianity, it's a historian, says that male and female had an equality inside the Christian church that made the rest of the surrounding Greco-Roman world look really pretty bad. Women had more rights, you might say. They had more scope for their gifts. Also, when the Bible talks about male and female, there's a place in Galatians where it says, in Christ there's no male or female. That is to say, God considers not just the men, the people who have salvation and their wives are saved through their husbands or something like that. The real problem with that question is, you're probably trying to say, does that mean there can be no distinctions? Modern Western individualism generally says there can be no distinctions inside a marriage and there can't be any role distinctions inside the church. I don't think that's what the Bible teaches, but I would say that even if there's role distinctions, there's still equality. If my wife, and she does, considers me the head of the home, and she does, and we have come to a mutual agreement, by the way, of what that means. Nevertheless, there's no doubt that she feels I treat her as an equal in every way. Because I do think that that means that even if there's role differentiation, the genders are equal. Now, because you didn't ask any more questions than that, I'm going to stop. Because there's a whole lot of, gee, there's a whole lot of, come upstairs and ask me. If you want me to go into more detail, you say, well, I really meant. too general for me to go on further. A question, trying to flesh out the idea of grace. The idea that you will be forgiven for anything you do just doesn't make sense. Yes. We agree. A person can be awful all of their life, then decide to believe when they are 80 years old. And that person goes to heaven while the non-Christian who has done good, works all their life, does not go to heaven. How do you explain that? Well, I've alluded to this in the past. I mean, most of you have not been here every week. There are a few who will get perfect attendance pins, but most of you haven't. So I think I've spoken a little bit to this before. Christians believe the idea that your salvation is dependent not on whether you're good or bad, but whether you admit your need for a savior, you admit that you're not good, you admit that you fail in many ways, you admit that there's a streak of self-centeredness in you. You admit that even the good things you do tend to be self-righteous. And then there's those who won't. So we would say, as traditional religion says, the good people are saved and the bad people are lost. But Christianity says, it's the, frankly, the humble people who are saved, the people who admit that they're not good, and the proud people who are lost who say, hey, I'm a good person. And there's a famous parable. It's in, well, in Luke chapter 18, Jesus talks about a Pharisee who goes up to pray, and he says, Father, thank you that you've made me a good person, that I'm not like this tax collector here. And the tax collector looks up and says, Father, be merciful to me, a sinner. And Jesus says, I tell you, the tax collector went home justified and the Pharisee did not. That's Christianity. Now, what that does mean is you say, well, that's unfair. Well, I got to tell you that because of what I know about people's background, the idea that everybody, if they just summons up their willpower, can live a good life, I don't believe it. Some people have really broken backgrounds. Some I see an enormous difference in people's lives, I'm old enough to see this, between people who grew up with really great, loving parents and people who did not. It's a huge, huge advantage to your ability to cope and your sense of your own well-being and your sense of your self-regard to have doting parents and people who just never had anything like that. You know that. It's huge. Then you're trying to, you think that creates a level playing field? You think that creates a quality that, hey, everybody's equal and those of you who try hard to live a good life, you should go to heaven. Those of you who have screwed up and you've been cruel and you've been nasty all your life, you should, you're lost. I don't think that's fair. I think the fairest possible way to have a religion and a basis of salvation is to say, all you've got to do is admit that you're not so hot, that you're not great, that you're, that you're, that you're not good, that you need a savior. And the people who are not allowed in, as it were, are the proud people who say, hey, I shouldn't have to beg for charity. I shouldn't need that. I should be able to get in on my merits. They're the ones who go home not justified. I think that's more fair, that's all. I think it's way more fair than to say everybody is bound to live as good a life as possible because actually I, I just see that some people find that extraordinarily difficult and we don't start with the, there's no level playing field. Next is a question on the credibility of the Bible. It says, the authors of the books in the Bible are long dead and there is no way the writer's intent can be verified. So how can we be sure that they did not misunderstand something or take something down incorrectly? Right. By the way, that's a great question. Um, though you have to, it, there are some parts of the Bible that you do spend time wondering, especially narrative. See, if Paul says in one of his letters, you can, you must only have one spouse. If Paul says in his letters, you must only have one spouse. It's not too hard to tell what the author's intent is. That is to say you can't, you know, polygamy is wrong. Okay. If you're reading the book of Genesis, as Robert Alter says, my book of Genesis is a story. It's a narrative. It's not a, it's not law. It's not proverbs. It's not, you know, it's not case law. It's not didactic. It's a story, uh, to, to discern the intent of, of a storyteller is a little harder, right? Now I think he's right in saying you can't read the history of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. is a good idea. I think he's right about that, but that's a little bit more indirect. So the fact is that I would agree that there are parts of the Bible that are extraordinarily clear, and there are parts of the Bible that are matters of interpretation. However, the most important parts of the Christian faith are based on the most clear and repeated statements in the Bible. So there's a whole lot of stuff that I feel like... A lot of people think if I become a Christian, it means I'm going to be told exactly what I have to believe. The fact of the matter is there's lots of areas of debate, and they're usually debates over text of the Bible. But the central stuff, which is what the Bible's based on, the deity of Jesus Christ and the necessity of him going to the cross and what it means to believe and that sort of thing, those things are actually quite easy to discern in the Bible. There's really no doubt what the authors mean, but there's plenty of places where there's room for disagreement. Given how massively interpretation has changed and how tied it is to our culture, under whose authority should we interpret and why? Well, that's one of the reasons why a lot of people are Catholic. Because what they can say then is the Catholic approach is to say that the magisterium has the right to tell you what the Bible says. The Protestant approach is that... And I'm a Protestant. Protestantism would say, well, what that does is it sort of puts the magisterium between you and God. God. That's how we would say it. See, this is one of those places where... This is an intramural debate. But what we would say is that I have the Bible, and it is my responsibility to interpret the Bible, but not individualistically. I have to interpret it individually, but not individualistically. And you say, what do you mean by that, Tim? I'm glad you asked. What I mean is that I'm not supposed to do it in isolation from history. One of the great things... There's a lot of things I hate about the internet, but one of the great things is it is really not very hard for you at this point to find out what about, oh, what Mark chapter 9, verse 28, what the early church fathers thought about it, what the Greek fathers, what the Latin fathers thought about it, what the people thought about it in the 5th century, the 6th century, the 7th century, what people in Africa, what African theologians think about it. It's not very hard for you to get an idea about what other Christians over the centuries and in other countries are saying about that verse and how they're reading it. And that can sometimes correct you, because we all have cultural blinders on, and we all are creatures of our own time. And so if you're willing to say, in the Bible, I think God is speaking to me, and it's my job to try to interpret it properly as a way of following God, I want to know what he wants for my life, and the way I find out is in the Bible. But I shouldn't be interpreting it individualistically without reference to what other people say. Otherwise, I might be self-deceived. So generally, when I find I'm interpreting it in a way that most other interpreters have interpreted for the years, over the years, I feel like, okay, that's good. Occasionally, I might think that other people are wrong. But again, you're going to see in the main pillars, the main truths and foundational truths that Catholics and Protestants and everybody believe about Christianity, they're rooted in the most obvious parts of the Bible. And the parts of the Bible where there's been an enormous consensus across the centuries. When I read the confessions of St. Augustine, 1,500 years ago, a man in northern Africa, and I see how he reads the Scripture, very often I'll say, huh, that's, I mean, well, first of all, it's amazing the commonalities. When I read the confessions of a man who lived in northern Africa 1,500 years ago, and I see the struggles he's struggling with and the things he's seeing in the Scripture, it's amazing to me how much it's like my own Christian faith. In fact, to me, it's one of the marks of the truth of Christianity, that this guy is not completely alien to me at all. And yet there are places where I see, as an ancient man, a pre-modern man, him reading the Scripture differently than I, and that's great, because what that makes me say is, am I getting it right? Is he right or am I right? And that helps me to be self-critical. So you just simply have to be willing, in a sense, to read the Bible in community. And that doesn't mean necessarily people that you know. It can be people who are long dead. But you need to read it in community, not individualistically, and you still have to read it individually. There are many other books that are considered inspired and many people's opinions. So this question asks and points out that every religion has their own texts of beliefs. rise above all the others? Okay. Yeah, I probably won't get to this next week, so I better talk about it. First of all, the reason I believe the Bible, why I take it as authority, is negatively the objections, I just went through most of the objections. It's culturally regressive. Miracles can't happen. The science is disproven. The creation accounts. Okay? And I've tried to show you that none of those things actually are, none of those arguments succeed. See, those are arguments that are saying you can't trust the Bible because, and I've tried to say, well, if miracles were real, if the Bible was inspired, if all these things, if these things were true, none of these objections would, none of these, you know, in other words, science couldn't disprove miracles. Or if Christianity was really true, it would have to be culturally offensive. So cultural offense is not a reason not to believe. Science is not a reason not to believe. So first of all, negatively, I don't have any reasons not to believe the Bible. Positively, though, I mean, there's a lot of things in the Bible that when I was a young man in particular, I said, good night. But when I read the Gospels, and the Gospels purport to be historically reliable accounts of Jesus' life, and I'll get to that next week, not now, I then had an opportunity to decide, do I believe in Jesus? Do I believe he is who he said he is? So I looked at his claims. I looked at his actions. I looked at the claims of the resurrection. Once you decide yea or nay, then that determines what you think about the Bible. Do you hear me? See, here's the point. If Jesus is not the Son of God raised from the dead, who cares what the Bible says? Because at the very heart of what the Bible teaches, if it's wrong, if you don't believe that, why freak out about what anything else it says? I mean, right? On the other hand, if I do believe that Jesus is the Son of God raised from the dead, he accepted the authority of the Bible. It's so clear. He breathed it. He bled it. He quoted it. One of the last things he cried out from the cross, he was quoting the Bible. So if I believe in Jesus, then I take the Bible. If I don't believe in Jesus, I don't need to take the Bible. And so I don't go to the Bible and come up with a list of, you know, here's why I believe the Bible, here's why not. I have to deal with the objections to the truth of the Bible and the trustworthiness of the Bible. Then I have to get to Jesus and decide what I believe about him. And then if I believe what I believe about him, in other words, Christ and the Bible stand or fall together. Got it? If I believe in him, the Bible comes with it. But because you can't follow Jesus and not trust the Bible because it was what he built his whole life on. You just can't follow Jesus without trusting the Bible. On the other hand, if you don't believe in Jesus, there's really no reason to agonize over this or that biblical teaching, you know. There's no reason. You mentioned the popular view of sex that the Bible has. If you want to know more about that. Is that word popular ironic? Yes. That was ironic. Sorry. Oh, New Yorkers. You're so ironic. Okay. Question wants to know, if you give yourself over fully by being vulnerable both physically and in every other way with a short-term partner, why is that a problem if you eventually do the same again with a husband or wife? Oh, well, I mean, I wasn't, you know, there's a problem with this whole format as I'm just treating things so briefly that I'm not, I told you before, I'm not doing justice to any of them. And so all of these things need more discussion. That's one reason why I'm hoping that a lot of you will be in these groups. But I don't believe you can give, if somebody says, oh, I'm going to give myself completely to them, I'm just not going to marry them. Okay. Well, why aren't you going to marry them? Why wouldn't, I mean, how could you say, I'm giving myself completely to you, but I'm not marrying you? Sounds to me like you're holding on to your independence. Sounds to me like you're saying, well, I don't want to get married because then I'd be sort of, in other words, you haven't, there's no way to give yourself completely to a romantic partner without marrying them. No way. And if you say, well, I have, I just haven't gotten married yet. Yeah, okay. Well, we'll see. I mean, go get married tonight and then we'll see whether you've really given yourself. I mean, you might be kidding yourself. Say, well, honey, I've just, let's, let's go to bed because I just, you know, I've just given myself to you completely. We'll get married someday. I've really given myself to you completely. Just say, okay, okay, let's go. Let's go get married and then I'll know. So I would say, I wouldn't trust myself to say I've given myself completely without marriage. That's the reason why the historic Christian teaching is that sex is for marriage. I think I said that, but maybe I didn't make it. can't give yourself without getting married. And therefore, sex is for self-donation within marriage. Okay, sorry. To talk about these massive subjects so quickly, it's difficult to say it all very well. So I'll try another one. All right. You talked about how you can't just read part of the Bible but need to consider the entirety of it. And people are curious about how were the books of the Bible chosen and compiled? The canon is a word that means the accepted books. And there are 66 books of the Bible. And there's always been, ever since the Da Vinci Code came out, Dan Brown, which you have to remember, it is fiction. And in there, the idea is that you have these earlier Gospels that show Jesus as a wonderful, wandering minstrel of a prophet of love. And later on, Gospels and other accounts came up that showed him as this deity. And when Constantine came into power, he brought together a group of people and he said, these books are in the Bible because they fit in with what I believe. And these books are out of the Bible. And it was a power play and it was an imperial power play. If you read that and you get your idea of how the Bible was formed, it's completely wrong. Don't forget it is fiction. Even Dan Brown wouldn't claim that it's the way it happened. It just made for a really good yarn. Basically, what happened is almost all of the Old Testament, Jesus accepted, Jesus quotes in the New Testament from every book of the Bible except, pardon me, every book of the Old Testament is quoted in the New Testament except the book of Esther. Which means the New Testament writers accepted the Old Testament canon, which was put together by, at the Council of Jamnia in 90 B.C. And I remember that from seminary. I'm so proud of myself. I actually haven't said that in about 40 years, but I really can't believe I still remember it. But so the point is the Old Testament was, Jesus and the apostles tell us the Old Testament was their authority. That's why Christians trust that. But the real question is why do we accept what's in the New Testament? And almost all of the books of the New Testament were instantly understood to be scripture by the church. They were circulated amongst the churches and they were accepted as scripture, as divinely inspired. Why? Three things. If they were written by an apostle or an associate of an apostle. The apostles were trained by Jesus himself. So if an apostle wrote a book, one of the 12 or St. Paul, an apostle was someone who had an eyewitness to the resurrection, met the resurrected Christ, personally taught, they were accredited. So if an apostle wrote a book of the Bible or an associate of an apostle, that's how they could be sure that this was Jesus teaching. You know, if Jesus trained Peter and met Paul, then Mark was an associate of Peter, Luke was an associate of Paul. So everybody, anyone who wrote a book of the Bible, who actually knew Jesus or knew someone who was trained by Jesus was considered authoritative. The fact is that there are a couple of books of the Bible, like Jude and 2 Peter, and there have been some controversies about whether they should be in the canon or not. Some of you might be shocked that I even tell you that. Generally, there was debate in the church as to whether it was really written by Peter or not. And finally, the church decided, the early church decided, yes, it was, and put it in. And you say, well, how do we know if 1 Peter is really part of the canon? The answer is, well, I trust the Holy Spirit working in the church. But here's the point. No major doctrine of the Christian faith is only supported by one or two verses and one or two books. All the major doctrines of the Christian faith are based on multiple texts across the whole Bible. And therefore, there's really no issue of, what if we missed a book? What if that stupid early church missed a book? What if there's a 3 Peter out there? And it's in my grandmother's attic, and we're going to find out about her. What if 2 Peter is not really written by Peter? Relax. Just relax. The early church decided which books were authoritatively and genuinely apostolic. They're much closer to the time than we are. go on what they said, there's no way we're going to figure it out now. If God let them make a mistake, I'm not sure why he would have, but if he did, it doesn't really change things because all the basic Christian doctrines are based on every, you know, multiple texts, and therefore there's really no doubt about what the, that the teaching of the Christian faith came from the apostles who were trained by Jesus himself. There's really no doubt about that. Unfortunately, that's all the time we have left for questions. There's always far more questions than we have time for, and as Tim mentioned, that's actually why we're so glad to be able to offer Questioning Christianity groups that we hope you will consider joining. Again, they're starting the first week of April, and they'll go for eight weeks, and they're going to be peer-led discussion groups meeting in apartments throughout Manhattan, and you can learn more and sign up even tonight on the fifth floor. And so, again, if you're somebody that is skeptical and has lots of questions still that you'd like to process with other people, just like you've been doing maybe throughout the course of the series, we invite you to consider joining. And also, if you're brought by a friend, bring your friend along too. So, again, check it out more on the fifth floor. And actually, the topics that will be discussed are going to be, in many ways, from Tim's book, The Reason for God. So, Tim, can you give us a highlight of some of the topics they might expect to explore? Yeah, I'm looking at a list of topics that you will cover if you get into the group. They're largely topics that we've covered here, only it gives you more chance to process them and work through them. Is the Bible a myth? Has science disproved Christianity? How can you say there's only one way to God? What about other religions? I like this one. What gives you the right to tell me how to live my life? Don't hit me. Okay. The Bible seems to be filled with so many rules. Is it? Why does God allow evil and suffering? Why is the church so responsible? Why is the church responsible for so much injustice? Oh, why are so many Christians I know such hypocrites? Especially the one that brought me here. How can God be? So, anyway, I want you to know that over the years, my own thinking is as much helped by relationship is by content. In other words, yeah, I read books, as you can tell, and I read arguments and I try to weigh them. But very often, it's in relationships as you give and take that things get more clear. Or very often, a friend or even an opponent might say something that will just make you think of something you never thought and you thought you had worked this out for years and suddenly, or maybe the night that you have the discussion, your mind is open because of something else that happened to you and some light comes in that wasn't there before. I really suggest if you can be in one of these things. They won't be, nobody's going to be just telling you what to believe. They're not going to be, actually, coming here and listening to me talk is, for some of you, it's got to be hard. This will be a lot easier. I mean, in other words, there won't be somebody up on a pedestal talking literally down to you, but it'll be a place of give and take and I really hope a lot of you will sign up. Again, you can learn more and sign up tonight on the fifth floor during which we'll continue to have food and drinks and continue the conversation and Tim will be there to answer more questions. And before we let them go, Tim, can you give us a word on what they can expect for our last and final night of questioning Christianity? Yeah, as I think I said, last week was, can we believe in God? This week was, can we trust the Bible? Next week is, can we have faith in Christ? And so we're going to take a look at who Jesus is and how you come to believe in him and what his claims were, resurrection, and whether you can trust what the Bible says about him. And that's next week. All next week.
