TITLE: Questions About God
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Questioning Christianity (2014)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/questions-about-god/

============================================================

Okay. Now, thanks, I think, for that, Susan. Okay. You know, what we've said is we were talking about how Christianity makes sense. We've all along said that the way we come to our beliefs is through a combination of emotional, social, and rational thinking, actually, and sensing. Things make emotional and cultural and practical and logical sense. We're not brains in vats. We're whole people, and we make our decisions about beliefs with reference to those different aspects of our being. However, though I would say up to now, we've spent more time on the emotional and the cultural. And this week, next week, and the following week, we're going to be hitting a lot more of what you might consider the classical arguments for and against belief in God or the Bible and Christianity. In fact, that's my three weeks. I want to, this week, I'd like to ask the question, can we believe in the existence of God? Next week, ask the question, can you trust the Bible? And the following week, ask the question, can we have faith in Jesus Christ or how? And I want to look at the arguments for and against on each of those three questions. For and against trusting the Bible, for and against belief in the existence of God. So this is a little more what you might consider the traditional stuff. And because of that, I've got way more stuff on my pages here than I can get to. Partly because I'm assuming, I know the kinds of questions that come up at a time like this. So I'm not going to say everything I probably ought to say, partly because I think it'd be tedious for me to go longer than I usually go, and I'm not going to. But I'm going to leave it up to you to say, hey, how come you didn't answer this or say something about this? And you ask that question, and then we'll try to get to it. So let me, the overview is, how does one come to belief in the existence of God? Okay? If you don't believe in God, I think it would at least be helpful for you to know how a person does come to belief in existence of God. Since so many believe in God, it would be good for it not to be a completely opaque process to you. So I think that you come to belief in God, the existence of God, through seeing three things. The faith it takes to doubt it, the existence of God. The faith it takes to doubt it, the problems you have without it, the existence of God, and the beauty you see within it. And so I would like to, first of all, talk about the faith it takes to doubt God. Those are the objections and arguments against believing in God. And then the problems you have without it. And those are actually the main arguments for belief in God and the beauty you see within it, which is the story that belief in God always comes in. So let's start. The faith it takes to doubt it. What I mean by that is I'm going to try to make the case that the four or five biggest objections to belief in God have their own hidden faith premises in them that are less well-grounded than the belief in God itself. In other words, I believe over the years, I've come to see that the main objections, the main arguments against the existence of God are themselves based on faith, leaps, leaps of faith that are even less well-grounded than belief in God. And that's the reason why none of these are conclusive. None of the arguments against the existence, all the arguments that say God couldn't exist because I think they're inconclusive. They don't accomplish what they want to accomplish. Here's what I mean. I'm going to give you five. I'm going to watch the clock. I'm going to give you five, four, and just a tweak on a fifth one. Perhaps the biggest argument against the existence of God is I can't believe in a God who would allow such evil and suffering in the world. Or there can't be an all-powerful, all-good God who would allow evil and suffering in the world. And I want to say three things about it. I'm going to try to show you three problems with this objection. Okay? The first is that to say there can't be a God, a good and powerful God who would allow evil and suffering is to actually, that objection is based on two hidden premises. They're usually hidden, and these are faith premises. The first one is this. Why couldn't there be some reason that God might have for allowing evil and suffering? A good reason. We all know that sometimes we let things happen or do things that on the surface look pretty bad, but you have good reasons for letting it happen or you have good things for doing it. Okay? You know, one of them, by the way, is, I'll give you a perfect example. If you're 40 years old and you have a five-year-old child and the child as soon as you make it happen, you have a six-year-old child and the child who will make it a why? Why are you allowing such awful stuff to happen to me? And you, at a certain point, you have to say, I could explain it to you, but I'm 40 and you're five and you wouldn't understand. Now, that's trivial, perhaps. You say you're trivializing evil and suffering, but the idea is it's possible that someone greater than you could have a reason for allowing something to happen that you can't imagine. And to say there couldn't be a God, there couldn't be a God who allows evil and suffering is to assume that there couldn't be a good reason for that God to allow evil and suffering to continue. He couldn't have any good reason. Now, why would you believe that? That's a belief, right? In fact, there's probably a hidden premise behind that. The premise might be, because I can't think of any good reason why God could have for allowing evil and suffering, therefore there can't be one. And everybody would recognize that as a logical fallacy. Because I, human being, can't imagine any good reason why God would have for allowing evil and suffering to continue. There couldn't be. That's a non-sequitur. It doesn't fit. And somebody has a story about that. One of the philosophers, there's a couple of Christian philosophers that tell a story. If you were to look into a pup tent, you know, a little pup tent, and you look into the pup tent and you don't see any St. Bernard dogs in there, it's very likely that there probably are no St. Bernard dogs. If you don't see one, they're probably not there, right? Why? Because St. Bernard's are big and you almost certainly see it. But any of you, by the way, if any of you have ever lived in the Great Lakes area or been in the Great Lakes area, do you know there's a little tiny gnat called the no-see-um? Have you ever heard of them? They're so tiny, they go through the screams and they bite you. They're awful. And they're so small. Well, so if you were to look into the pup tent and you don't see a St. Bernard, almost certainly there's no St. Bernard there. But if you were to look into a pup tent and not see any no-see-ums, that doesn't mean that there are no-see-ums, that there are no no-see-ums in the pup tent. Why? Because even if they were in there, you couldn't see them. Because that's what a no-see-um is like. Now, if you say, I can't believe in a God who would allow evil and suffering, what you're saying is that if there were any good reasons that God could possibly have, a wise infinite God, if there's any good reasons that God could possibly have for allowing evil and suffering, it would be more like a St. Bernard than a no-see-um. It would be something I would be able to think of. But why believe that? That's just a leap of faith. Summary. If you have a God transcendent and infinite enough to be mad at because he doesn't stop evil and suffering, if you've got a God that big that you can be mad at him for not stopping evil and suffering, then you've got to have a God big enough to have a reason you can't think of. You can't have it both ways. You can't be mad at him, and I sometimes get mad about why all this stuff. But if I've got a God big enough to be mad at, I've got to have a God who's big enough to know something that I don't know. And therefore, that can't disprove his existence. Let me just say one quick other thing. If you say, look at the violence in the world. Look at all this violence. I can't believe in a God who would allow violence and the strong eating the weak and all this awful stuff. Fine. But if you get rid of God because the world is an unjust place, once you get rid of God, you now don't have any basis for saying the world's an unjust place because nature is red in tooth and claw. Violence is the way we got here. Violence is the way we evolved. Violence is the way the world probably came into existence. So what's really weird about denying God on the basis of the injustice of the violence of the world is once you get rid of God, the basis on which you objected to God goes away. See, the whole idea, I can't believe in God. Why? Because the way the world is, is wrong. Well, listen, if there is a God, evil and suffering is a problem. And I believe in God, and therefore, it's a problem for me because I don't know why he allows it. But if you don't believe in God, evil and suffering is a bigger problem for you because you have no basis for complaint and outrage anymore. This is just the way the world is. How could you say there's something crooked about nature unless there was some kind of straight edge, which was supernatural, by which you're judging that nature is crooked? One last thing, only Christianity teaches that God himself came down into the world in the form of Jesus Christ and experienced suffering. There's not a single other religion that says that. I actually think, as a pastor, that what most people need is not answer so much for why did God let this happen. They just want a way of feeling that they can get through it. And if I know And if I know order to rescue us was willing to come down and get involved in our suffering and and and the pain then even though I don't know what the reason is for that God is allowing evil and suffering I do know the reason I know what the reason isn't can I say that again if Jesus Christ came and died on the cross if God came and suffered I don't know what the reason for suffering is but I do know what the reason for suffering isn't it can't be that he doesn't love us can't be that he doesn't care so do you see if you object to the existence of God on the basis of evil and suffering you've got to do so on the basis of these leaps of faith that you can't have ever thought of I mean there has to be a God couldn't have a reason that you can't think of and the world is broken even though there's no God number two a second objection to the existence of God or at least to the existence of a Christian God is the objection that you can't have just one true religion this is a big objection that people have to the Christian God because the Christian God you know say that hopefully not the way I just said it a little more humility but anyway we do say yes we have the true religion on the other hand let's you know we're not the only religion that says we're the true religion just just to point that out a whole lot of religions say we're the true no no we're the true religion so a lot of people object to the whole thing in fact a lot of people in New York City object to the whole thing and they say all religions are equally valid or most religions I mean obviously not the ones that require child sacrifice but most religions are easily are you know equally valid and you just can't assume that there's just one true religion and any any religion that says our God is the true God and we have the true religion I just can't believe in that but let me ask you to think about something for a minute under what conditions could most of the major religions all be equally valid what would the what would those conditions be well one condition is if there was no God and basically our beliefs were totally subjective now that's one way in which they could all be equally valid because they're actually all equally wrong there really is no God and we all have our own subjective feelings and beliefs and that's one way it's possible so possibly all religions could be equally valid if there's only one if there's no God or all religions could be equally valid if there's a God who doesn't care what you believe some kind of impersonal force that doesn't really care about different beliefs because see the different religions contradict each other so the only way they could be equally valid even though these make very contradictory claims is if there's no God or there's a God who doesn't care but as soon as therefore if you say those are the only conditions under which all religions could be equally valid you have an impersonal God or you have a God that doesn't care you don't have any God at all do you realize what you've just done then when you say all religions are equally valid you can only do that from a stance of belief in a particular kind of God that's different from the other religions if you say well I believe all religions are equally valid what you're actually doing is you're saying my belief in spiritual reality is better than yours so if you talk to a Muslim who says well we have the one true faith oh that's narrow-minded you say that's narrow-minded I believe all the faiths are equally important and equally valid now you know what you're doing you're saying your take on spiritual reality is right and his take on spiritual reality is wrong which means you're doing the very thing you just told him you're not supposed to do and it's impossible not to every single time you open your mouth about spiritual reality if you say anything about religion or belief in God at all it's an exclusive claim what you're saying is I think it'd be better for people to think like this or I'm right and you're wrong that's exactly what you said Christians aren't supposed to do in order to say no one's take on spiritual reality is right or wrong they're all equal is to say my take on spirituality is right my particular Western religious pluralistic view of things is right and all the rest of you are wrong which means you're doing the very thing you just forbid which means you are locked into a very hypocritical self-contradictory cycle and I guess I should ask just let me give you one example of how this works have you heard the story um that you know all religions see part of the truth that's another way in which you could say all religions are equally valid I oh really all religions are part of the truth yes no religion has all the truth all have a part of it and then maybe you can say here's two illustrations one illustration is every single religion is a different path after the clear speech ACPS in the end of the day like but when they get to the top they all come to the same place to god or the blind man and the elephant right um here's six blind men and they come up to an elephant and they're feeling it and one says oh an elephant is has one blind man has a hold of the trunk an elephant is kind of uh uh flexible but another uh but thick and the other blind man has a hold of the tail saying well it's flexible but kind of skinny another uh blind man has hold of a leg says well I don't think it's flexible at all and doesn't that explain you know they're all different paths up the same to the top of the same mountain they're all seeing part of the elephant the only way you could know that all religions only see part of the truth is if you see the whole truth the only way you could know that all religions are like the blind men each seeing part of the elephant is if you think you see the whole elephant the only way you could possibly know that all the religions get to the top is if you're already at the top which means you are claiming the kind of exclusive knowledge you're saying nobody else has Listen, what this world needs right now is not somebody saying everybody's right, all religions are equally valid, no religion is the true religion, which is a way of saying my religion is the true religion. What you really need, and by the way, when more secular people, talking as if they're more inclusive, talk to religious people like that, being completely blind to this incredible faith assumption about their own ability to see religious knowledge even better than anyone else, it's actually quite infuriating. It does not help world peace. It does not help world peace. What you really need, since everybody has exclusive beliefs, what you need more than anything else is you need a set of exclusive beliefs, because we all have them, that make you open to people who are different than you, who make you humble and respectful toward people who are different than you. I argue the third week that Christianity, at least potentially, because it's based on a man who died for his enemies, praying for their forgiveness, did not retaliate, did not repay evil with evil, loved his enemies to the death and all that, that potentially Christianity is a set of exclusive beliefs, because by goodness, all beliefs are exclusive, but gives you some real reason to really respect and love people who differ with you. So let's not try to say we're going to have world peace only when everybody gets rid of this idea that they have the truth, everybody thinks they have the truth, even the people who say nobody's got the truth, thinks they have the truth or they wouldn't have said that. So that objection falls on its face because there's these hidden assumptions of faith in them. Let me give you a third. Third, this again is an objection to the Christian God in particular. Christians say you've got to believe in Jesus to be saved. Many people find that absolutely something they can't swallow or digest, because what they say is, if you're saying that you have to be saved through believing in Jesus, what about all the people who never even had a chance to hear about Jesus and never even had a chance to think about it? People who were born before Jesus lived and people who have lived without ever hearing about Jesus. Even today there's people who are living and dying and never hearing about Jesus. So to say that you have to believe in Jesus to be saved means that your God can't be just. I can't believe in a God like that. So to say that Jesus is the only way to be saved means that the God of Christianity is not a just God. Those two things can't be true. God is just. And Jesus, you have to be saved through faith in Jesus. How do we respond to that? Well, there's two levels. First of all, you do have to understand the reason why Christians do say, you have to understand the internal reasons why Christians say that you have to believe in Jesus to be saved. And here's the main internal reason. Listen, when I've talked to people who say, I think it's so narrow to say you've got to believe in Jesus to be saved. And actually this question came up before. Some of you may remember this in one of the other evenings. And they say, I think that good people from any religion or non-religious people who are good, I think all good people can be saved and go to heaven. Now, do you see, that sounds very inclusive. But what you've just done is you've ruled the entire Christian faith out. Because the very heart of the Christian faith is nobody gets to heaven by being good. That your goodness is not sufficient. In fact, your goodness is usually done for bad motives. And therefore, ultimately, no one, no one, by being good, could possibly merit salvation. That's the essence of Christianity. And therefore, you have to be. was not just another prophet coming to point the way to how you can live a good life and save yourself. Jesus Christ is God come to save you. God come to go to the cross and take the penalty for our sins and satisfy all the requirements of salvation in our place so that we receive it freely by grace. That's the gospel. So when you say, see, in the effort of being inclusive, say, I believe that all good people can be saved. You say, well, that means that no Christians can be saved. Christians utterly deny that. That's the very, what you're doing is you're basically tearing the guts out of our faith, and you're refusing to let us believe what is the very essence of our belief. So that's not very inclusive, okay? And now maybe you can see why we have to believe, since we believe salvation is by faith. We think that's the most, in many ways, the most accessible kind of salvation out there. Any religion that says good people have to be saved, you realize that there's an awful lot of people that will never be good because they've had terrible broken homes or they came up in poverty or, you know, they had awful parents or, I mean, to say only good people can be saved is by no means fair. In some ways, to say, I believe all good people, no matter whether they have any faith or what faith, that sounds very, very democratic. Actually, it's quite exclusive. It's really trying to say those people who can pull themselves together can be saved and nobody else can. That sounds exclusive to me. Okay, then you say, well, how do you justify both of these propositions? People can only be saved through faith in Jesus Christ and his grace. Or, and God is a just God. How do you, how do you, how can, show me how they could both be true since so many people die without ever hearing about Jesus. Well, the philosophers are going to tell you, when you have two propositions that don't look like they could both be true, all you need is a story that could be true through which they could both be, pardon me, philosophers would say you need a story that depicts them how they both could be true even if you're not totally sure the story is true. And that sounds a little bit weird, but I'll give you an example. Okay, let's, Ethel. This is, by the way, I don't mean, if your name's Ethel, you're going to hate me for this, but this is a fictional illustration, okay? Let's imagine that everybody knows that Ethel is completely irresponsible. She's a nice young woman, but you never give her anything to do. She forgets things. She never does anything on time. She's almost dangerous. You know, she leaves, you know, she leaves the heat on. She leaves the oven on. She's just, she's really kind of a, she's a sweet girl, but, you know, she's, don't give her anything to do. She's very responsible. And now we found out that Sally left her four-year-old at Ethel's house overnight for Ethel to watch. So a bunch of Sally's friends and people who also know Ethel say, I just don't see how Sally can be a responsible mother. Anybody who gives, um, uh, Ethel the, uh, uh, takes her child and lets Ethel watch her overnight is just completely irresponsible. Then somebody says, well, wait a minute, Sally's a single mother and she has two children and the younger child has asthma. And what if in the middle of the night, the younger child had an asthma attack and she had to take her to the emergency room and she just had to drop the four-year-old off with somebody introduced. She was, it wasn't a great idea, but it was better than, you know, uh, this or that. And so, and so you're sitting around saying, oh, okay, well, if that happens, suddenly you realize, well, maybe she wasn't irresponsible. Now, are we sure that that's what happened? No. But as soon as you come up with a, with a, this is what the philosophers would say, as soon as you come up with a story and in that story, which could have happened, both of these statements could be true. That Sally's a responsible mother and Ethel is a irresponsible babysitter and that a responsible mother let Ethel, you know, watch her child and still be responsible. Once you have a story by which it could be true, you say, well, even though I don't know if that's what happened, I can see that maybe there's some good explanation. Let me give you one like that for God and Jesus. It's called middle knowledge. And I want you to know right off the bat, I doubt that it's true. And I'll tell you why, but here's, here's the middle knowledge story goes like this. God knows everything, does he not? He knows the end from the beginning. So what if God who can do this looks down the corridors of time and he knows exactly what every single human being would do with their free will. He knows what they would do with their free will in any kind of, any possible circumstance. So what if he looks at this person and says, well, you know, if this person is born in Tibet in the fifth century and never hears about Jesus Christ. So what if he looks at this person who has requested the Giants of� Aqui? You know, you can see that they're part of every single player in God's way of mine. So what if he looks at it and not knowing what Jesus is? You know, you know, that isn't the position of reality. But then that's first thing that we know we know in the about faith. So what if he looks at this person and says, well, you know, if this person is born in Tibet in the 5th century and never hears about Jesus Christ, that person will never believe in Jesus Christ. But I happen to know that if this very same person, if I had this person born in Indianapolis living right across the street from First Baptist Church in 1980, I also happen to know this person would never accept for Jesus Christ either as Savior. So I'm not going to have anybody born without hearing about Jesus, who I know would have received Jesus Christ if they had been born in a situation where they would have heard. That's called middle knowledge. In that way, God is absolutely just, and yet salvation is only through Jesus Christ. Now, the reason I don't believe that is I'm pretty sure that that's not how free will works in the Bible, and therefore I don't buy it. But do you see what I just did? When I hear that story, though I've never bought the story, I realize, well, you know what? How dare I say that there couldn't be a story that at the end of time I'm going to hear, because right now I don't, I myself don't see how it's fair. I don't see how it's fair. But I also am not sure that I could imagine every possibility. In fact, it would be extremely easy for me to imagine, since some people have come up with good stories, even though I don't agree with them, that there probably is a story. Why couldn't there be a story? Why should I stay away from believing in Christianity just because I can't think of what that story is? Surely God has good reasons and good ways of being just in that, and I just don't know how they could be done. All I do know is salvation is by grace. It's not by good works. It's not by being a summons and yourself together. All I know is I need to be able to offer salvation as a Christian minister to anybody, no matter what your record, no matter how messed up you are, no matter how weak-willed you are. It's so important for me to be able to do that. That seems very fair. I don't know how God could be just about the people never heard, but I figure there's stories that might account for that. Number four, the fourth objection to, again, the Christian God. There's many people who just can't believe in the Christian God, and this fourth objection goes like this. Christianity can't be the true religion in light of the record of Christians. All the injustice, all the intolerance, all the violence. Now, there's quite a number of things you could say, and by the way, you may have heard Christians say this. There's a bunch of ways I could respond, and maybe you're not going to like the one response I'm about to give you because I'm watching the clock, and you may not like this response, and you may want to come at me, and I've got other things I could say. However, let me just tell you one. Virtually all the criticisms of the Christian church that I've ever heard use Christian standards to critique the church, and what that does is confirm Christianity but condemn inconsistent Christians, Christians inconsistent with Christianity. It certainly doesn't disprove Christianity or the Christian gods. Let me give you an example. John Somerville, who taught history at the University of Florida for many years, had a little mind experiment that he used to do with people all the time, with his students. What he would do is he'd say, imagine, trying to help people understand how different the Western world is than it was, say, 800 years ago. He says, imagine there's a little old lady, I think this is coming down, late at night, you're walking in a back alley, and a little old lady who's practically blind is walking along with a great big purse with jewelry and bills, you know, sticking out of the top. And you know that you could grab that thing, and she would never know who you are, and there's absolutely no way you would ever get caught. So for the sake of the mind experiment, imagine that you could rob her and never be caught. He says, now I have questions. Choose one of these. A, you think you should do it. B, you should not do it because, and C, you should not do it because, and then you choose. Now here's what the two becauses are. He says, B, let's imagine a shame and honor culture. Let's imagine the European cultures before Christianity came. Let's imagine much of the Eastern shame and honor culture. The reason why people in those cultures would not rob the little lady is because it would not comport with your honor. An honorable person wouldn't do that. You couldn't respect yourself. Other people wouldn't respect you. It because you want to have a high self-image of yourself as an honorable person, because you want to maintain your honor and your dignity, you won't do it. C is, you won't do it because you'd be violating her rights. She's a human being. She has feelings. She has rights. And so you should not steal the purse for her sake. So A, you should steal the purse. B, you should not steal the purse for your sake and your sake of your honor. in the class always chooses C, everyone. And then he says, you realize that whether you think you're a Christian or not, you have been utterly Christianized. He says, shame and honor cultures, one place, he says, shame and honor cultures valued pride over humility, dominance rather than service, courage over peacefulness, and glory rather than modesty. Loyalty to one's own tribe rather than equal respect for all. And he says, the idea, when the Christian monks first came to Europe with the idea that you should forgive your enemies, you know, this idea of forgiving your enemies and not repaying evil with evil but overcoming evil with good, that does not come up in any other religions. It doesn't come up in any other culture. You know, other cultures talk about a lot of different things, caring for the poor, things like that, but no culture has come up with that. And when Christian missionaries first have gone anywhere in the world into the shame and honor cultures, everybody thought this is absolutely crazy. He says the old Anglo-Saxons and the Germans and the Franks and all that, when they heard the idea that every human being, no matter how low, no matter how weak, no matter how poor, has dignity, and they're your neighbor, and they're made in the image of God, and you need to care for them, and you also need to forgive even the enemies. They said, society will just blow up. Nobody will, society is based on the idea of fear. You have to respect each other. You have to know that if you wrong me, I'm going to come and destroy your whole family. You know, because I'm going to have my revenge. And this idea of loving one another and forgiving enemies and everyone having rights, why, society will be a mess. And John Somerville says, if you think that's crazy, he says, that shows you've been thoroughly Christianized. And his point in this book, and I'm done with this point, is that we do not realize that when you look at the Christian church and look at the slavery, look at the oppression, look at this, look at that, in all those cases, you are using Christian principles. You may think, oh, they're not. They're just common sense. No, they're not common sense. None of this stuff, loving the poor. Peter Brown recently came out. Peter Brown is one of the great historians of antiquity. He's been at Princeton University for years. He says, the Christian idea that you should love the poor was a completely new idea in the history of the world. And the idea of loving the poor and forgiving your enemies are definitely Christian ideas. And if you think they make perfect sense now, you think they're common sense, they're only common sense because they're not common sense. They came from the Bible. They came from Christianity in particular, the Christian understanding of the Bible. And so let's criticize Christianity for all this injustice and oppression, intolerance and violation of rights, except you have to realize, you've got to do what Martin Luther King Jr. did. What did he do? He did not go to Southern white people and say, you bigots, don't you know that everything is relative? That the Bible really isn't true? That there really is no God? And you need to, you know, get out of your religion? He did not do that. What did he say? He says, you're not being consistent with the word of God that you say you believe. Let justice roll down like waters and righteousness like a mighty stream. Go read his stuff. He never told the Christian churches that were oppressing black people that they ought to give up Christianity. He ought to say, you need to get consistent with it. You're violating your own principles. And so the very idea that Christianity isn't true because of the inconsistency of Christianity doesn't wash. Now, let me give you the three big, I've got to keep it going. The three, so there's, okay. Do you see the faith it takes to doubt it? To doubt Christianity because of oppression means you're assuming, whether you know it or not, by faith, Christian ethics. To believe there's no evil, God can't exist because of evil and suffering. God couldn't exist if there's just one true religion. In every case, you've smuggled all kinds of amazing leaps of faith into your objections, which have less, I think, they're less well-grounded than belief in God itself. You say, okay, well then tell me, how is belief in God grounded? Chapter two. I said, there's the faith. It takes to doubt it. Secondly, you need to say the problems you have without it. Now, I want to give you three classic arguments for the existence of God in brief. But first, you have to understand how arguments work. Richard Swinburne, who was a professor at Oxford University for many, many years and wrote a lot of books on why he believed in the existence of God, he says, most people, when they hear about proofs and arguments, they don't realize how it works. Look at science. He says, how do we have the axioms of physics that we have right now? He says, the axioms of physics are proven, quote unquote, as long as they are the best explanations as long as they are the best explanations for the axioms of physics. He says the axioms of physics are proven, quote unquote, as long as they are the best explanations for what we see. So we see particles reacting like this, we see energy in particles, we see all this stuff reacting like this. An axiom of physics is proven if it explains what we see better than all alternative axioms. And as long as it explains what we see, then we say that's the most rational of all the axioms. So somebody says, well, I think this is true, I think this is true. Let's just see what it's, you know, do you understand that? Basically, scientific theories are proven by their explanatory power. Now, they're always changing because data comes along later on sometimes and changes things. But nevertheless, scientific theories are basically confirmed through explanatory power. The arguments for the existence of God, the best ones, do the same thing. What they say is if you don't believe in the existence of God, you've got three problems. Explaining the fine-tuning of the universe. Explaining moral obligation and human rights. And explaining the reliability of your cognitive faculties and reason itself. And if you know what time it is, you will know that I am not going to give you lengthy descriptions of these three. But they're kind of fun. And hopefully you'll draw some of them out. But here's what they are. The fine-tuning argument, which you might call the matter argument. Then the morality argument. And then the mind argument. Think of it like that. Matter, morality, and mind. The matter argument says that the fine-tuning of the universe, excuse me, fine-tuning of the universe is a bigger problem for people who don't believe in God than it is for people who do. God explains the fine-tuning of the universe. Not having God doesn't really explain it. If you don't believe in God, then you're going to say, well, the fine-tuning of the universe, if there's no God, probably shouldn't be true. But I'm going to live as if it is. So, the fine-tuning of the universe doesn't prove God. It just shows that belief in God is rational, probably more rational than disbelieving in God. What do I mean? Well, the fundamental regularities and constants of physics, like the speed of light, the gravitational constant, the strength of weak and strong nuclear forces. For organic life to exist, every single one of these values have to fall into an extremely narrow range. Which means it's almost as if you had a hundred dials, and organic life could only happen in the universe if every one of the dials, a hundred dials, was turned exactly to the place where it is. Now, what that means is, the universe looks as if it was fine-tuned for organic life. And the real question is, could that have happened by accident? Well, the answer is, of course. Of course it could have happened by accident. But it's not real likely, of course. So, for example, in every book by the new atheists, Dawkins and Dennett and Hitchens, every one of them deals with a fine-tuning argument, which proves, by the way, it's got some weight. And some of the best philosophers who believe in God have used it pretty well and developed it pretty well, way better than I'm doing it right now. But recently, there was an interesting article by, two years ago, MIT professor Alan Lightman. I don't think he's a believer in God. But anyway, in Harper's Magazine. So it was a pretty prominent article. And he wrote, The Accidental Universe, Science's Crisis of Faith. And in it, he says, the fine-tuning argument is so strong that most scientists believe in the multiverse thesis. That is, that there are, at the Big Bang, there was zillions of, an infinite number of universes that happen all at once. And we just happen to be in the one that grows organic life. And therefore, it's, in other words, the Big Bang created a zillion universes and we just happen to be in the one that created organic life. And Lightman actually says, most scientists, there's no, there is not the slightest bit of shred of evidence that there is such a thing as the multiverses. And yet, Lightman says, he's a scientist, he says, so many scientists believe in it because it seems to get them out from under the fine-tuning argument. And what he says is, in other words, you either have to take a step of faith to believe there's a God behind the universe or you must take a step of faith to believe there's not. So, Alvin Plantinga, who's a Christian philosopher, tells this kind of story to show how unlikely this is. He says, you know, the idea of the multiverse is like, yeah, yeah, okay, the chances of the world being exactly the way it is to create, you know, life is not likely to happen unless there are zillions of universes all at once and we just happen to be in the one where it happened. And here's what he says, he says, imagine a man down in Texas, by the way, and everybody's got six shooters. Imagine a man dealing himself 20 straight hands of four. assume he was cheating and they start to get out their six shooters but suddenly the guy who's dealt all the 20 straight hands of four aces to himself says wait a minute guys i know it looks suspicious but what if there is an infinite succession of universes so that for any possible distribution of possible poker hands there's one universe in which this possibility is realized we just happen to find ourselves in the one universe where i always deal myself four aces without cheating there's no why couldn't that be the case well they're going to shoot him and the reason is because nobody would assume that without intelligent manipulation that you could deal yourself uh 20 hands of four aces as you know i guess you know that the chances of the universe being fine-tuned for organic life are far more remote than the chances of dealing four aces uh 20 times so the real issue there is what if there's a god the fine-tuning universe makes sense if there's not a god it seems very unlikely and yet what you are saying is well i'm going to believe is if the fine-tuning the universe is true anyway i mean nobody's proving the fine-tuning universe of the universe doesn't prove there's a god but what it does show is it's more reasonable to believe in god at that point the second argument is the morality argument and the morality argument it goes like this uh we've actually talked about the second week where if there is no god then it makes sense that there would be moral feelings but how do you account for moral obligation we talked about this in the second week that is if you have moral feelings because of evolution or because of social uh construction that's one thing but how for example if there is no god how would you say that that gender equality is a is a universal uh truth that i need to insist on this culture over here in this part of the world you've got to have gender equality they don't feel like it's it's a value they don't have a moral feeling that gender equality is important so do you have the right to say that they're that they're being unjust you say yes why why if there was a god then you could have a basis for saying there's moral obligation if there's no god then you have your feelings they have their feelings what makes you say that your feelings trump their feelings you could use your economic power to take the poor country down but you still are basically just saying there is no god but i'm going to act as if there is no god and there is no god there's no basis for universal human rights but i'm going to act as if there is uh alan um interesting alan dershowitz of harvard some years ago wrote a book on human rights and he said originally human rights grew up in a society where we all believed in god and therefore we're all children of god or we're all in the image of god or something like that but he says here's the problem we have if there is no god where do you get human rights there's only two he thinks there's really only three possibilities one is he could say we create human rights we pass laws if the if the society says that gender equality is there is a moral value then it is he says the problem with that is the whole point of human rights is that you can go a minority can go to a majority and say you must honor our dignity but if human rights are created that means they're created by the majority which means they can be taken away he says human rights have to exist they have to be discovered they can't be created if they're created they're of no use because they've got to be used by minorities against majorities so they can't be created secondly well maybe we get it from nature maybe uh you know human rights is something we can see in nature but have you ever have you ever read pilgrim at tenker creek by annie dillard who went out there at she went out to try to observe nature out by a brook in you know somewhere out in the mountains of virginia thinking if i get near nature it's going to get me closer to something and she saw how nature really is she watched that she watched a great big kind of bug a great big i forget what kind of bug uh sting a a frog and then stick it's uh it's uh you know it's stinger down into the frog's skull and suck it dry till it just was a little shell and and she went out there and she says you know nature she says nature is no basis for deciding how human beings should treat each other and jersewitz says the same thing so he says okay if we don't believe in god and we don't believe that human rights can be created and we don't believe we can get them from nature them from nature idea where human rights come from, we just have to believe in them. He even admits it. He says, if there's no God, then there really is no basis for it, but we just have to believe in it anyway. Lastly, and it's got to be the last, because the time's up totally. It was up about four minutes ago, is the mind argument. And this is the least convincing in a nutshell, but the most convincing in the long run. One of the problems with the evolutionary hypothesis, and you guys, a lot of you have given it to me, men and women, excuse me, have pushed me on this upstairs and sometimes here. And you said, well, what if our, it's true, many people believe in God, but that could be evolution. That our religious sense is something that just evolved, and because it helped us survive. And so we sense God, but that doesn't mean it's there. It just helped us survive. And other people say, well, maybe we have these moral feelings, but they're just, they evolved. We feel this is right, and we feel there's moral obligation, but that's because it helped our answers to survive. There's no moral obligation. We feel it. Our moral sense evolved. That doesn't mean there really is moral obligation. Our religious sense evolved. That doesn't mean there really is a God. But then, this is how the argument goes, then we turn around and say, well, what about your brain? What about your rational? What about, what about your reason that you're using right now? Are you telling me that we can't trust our religious sense because it doesn't tell us what's true, only what helps us survive? And we can't trust our moral sense. It doesn't tell us what's true, only what helps us survive. And now you're going to tell us we can trust our rational sense. We can trust our logic. We can trust the line of argument that's gotten you to the place where you don't believe in God. If there is no God, your brain was selected not to tell you truth, but only to help you survive. And therefore, you cannot trust anything that your mind says. Now that may at first say, oh, I don't like that idea. That's silly. I want you to know that there are a number of philosophers, Christians and non-Christians who think that that's actually quite powerful. If there's no God, you can't trust your mind, including the mind that tells you there's no God, which means not believing in God is self-defeating. Now, when I said the beauty that you find within it, I'm just going to have to wait to the next couple of weeks. You're going to have to come back. Because basically, there is no such thing as an abstract idea of God out there. Islam, Christianity, Buddhism, belief in God never comes without a story. It never comes without a story about what's wrong with us, what will put us right, what our deepest hopes are, what our deepest problems are. You'll never believe in God just by doing what I just did, which is just going through the arguments. Because what we just did, if you believe everything I've said so far, all this means is God is probable in general. But that's not going to get you home. We got to go on and we have to look and see which of the stories that various religious tell about God is the one that's most compelling. And we'll look at that later. Right now, I already went over time. So I'm going to have to make my answers shorter if we're going to get through enough questions. So Susan, come back on up here and start texting your questions, okay? All right. As Tim said, now is the time to text and email in your questions to the number above or to the email address above. And we look forward to hearing what you all have to ask. And we'll get to as many questions as we can in the next 25 to 30 minutes. Thank you. All right. First question. And they were streaming in even right as you were wrapping up. And you said that this, what you have just shared might help people think that God is at least probable. But people are pressing into that and want to ask, well, then what do you have to say to people who recognize that neither God or atheism is provable and simply choose to be agnostic? Oh, listen, I, I, I believe, I must say, I don't think it's rational to be an atheist because I, you'd have to have atheists, I think, and that depends on what you, how you define these words, right? Atheist usually means there can't be a God. There is no God. And, um, as I've tried to say, there's, there's, uh, you can't, I don't think you can prove a negative anyway. Um, however, I think agnosticism is perfectly rational. Um, and it, uh, if you don't go to the emotional and the cultural, I can see why, um, you can be agnostic. And here's the, here's the reason why. Okay. Thank you. the fine-tuning argument and the moral argument and the mind argument, and there are others. By the way, some of these are, if you study them in history philosophy, are the cosmological argument, the teleological argument, the ontological argument, the moral argument. There's various arguments that have been used by Aquinas, and they've been worked through by Descartes and other people like that, and Immanuel Kant. I think when they're all done, what they are is probabilistic, which means it doesn't get you all the way to faith. But I think the main answer to that is something that Pascal says, which is you may be agnostic about God, and yet you are—I didn't have the time to develop it. You are going to assume moral obligation. You are going to assume human rights. You are going to assume your cognitive faculties work. You are going to assume the regularity of nature. You are going to assume the validity of logic. If I had more time, I could show you that all of those things work better. If there is a God, they make sense. If there's no God, you can just say, well, I'm going to act as if they're true, even though, frankly, a disbelief in God leads you to not expect any of them to be true. So you certainly have the right to be an agnostic, but A, there's a little bit of smuggling going on. You're smuggling into your life a lot of certainty and a lot of confidence in moral values and things that you really don't have the right to. And secondly, in the end, nobody can get all the way to certainty with only reason. The illustration I would often use is if—let's just say you were trying to hire somebody for a new job, and you're an employer, and you're trying to hire somebody. You would use your reason to choose what you think is the best candidate. You would look at their resumes. You would listen, talk to their references and all that. But can you be 100% sure that that person is the right person for the job? No, you can only with your mind reason to the point of probability. Then you have to commit to get to certainty. I have to commit. I have to bite. I have to risk my capital. I have to hire the person, bring them in, and you know how hard that can be if the person's not the right person. Very difficult. Costs you money, costs you grief, costs you relational capital, and all that sort of thing. So that's the way it is in every other area of life. You can never get all the way to certainty on these big things. Same thing with marriage, by the way. You can reason your way to probability on marriage. There's a lot of people—I know there's a lot of people who like to be married. There's a lot of people who say, I just haven't found the right person. And as a pastor, I know that they were looking for 100% rational certainty before they marry. That's impossible. With your mind, you can only get to probability, but it takes commitment to get to certainty. It shouldn't be any different with God. So I would say agnosticism is reasonable. I wouldn't say it's not. But I would also say it's a bit hypocritical. And ultimately, it's probably treating God as if he's different than anything else important in life, like love and like work and like marriage and things like that. You can only go to probability with your mind. And you have to get to certainty with your emotions and your life. Okay. Now, this person agrees that multiple religions cannot all be correct because they contradict each other. But would you please give examples of the differences between the Abrahamic religions, Bible, Koran, and the Torah? Well, yes. I mean, they are all so different, though. In one way, Christianity is more like Islam because you have a personal God, whereas in Buddhism you don't. So Christianity seems like it's Abrahamic. It's true it is. As you know, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam all look back to the Old Testament. They look back to the Hebrew Scriptures. They look back to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. On the other hand, what's really weird is if you go to Buddhism, Buddhism is all about the heart. It's all about what is wrong with your soul, what is wrong with why you're suffering, craving, trying too hard to get satisfaction. It deals with tranquility. It deals with the inwardness. Islam doesn't do that. So in some weird ways, Buddhism is very different than Christianity because it has an infinite but not personal God. But Islam is much more about submitting the will. You know, it's much more oriented toward how you behave. It's all about behavior. In fact, it really is, even though, of course, you're supposed to submit on the inside, too. What they're much more concerned about is doing what others do. Christianity is quite a bit different than Islam and it's quite a bit different than Buddhism, but it's similar to each in other ways too. Obviously Judaism, Christians and Jews will always be kissing cousins. Two-thirds of the Christian Bible is the Jewish Bible, two-thirds. And the difference is Christians look back and Jews, Jewish leaders and thinkers have resented this for years, but we look back into the Jewish religion and we see all the foreshadowings of Jesus and salvation by grace and they just don't. They just don't. And so we're extraordinarily close to Jews and yet extraordinarily far away too. You know, much closer than the other religions and yet at the same time has some just irreconcilable differences as well. So those are some of the contradictions and similarities. This is the kind of question that kind of blows your mind to even think about it, but it's really interesting to me. Like the chicken and the egg, where did God come from? Now, this is an argument that's called the cosmological argument that I didn't even get to. And as it was, if you noticed, I spent, you know, too long on everything and too little on the arguments. The cosmological argument goes like this. Everything in this world appears to be contingent. Contingent. Contingent means it's dependent on something for its existence. So there's nothing that exists without being dependent on something else. Nothing. So how could the world itself have just always existed when everything about the world is dependent on something else? So the cosmological argument is that there must be some non-contingent being that caused everything else to happen. Because if everything you see is contingent on something else, which is contingent on something else, which is contingent on something else, at the very bottom, you can't just say, well, there's something that is not contingent. Something that depends on nothing else. Something that exists all by itself without dependence on anything else. Well, that would be God. It has to be. Unless you say, you know, there are people who say, well, there's an infinite digression, but anyway, this is where the philosophers love to go and you can get a good PhD or two on that. But my answer is that since everything in this world, this is the cosmological argument, everything in this world is contingent. And therefore, there's nothing about this world that could be non-contingent. Something non-contingent must have started the world and everything in it. And that's called the cosmological argument. God is the uncaused cause. And if you say, well, what caused God? Well, I don't know, but whatever that would be, that would be the real God. Anything that is the uncaused, non-contingent being that started the whole thing rolling would be God. So, by the way, William Lane Craig is a philosopher who's developed something called the Kalam, or is it the Kalim? How do you pronounce that? K-A-L-A-M. Anybody know? I think it's Kalim. Anyway, there was a particular, in, believe it or not, in medieval Islam, there was a particular version of the cosmological argument developed. I think around the same time Aquinas was developing his, that is unusually strong. And William Lane Craig, if you Google William Lane Craig and the existence of God, you'll find versions of his reworking of the Kalim cosmological argument online. It's very, very good. This person is curious about the nature of God. Does God have a body? There are multiple questions in here, but, you know, the essence is understanding the nature of God. Does God have a body? Is there a gender? Is he physically like us? Is he separate from Christ? And what about the Holy Spirit? Well, now, it sounds, the question sounds like you're asking me to answer that from inside the Christian story of God. I try to say at the end that belief in God in the world isn't an abstraction. You know, you don't have these, you don't have just sort of general belief in God. It always comes with a story. From inside the Christian view, God is tripersonal, but singular. He's not, God is, we don't believe, Christians don't believe in three gods in three persons or one God in one person, but one God consisting of three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. I think we talked about this one other night about this. And, and the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit are in some sense, they, the, uh, the, the Bible uses, uh, yes, the Bible uses masculine masculine. of any Christian who believes that that necessarily means that God has a gender, all right? Now, Jesus Christ, when God became incarnate, he had to become a human being, and to be a human being is, human beings are all gendered, and so he was a male, or he became as a male. But when it comes to saying God has got a gender, we wouldn't do that. The Bible uses the language it does. The Bible says God is a king. It really means he's like a king. He's like a human king. It says he's a father. It means he's like human fathers, but obviously he's infinite, and therefore there's other ways in which he's not like. But God is tri-personal, and God, as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, know and love each other. The three persons are equal, and they've known each other for all eternity. And I think I mentioned this a couple of times ago, but I think it's a beautiful idea. Saint Augustine, his teaching on the Trinity was so helpful to me, because Augustine says there's a side of us that says, that's crazy. How could there be a God who's three in one? That doesn't make any sense. It boggles the mind. But he says, the alternative is that love is not the meaning of life. Now, some of you heard me say this, but Augustine says, if there was a God who is unipersonal, if there was, if, pardon me, if the Buddhism is right and God is impersonal, then love is basically an illusion, and Buddhism teaches that. Or it's a passing thing that's only here as long as we think of ourselves as individuals. If, on the other hand, the Muslim God is true, which is a single person, then God did not know love until he created other beings, whether angels or human beings or whatever. Why? Because you can't have love without more than one person. So, in the Buddhist approach, in every other approach, God was not love primarily. God was power before he was love. God created things and then brought in beings and love comes in next. But Augustine says, the Christian understanding of God is deeply personal because God has always been personal, unlike Eastern religions. But God has also always been loving. I mean, love is intrinsic to who he is. It didn't come in later. It was there before he was creating, which means, if you believe God created and then after that comes in love because he was unipersonal, then power is more important than love. But if you believe God was love before he created, then love is more important than power. It's all in Augustine, and it's brilliant, and he's right. Next is, you focus exclusively on intentions with little regard for the outcome. What is wrong with the morality of selfishness if it leads to greater happiness and more positive outcomes for more people? Why be guilty of selfish intentions? Well, that's a big question. I mean, most people in ethics say deciding whether a behavior is right or wrong is, there's three parts to it, at least. And by the way, I'll never get all the different views of this straight. But one view, first of all, there's the motive. So, for example, I'm helping the little lady across the street, which in itself is a good action. The form of the action is right. But inside, I'm proud or I'm trying to get people to admire me or, you know, I'm trying to get people to think, you know, I'm a politician. I want people to think that I'm a really compassionate person when actually I'm not. So, a bad motive means it was a bad action, even though the form of the action was good. So, there's the motive for the action, there's the form of the action, and then there's the outcome. And yes, sometimes the right action, a good action, brings about a bad outcome, and in which case you should refrain from it. So, in other words, I might be, I might see, we all know, for example, it's possible, it's possible to not technically lie, and yet deceive people. So, if you are, the form of the action is right, and yet what's happening is you're deceiving people, that's the outcome, then that's wrong anyway. In spite of the fact that you stayed in the letter of the law, well, the intention was wrong too, and then the outcome was wrong. So, different forms of ethics, this is one of the reasons why Christians believe you're saved by grace. Because there are different forms of ethics that would say, the form doesn't matter, only the outcome. And it sounds like you're saying that. I think there's great problems with that, of course. And here's the reason, is how, why take the God-like position that you know what the outcome will be? See, I've had, over the years, I've had many, many younger people say, I know that what I did was illegal, or against what my parents said, or against what... good end. Well, the point is, how do you know what the end is going to be? And also, how do you get to define human flourishing? So there's a certain, there's a certain, I think, hubris about saying, I can do the wrong, I can do things that most people think of as immoral because I'm trying to bring about a good end. How do you know what the result of your behavior really going to be? When you're younger, you often think you have no idea what the results are going to be. By the time you get to be my age, you have a little better idea. But technically, what if, what if we lived to be 200 years old? If everybody lived to be 200 years old, probably when I get to 200, I look back at my 60 year old self and think I was a jerk. Because you can always go back about 20 years and the way you were then, you were making all kinds of stupid mistakes. So if you think the only way I have to decide what is right or wrong is what the outcome is, you realize that every stage as you got older, you got smarter and you look back and you say, wow. So Christians would say, no, if the form says thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not lie, you stick with the form and you don't decide, well, I think I can do that because it'll bring about a good end. Now there are exceptions, believe it or not, I just can't get into it because the time keeps running by. But Christians would say the motive could make the action wrong. The form of the action, if it's against the law of God, it could make the action wrong. And the outcome could make it wrong if it's bad for people too. And that's the reason why Christians feel like you've got to be saved by grace because virtually everything you're doing is wrong. No, I mean, it brings about humility. And once you understand the grace of Jesus, you don't go around feeling like a, like a mess all the time, but it does humble, once you, when the love of God is real enough to you that you are not, that you're feeling affirmed by his love, you can then actually admit how much of what you do has bad motives to it, is duplicitous. You can admit just how weak a person you are. It certainly keeps you from ever feeling superior to other people. At the beginning of your talk, you encouraged us to imagine that God might have good reasons for some of the suffering and we see in the world, but can we blame God for allowing suffering? Well, I would say this, those go together. I, um, the, um, I'm reading the book of Job right now because I try to read through the Bible every year and always get to Job right around now when it's dark and cold. Anyway, um, and, uh, uh, Job does a wonderful job of, of protesting, getting angry, being very upset, saying, God, this feels so unjust, please give me an explanation, please do something. So he's very open about his feelings. He doesn't feel like, Oh no, no, I gotta be respectful. I mean, he doesn't get it. He doesn't understand it. It doesn't feel right, but he always, in the end, he doesn't just say, so I'm not going to believe in you. He, he says, you have all wisdom. You know, I, no one is righteous in your sight. I have nowhere else to go, but to stay with you. What's interesting about Job, if when you get to the end of the book of Job, God vindicates Job, even though he spent the entire 40 chapters, practically complaining and yelling and screaming about how bad everything was sometimes saying to God, would you appear before me and give me some answers? If you would appear for me, I have some questions for you. He's very honest and, and, and out, you know, outraged. At the end of the book, God shows up and vindicates Job and says, you did very well. And he castigates his friends who were criticizing him. And you, the first time through it, I said, how could this be? But the point was that Job never stopped praying. All of his, all of his belly aching, all of his yelling and screaming was not into the wind or to his friends. It was to God. God. So he had this balance of not blaming God, knowing that he doesn't know enough to blame God. He just knew he didn't know enough to blame God. How dare he blame God? At the same time, he complained to God virulently. And that balance is something that you see in the Bible. It's not like goody two shoes, you know, stuff all your feelings, nor is it you, you, you must be evil and I can't believe in you. It's a balance. You spoke about grace today. And along with the questions coming in, also have a list of some of the questions that have come in previous weeks. And I really like this one and think it's appropriate. It says, wouldn't it be unjust for God to disregard the merit of people's efforts and award grace randomly? If the teacher is handing out grades randomly, regardless of how well we did, who will bother studying? Now, that is a great question. And by the way, Jesus actually, first of all, Jesus goes right out. There's a place where he tells a parable where it says a man hired a group of men to labor in his vineyard or labor in his fields in the morning. Him there... Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. at noon you know this you know this parable he goes out at noon and hires another bunch and then he hires another bunch just like an hour before you know knockoff time and then when they're all done he gives every single one of them the same wage and they're all really freaked out about it and he said basically he says i have listen he says you agreed to work for a denarii or whatever it was i think and so i i said and so he basically it's interesting he doesn't really explain it other than to say i have the right to be gracious with what i'm doing he said you you in the morning agreed to a denary a denarius and you in the afternoon agreed to an areas and if if i want to be generous and pay the guy who only works two hours a denarius it's mine to do and jesus is actually he's trying to say i'm more gracious than you so you're complaining people say well you know you're being unfair to the people who work very hard but from the inside that's not how it feels i want you to know um from the inside once you see that much of the good work that you did this to be a christian you've got to see that an awful lot of the effort you made to be good was uh poorly motivated and uh kind of shoddy and very often superficial and ultimately when you when you come all the way into the center you do not feel better than the people who have had more broken up lives those of us who did live kind of goody two-shoes sorts of lives don't resent the people who came in after having you know been in jail or done pretty bad things or that sort of thing uh however the other side of the question which is really important why live a good life somebody once i had a professor a christian professor who said to me once once you tell them about the gospel of grace how are you going to get them to do their homework anyway uh the answer is if the only reason you have to live a good life if i get rid of fear of punishment from you if i take away the fear of punishment if i say um that you know god loves you and he accepts you no matter what unconditional love so i've taken away your fear of punishment if when i take away my your fear of punishment you lose all your incentive to live a good life that means the only incentive you ever had to live a good life was fear you need to go get another incentive you need to go out and say i want to do this for the love of my neighbor i want to do this for the love of my god that's that's the only reason to be good anyway if you're saying well once i find out that you know god's just rewarding people you know left and right you know freely i gets rid of all my incentive what was your incentive to start with it wasn't a good incentive in fact most of us who lived good lives before we became christians realized all the incentive we had for all those good lives was fear and pride and we don't look at it as all that valuable morally and we don't see ourselves as more wonderfully uh you know worthy somehow of people who've lived lives of cruelty and uh and addiction okay let's do another couple because i went so long why does god offer no evidence of the supernatural the multiverse argument that you discussed doesn't come from closed-minded skeptics it comes from curious natural creatures who are using the evidence we do have to draw the best logical scientific conclusions so why does god offer no evidence of the supernatural you know um would you whoever asked that question would you stick around and come up to the fifth floor and fight your way i'm so popular that you have to fight your way to the front no i'm really not i mean i've had a lot of great conversations but you ought to be able to get in i'm not there's not mine um to explain that a little better because i i actually think that i'm probably not completely following i would say that the resurrection which we're going to get to week after next there's a lot of historical evidence for that and that's evidence for the supernatural so i'm not i think there is and if you maybe you're thinking of something else so come talk to me i've never felt that god is personal and never understood how he could become personal how can you have a personal relationship with god who we cannot see hear or touch well um years ago i was in a debate basically i mean they didn't call it a debate there was a group of christians and a group of muslims who met together uh it was a mosque and a church and every other week month we you know we all met either in a mosque or the church went back and forth it was very interesting they were called meetings for better understanding and we always had a christian speaker and an islamic speaker and we didn't call it actually a debate but what we did we took a common subject and um i know i'm being videotaped here i hope i but it's what this happened i don't know how private it was um it wasn't a debate but you you on a common subject and then we'd respond to each other and we'd take questions, but it wasn't a true, we tried to, we really tried to keep the temperature turned down as far as we possibly could. They were really great meetings, it was back in the 1980s and I learned so much, so much. But anyway, the one week, the one time that was most notable was, we talked about images. And, you know, Muslims do not believe in any images for God. No paintings, no statues, nothing at all, because nothing is worthy of Allah, nothing, nothing. And so they made the case for that. Now I made the case, you know, in the Old Testament, of course, it also says human beings should not create an image. The Old Testament is also against paintings and images and things for the same reason, that these things are not worthy, it's not for us to create images that makes God more palpable and more concrete. It's not up to us to do. So the Old Testament and Islam really agrees. When you get to the New Testament, though, wow, you get to Colossians chapter 1, it says that Jesus Christ is the icon of God. E-I-K-O-N. In Greek, it says the Greek word is the image of God. Jesus Christ is the image of God. It's the word icon. And what it says is, in there, that though human beings may not create a visible, personal representation of God, which would be extremely helpful, because we could then relate to it. But God can do it. God has the right to create his own image, to create his own physical representation, and it's Jesus Christ. That's the New Testament claim. That's the Christian claim. And Christianity says if you didn't have Jesus Christ, it would be extremely hard to think of God as personal. But if you watch him walking through the pages of the Gospels, acting in very surprising ways, which we'll talk about in two weeks, God becomes personal. Because Jesus is not somebody that you could have really thought up. You know, he surprises you all the time. He's never acting the way you'd think somebody would act. And it's the surprises that come because he's perfect. And, you know, it would take a perfect human being to imagine a perfect human being. And since none of us are perfect, our understanding of what a perfect human being would like, you know, it's kind of fuzzy. But when a perfect human being actually came to us because he was God, you start reading about him, it's just striking. So I would say it would be impossible to relate to God as a personal being if I didn't have him in Jesus Christ. But that's the Christian claim. But just to end the story, that night, I thought, you know, hey, you know, there were a lot of questions. The next week, the Muslims called us up and said, would you do it again? They never asked again. Would you send Tim Keller back to give that talk on images? And we'll have a different Muslim speaker next month and we'll do the same. I said, all right. And then the third time, after that, they called back and said, could we do it a third time? And we didn't have any idea what was going on. Why in the world would you want to do it? And they had another Muslim speaker. Eventually, they told us it created a problem because the Christian idea of a personal God in Jesus Christ was so attractive. And it gets it got out from under the idea that we can create our own images, which, of course, would be wrong. But the idea that God could create his own image so that we could relate to him as a person. So it was somebody who could really be embraced and loved was so attractive that they kept feeling like we've got to do a better job of defending our faith. And so they kept having me come back and try to put somebody. And it wasn't a debate. It was just trying to present God in a personal way. So that's kind of interesting. But I think we probably are at the end of our time.
