TITLE: Questions About Jesus
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Questioning Christianity (2014)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/questions-about-jesus/

============================================================

so these facts are fun for who who are they fun for well you know some of you have tweaked me a little bit or uh you know joked with me a little bit that very often even though the topic is this christianity makes sense uh we've had some nights together that i've hardly mentioned christianity at all we've talked about god in fact as i think back on where we've been uh our uh i don't use the word journey because everybody uses the word journey but our trajectory now that's a crappy word too anyway the point is during our time together i think we saw i started by trying to make a case that life without god is harder than most people think at the least and then we try to move into uh is it rational to believe in god and i was trying to make the case not only is it not uh uh not rational uh but actually in any ways god explains the world better than a disbelief in god and so we try to make a case that believing god is purely and perfectly perfectly rational not purely but perfectly however uh last week and particularly this week yeah i'm in a full-throated way i'm basically trying to talk to you about christianity and i said this these last three sessions were on can we believe in god can we trust the bible can we have faith in christ christ so tonight's can we have faith in christ but frankly another way to ask the question is why believe in christianity now again i can't believe that i'm going to in about a half an hour or so try to uh lay out all the reasons but let's give it a shot and i suppose if somebody asked me why should i believe in christ or why believe in christianity i would say three i would say because of his claims uh because of his resurrection and because of his message uh and so let's just take a look at those three okay his claims his resurrection his message yeah first his claims um now the issue is this about claims huston smith wrote a book i don't think this is popular anymore when i went to college everybody read it in high school it was called the world's great religions by huston smith it's still well i don't know it's a it's a great book and a very very fair even-handed treatment of all the great world's religions and what i always found interesting about that book is in the book he says that when it came to buddha and jesus he says of all the founders of the great religions of the world buddha and jesus impressed their contemporaries so much that they didn't just ask who are you but they asked what are you and buddha gave what most of us would consider a rational and good answer which is oh i'm not a god i'm not god which we think it all good you know anybody in their right mind should say jesus did not give their the sensible or rational answer at all and he did not only say i am a god i am a god-like being i am an avatar expression of the divine principle of the universe instead he says i am the god of the bible i am the god of israel i'm the god who created the world i'm the god who's infinitely who pre-existed the world who's infinitely transcendent over the world that's he that's what he said in fact just just to rub your noses in it uh here's a little list of the things that he said i'm not going to give you the references it would be tedious in other words i'm not going to give you mark john luke all the places in the new testament i'm just going to read them to you jesus assumed authority to forgive all sins i'll get back in a minute only god can forgive sins that's what everybody said he's only god can forgive sins he says well i can jesus claimed that he alone could give eternal life jesus claimed not only to bring the truth but to be the truth i'm the way the truth the life he assumed the authority to judge the whole world he said he's going to come back and judge the living and the dead and he claimed that we will be judged in the end primarily on our attitude toward him he said to know me is to know god to see me is to see god to receive me is to receive god he also claimed the right to receive worship i mean there's a number of places in in the bible both old and new testament where angels appear and when angels appear whoever's seeing them always falls on the ground the angel always says get up don't worship me i'm just a creature like yourself but when people fall down and worship jesus he just says doesn't say anything he just takes it but then of course he actually does directly claim you know when he called himself the son of god uh people understood that he was claiming to be equal with god there's a couple places where it said you tried to kill him because if you say in ancient times if you're the only son of a father if you were the only son of the father then you were equal to the father why because you're going to get everything the father had it was it was that was just the way it was done you're the only son you got everything the father had you're equal with the father you're an equal in status in in you know you're an heir and so forth so for him to come along and say i am the son of god not a son but the son of god everybody there knew what that meant i've talked to people here who often said well he didn't jesus never said he was the son of god he said he was the son of god but yes he did when he says he's the son of god he was saying he was equal with god and there's a great place in john chapter eight where jesus um is talking to some people who are pretty unhappy with him and and they were saying we don't need you and you know who you think you're talking to we're children of abraham and jesus looks at them and says before abraham was i am and they immediately tried to kill him they picked up stones they tried to execute him you know why well if jesus had said before abraham was i was that would have been weird enough he was saying i i'm older than abraham i i pre-existed abraham that would still be some kind of supernatural claim but in the burning bush when god appeared to moses in the burning bush in exodus chapter three and when moses said who should i say is sending me what's your name god out of the burning bush said tell them i am has sent you and the word i am is a it's just a hebrew word to be but it really means i am self-sufficient you know when god says i am i always am he's saying there was never a beginning for me there will never be an ending i'll never you'll never be able to say about me i was you'll never be able to there never was a time when you could have said said about me he will be because i am that i am i'm always uh i'm dependent on nothing for my being everything is dependent on me jesus has the audacity to say before abraham was i am which isn't good grammar but he he was deliberately using the divine name that god gave to moses in the burning bush and taking it on himself and that's why they immediately wanted to kill him there is absolutely no doubt that jesus christ is going to be god unless well here we go um now that creates a conundrum that creates a conundrum because unlike muhammad unlike buddha unlike all the other religions of the world all the other religions of the world have a founder who says i'm here to tell you how to find god now they have somewhat different the eightfold path of buddhism isn't the five pillars of islam nevertheless they're in some ways they're parallel because they're all saying here's how you can find god but jesus comes along and says i'm god and i've come to find you and the the audacity of that claim the magnitude of that claim pushes you away from doing what we desperately want to do as western people in you know western side and we want to say is all the different religions they all are different ways up the mountain of god we talked about this a few weeks ago but i'm trying to press you here which when jesus made those claims what he was doing was essentially pushing you and the way uh c.s lewis has a very couple of famous places where he says what lewis is saying is what lewis says is what jesus is saying if true then you have to make him the supreme point of your life but if not true jesus claims are those of a megalomaniac comparable with with with yeah compared with whom hitler was a most sane and humble of men and uh lewis is the one that says here's the trouble uh jesus christ makes these claims and pushes you you can't just say what a nice guy or one more prophet or one of the ways to no no if he's what he's saying is true then he has to be the way the truth the life he has to be the way to find god he's got himself come in human form but if he's not right then he's not one more way to be a good person in life like one more religion it's really all or nothing the claims have made it all or nothing with him now how do you respond to that the first way that many people respond is i still like to think of just his teaching many many people have told me over the years i really respect jesus teaching i just cannot buy that thing about you know his claims to be god i just can't i don't believe it i see him as a good teacher as a wise man i read the sermon on the mount turn the other cheek uh forgive your enemies we've talked about this before the idea for giving your enemies and making peace and overcoming evil with good was a very unique christian understanding I just don't buy the stuff about God. All I want to do is take his teaching. Now, there's two problems with that. The first is his teaching is based on his claims. Anybody who says, I don't want to deal with the claims, I can't accept him as God, I just want to take the teachings. That shows you don't know much about the teachings because the teachings are based on it. So for example, if, excuse me, I hate to use you as a sermon illustration. If I walk over and punch Mike right in the nose and Sam says, Tim, that was a terrible thing you did, but I forgive you. Mike is going to say, excuse me, Sam, but that's really not your place to do it. He hit me. And so if he's going to be forgiven, I have to do it. Right. You can only forgive sins against you. Right. Okay. No other religious founder ever offered to people complete forgiveness for their sins. You believe in me and all of your sins are forgiven. In fact, in our, you know, our, our informal time upstairs we've been having over the last few weeks, just talking afterwards, numbers of you actually have come up and said, this idea that you, it doesn't matter what you've done in life, that if you ask God, Jesus, forgiveness, you're, you're forgiven. It doesn't matter if you killed people. And a lot of people are struggling with that. And by the way, okay, well, that's only offered in Christianity. You don't, you don't see that kind of forgiveness. It doesn't matter what you did in life. You know, it, it's over. Do you know why Jesus can say that? The only reason that Jesus can forgive you for all your sins is if Jesus, in a sense, all your sins are against Jesus. See, only Mike can forgive me for hitting him in the nose because I hit Mike. But Jesus actually can also forgive me for hitting Mike in the nose because if Jesus is the God who created us all and who keeps us all, you know, going all the time, whenever I sin, I always sin against Mike and Jesus actually. Uh, there's a place in Psalm 51 where, where David has just murdered somebody to get his wife. And when he's cut to the heart and he begins to repent, he says to God, against thee have I sinned. And when you read that, you say, wait a minute, he killed Uriah. He sinned against Uriah. He sinned against Bathsheba. He did what, well, the point of course is yes, he did. And he does need to ask their forgiveness. Of course you do. The point is if the, is because God owns us, because we are gods, then he can forgive us too. And he needs to forgive us because we have wronged his people or wronged, you know, somebody made by him. So the only reason why Jesus Christ can offer forgiveness so in such a blanket way, so free, such incredible graces, because all sins are against him. Buddha would never say that. Mohammed would never say that. None of them would ever say that. And so as soon as you talk about forgiving and forgiveness and enemies and all this stuff, uh, and you say, well, I don't want the claims. I just want the teaching. That shows, you probably don't see how the teachings and the claims are of one. They're, they're of a piece, you know, they're warping woof, woof of each other. The other thing that's wrong by the way about this is to say, I just think of him as a wonderful moral teacher. I don't like to, I don't believe he was God. Um, you know, this is where CS Lewis pushes us a bit. He says, honestly, anybody that says stuff like this cannot be a nice moral teacher. He's crazy. I mean, basically what Jesus is saying is if you ever heard a man saying without irony, you know, absolutely seriously say something like this, this is from CS Lewis. I have always existed. That's bad enough. I created the world. I'm ultimate reality. I will return at the end of time and your fate will depend on your attitude toward me. How would you treat that person? Say, well, you know, that's fine. I, but I, but I really liked the fact that, you know, he wrote a really great biography of that you can't, you, you can't just bracket out that. How can you trust anything he says? How can you consider him in any way, a source of any kind of wisdom? He is either, according to, this is the idea because of his claims, you can't treat him as a nice guy or a moral teacher or something like that. He's either a legend or a liar or a lunatic, or he's a Lord. Maybe some of you have heard that. That's the reason he is either a legend. In other words, he maybe never made these claims, but if he did make these claims, then he's a liar or he's a lunatic, or he is the Lord himself. But there's no other alternatives for you. Now there's problems with, with, with all three of those. I'm going to go through this quickly. Was he a legend? So he never really claimed to be God, which is what a lot of people say. Was he a liar? Was he a liar? Was he a liar? Was he a liar? me. Here's the reason why. First of all, let's talk about the legend. Last week, I told you I didn't get to everything I wanted to do on the Bible, but here we go. It's very common for people to say that Jesus never really claimed to be God, that he was really a wonderful teacher of love and wisdom. And later on, legends grew up about his claims to be God. And, you know, therefore there was a, you know, when you read the Bible, you really don't know that you're really reading historically what Jesus actually said or did. You're reading the legends written down by the leaders of the Christian church in the early days who put down there what they wanted. In fact, there's a very, very, uh, influential body of scholarship that says that the, that the biblical gospels, you know, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, the new Testament was really for many years, an oral tradition that was passed along for many years around the church. Uh, the churches develop stories about Jesus that answered the problems they were having. So let's say was there some dispute in a church? Well, somebody came up with a, with a, with a story about what Jesus said, and that answered the dispute. So as time went on in order to meet the needs of the various churches, stories about Jesus became developed and kind of got crafted and they were put together. And after many years, the leaders of the church wrote them down and put them in the Bible as a way of accruing their own power. They chose those texts, which, uh, supported their leadership and supported their authority and supported their doctrine. And therefore it was kind of a power play. And by the way, the people who, uh, that was all fictionalized and popularized in Dan Brown's The Da Vinci Code. So if you ever read that or saw the movie, that was the whole idea. Jesus was this, but actually the Bible depicts him as something very different. The powers that be fabricated those stories and it helped them in their power. And that's how you got the Bible. Now there are really terrific reasons why none of that's true. None of that's true. I'm going to just give you four real quick. Okay. Number one, the new Testament documents that we have were not written down late enough to be legends. They're too early to be legends. The gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were all written within 30 to at most 60 years after the events of Jesus' death and life and death. And the epistles that is Paul's writings, first, second Corinthians, Philippians, and those first, those writings were written only 15 or 20 years later. Both Paul's writings and all the gospels say that Jesus claimed to be God, that he died on the cross and that he was raised in the dead and many eyewitnesses saw him. All those three things. So these things were already written down and circulating around just a few decades after Jesus' death. Let me just tell you why that makes it hard to say those are whole cloth fabricated legends. 40 years ago, no, 42 years ago. Oh my gosh. 43 years ago. Bucknell University, where I was at school at the time, played University of Pennsylvania in football at Franklin Field. And I was in the marching band. It was the first time I'd ever been on artificial turf. This would have been 1970, I think. And so I was there. I'd never been to Franklin Field. It was really cool. I used to watch Philadelphia Eagles games at Franklin Field because I used to play there. And so there I was. And okay, I remember that fairly well. What if today a story came out saying that over Franklin Field in 1970 in a game between Bucknell University and University of Pennsylvania, flying saucers appeared in formation. And this happened and that happened. Now, I happen to know that in spite of the fact that some of you think of 1970 as the same as 1870 or 1770, there's probably a lot of people alive still who were there. And even though, you know, you know, you don't remember everything about something that long ago, you'd remember if there were flying saucers. And as long as you have living eyewitnesses around, you can't just in a whole cloth way write that there was something was happening. So with it, for example, you can't just write that on the Golan Heights, Jesus Christ fed 5,000 people miraculously food, you know, with a few, that's where he did it on a particular year. And everybody, of course, in the whole community was there. You can't write about that. You can't write about Jesus raising Lazarus from the dead. You can't write about these highly public things, get them down on paper, when lots and lots of people, even opponents, people who didn't believe in Christianity at all, had been there. You can't just write those things down. It's very, very difficult. In other words, the New Testament documents are way, way, way, way too early. one. Number two, the content of the Gospels is way too counterproductive to have been creations made to accrue power for the leaders. You know, that's very much the Da Vinci Code thing, and I've read this too, is that the New Testament documents were really crafted by the winners, right? History is written by the winners, and it was crafted by the winners. There's a lot of problems with that. Look at the book of Mark, which we know was written pretty early. Almost everybody says it was written like 20 or 30 years after. The book of Mark was written when Peter was still alive, and Peter was one of the main leaders in the Christian church. The book of Mark says that Peter denied Christ three times before the rooster crossed. Some of you know the story. In fact, in the book of Mark, when everybody's saying to Peter, weren't you with this guy that's on trial now? And he was trying to save his skin. He was scared. He lied over and over and over again. In the end, he cursed Jesus publicly in order to prove that he was not one of his disciples. The only possible reason why that would be in the book of Mark, when one of the great leaders of the Christian church was still alive, is if Peter wanted it there. Isn't that right? Why would any leader want that in the Bible? Nobody would want it there. And also, it couldn't be there without his permission, which, by the way, shows that he had a radically different identity than you and I would have apart from the saving grace of Jesus Christ. But the fact is, that doesn't help the leaders. The reason it's in there is because it happened. There is no good reason for that to be included in there unless it happened. It doesn't help Peter. It doesn't help the church. Do you think it helps the church to be telling people, our best leaders were all a bunch of cowards? In fact, the apostles look horrible in the Gospels. Have you read the Gospels? They all look like jerks. They're completely clueless all the time. In no way do the Gospels really help the early leaders of the church. Why are all those awful stories about how stupid the apostles look? Unless they're true. All the eyewitnesses of the resurrection were women. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. Who were the first eyewitnesses? Women. Women's testimony was not admissible evidence in either Roman courts or Jewish courts because women were held in that kind of low regard. Now, that might infuriate you, but the fact of the matter is, no one would make up a story about the resurrection of Jesus Christ, put the eyewitnesses all being women unless the eyewitnesses really were women. There's no possible reason why you make something like that up. There's all kinds of reasons why the theory that the Gospels were put in there just in order to help the leaders of the church just doesn't work. I'll give you one other real quickie, and those of you who might know more about this, you know the early church had a lot of conflict over whether the Gentiles who became Christians coming in needed to be circumcised. Did the Gentile Christians need to adopt the Mosaic rituals and laws? It was an area of tremendous problem in the first because the early church was Jewish and Gentile and they often didn't get along. There's nowhere in the Gospels where Jesus says a thing about it. If the Gospels were being created, fabricated as it were, in order just to simply help the leaders of the church by putting words in Jesus' mouth that solved issues and solved disputes, surely they would have done it. The reason why there's nothing in Jesus' mouth about circumcision is because he never said anything and the early church did not believe they had any right to make up words of Jesus at all. I'll give you one more. I said that the Gospels are too early to be legends. Secondly, they are too counterproductive in their content to be legends. Also, their literary form is in no way legend. They are written as an oral history. C.S. Lewis, who did know literature, has a little interesting place in one of his writings where he says, I have been reading epics and legends and ancient literature all my life. He was a professor at Oxford and Cambridge in medieval and Renaissance literature. So he knew something about legends and myths and epics. He'd been reading them all his life. And he says, if you think the Gospels are written as legend, you don't know anything about legends. He says, modern realistic fiction was not invented until about 300 years ago, 400 years ago. So for example, when you read the Iliad, you don't read this. You don't read the night before the battle. Achilles stood at his tent. He saw the water. that's not the way the Iliad reads. That's modern realistic fiction. He went to the door. He heard the creak of his shoes. He turned the, I mean, people can write fiction at that level of detail now. But you didn't back then. Legends were high. They were kind of remote. They had very little character development. In other words, they were very, very sketchy. He says, why is it that when Jesus Christ tells in John 21, he calls out, this is after his resurrection, he calls out to the disciples in the boat, put your nets down on the other side. And they put the nets down on the other side and they get this enormous catch of fish. It's a miraculous catch of fish. And they realize it's Jesus and they come running in. Some of you know the story. Some of you don't. You don't have to. But when they get it in, the text says, we're 153 fish. 153 fish. What does that mean? 153. Is that symbolic? No. Somebody remembered there were 153 fish. A lot of people, people who are there remember that story. If they were there, you'd remember that the rest of your life. You met the risen Christ and all that. And C.S. Lewis says, legends were not written with little things like 153 fish. You just didn't do it. Richard Baucom, professor at St. Andrews University in Scotland, who's a historian, New Testament professor there for many years, wrote a book called Jesus and the Eyewitnesses. And what he says is, if you know anything about ancient literature, you'll know that the Gospels are written as eyewitness accounts. What does he mean by eyewitness accounts? Because the accounts have, quote, number one, many irrelevant details that don't help the plot and they don't help characters, but they're just remembered. Irrelevant details, highly selective fixing on unique elements, limited vantage point, not the omniscient vantage point of a fiction author. He says it has all the marks. But here's one more, real quick. I really need to press you on this because if you buy the normal idea, this is the only area, by the way, in which I'm an expert. You realize that whenever I talk about science and anthropology and all this stuff, I sound, philosophy, I might sound smart. I'm an educated amateur, but this is something I know. In Mark chapter 14, it's talking about Jesus Christ on the road to Calvary. You know, he's carrying the cross and he's falling down. Some of you know how that works. And we're told that because he kept falling down, the soldiers grabbed the guy out of the crowd to carry the cross for Jesus. And his name was Simon of Cyrene. And what it says, this is, let's see if I can find it quick. What it says is in the text, yes, it's Mark chapter 15. What it says in the text is they chose Simon of Cyrene. And then it says he was the father of Rufus and Alexander. And then the narrative just goes on. What? Who's Rufus and Alexander? Richard Baucom says Rufus and Alexander do not appear anywhere in the text. They're not characters. Why would they be there? He said it's very typical that when people were writing historical accounts, eyewitness accounts, what you would do is you were putting the names of the living eyewitnesses in the account so people could check with them. There's no reason for Mark to write this account and says he was the father of Rufus and Alexander unless the readers knew who Rufus and Alexander were. Now, you and I don't. But they must have been prominent people and they could be consulted. And Baucom says all through the New Testament Gospels you see signs of this idea of, you know, that's the reason why in John, the guy who's, the soldier whose ear is cut off by Peter in the Garden of Gethsemane is named Malchus. But in the other places where his ear is cut off, his name is never used. Baucom says that's because he was an eyewitness source. Otherwise, there's no reason to put, why would you put the name in there? All I'm telling you is not I can prove the Bible is the infallible, inerrant word of God. What I can tell you is there is a tremendous amount of evidence that the New Testament is basically reliable history and that the things Jesus said and did that are recorded in there, you can assume that something like that really happened. And particularly that he claimed to be God. Okay, now how do you, where do you go? I just said he's either the legend, a liar, a lunatic, or a lord. And now I just try to say it's not enough to say, well, he never claimed that, he was a legend. Well, you say, okay, maybe he was a liar and a lunatic. Here's the reason why that's a problem. Maybe he was, he was just a liar and lunatic. You know, crazy people all the time claim to be God. Yeah, but they do not start religions that grow to two billion people. And here's, that's not a joke. Look, there have been lots and lots of people who started religions that did very well. Big religions, okay? You know them all. And there were lots and lots of people who started living. to be God. They said they were divine this or divine that. And people who claimed to be God did not have very successful religions. Usually they had a little coterie of dysfunctional people around them who worshipped them, but basically it never got off the ground. So you had people who claimed to be God who never were able to convince anybody they were. And then you had people who did not claim to be God who started these great religions, but you've only got one person in this category. A man who not only claimed to be God, but convinced people he was. That's never happened before. And the reason why it's important for two reasons. One is remember that people in the East, Eastern religions believe that God is a kind of impersonal force in everything. So it's not all that weird to say to a group of Hindus, I'm God. What would they do? What they would say is, okay, maybe, let's see. Because I'm an avatar. Because the idea of God is that you could be manifest through a human being. It's not a big deal. But to say to a group of Jews, I'm God. Before Abraham was, I am. I'm the judge of all the earth. I'm the way, the truth, and the life. To say to a group of Jews, I'm God. Who are the last people on the face of the earth. These are people who believe in a high, transcendent God. These are people who won't say the name Yahweh. They won't even write the name Yahweh. The last people on the face of the earth to believe anybody is God. How is it possible that thousands of those people came to believe he was? Two things must have happened. The first thing is his actual life must have been unbelievable. In other words, his moral character must have matched his claims. Nobody else's has been like that. It must have. There's no other way to explain it. By the way, somebody has also pointed out, and if you read the New Testament, and I hope you will, if you read the New Testament, you'll see that even though his claims were enormously high, his actual behavior was amazingly humble. And that's one of the weird things about him. In fact, it's one of the things that I think has been the most convincing to me. One man wrote it like this. An old Scottish minister wrote it like this. He has infinite highness and infinite humility. Despite his high claims, he is never pompous. You never see him standing on his own dignity. He has tenderness without weakness, strength without harshness, humility without the slightest lack of confidence, unhesitating authority with a complete lack of self-absorption, unbending convictions without the slightest lack of approachability, power without insensitivity, enthusiasm without fanaticism, holiness without Phariseeism, passion without prejudice. Nothing he does falls short. In fact, he's always surprising you and taking your breath away. He's incomparably better than you could imagine for yourself. Why? These are the surprises of perfection. So the real, how do you say a guy who lived like this and who convinced the hardest group of people in the world that he was God did that? And the answer is he couldn't have acted like a liar or a lunatic. These are people who were living with him. You know, people who say I'm God, you live with them a little bit and you know they're not. I mean, everybody's got, you know, I mean, everybody sees, you know, what you're like in the morning and I mean, how could you pull that off? But he did. It comes down to this. This, Bono, was being interviewed some years ago and said he believed that Jesus was God and his interviewee said, you're kidding. And he says, no, it's not far-fetched. Look, he said, this is Bono, by the way, the secular response to the Christ story always goes like this. Well, he was a great prophet, obviously a very interesting guy, had a lot of good things to say along the lines of other great prophets, be they Elijah, Muhammad, Buddha, or Confucius. But actually, this is Bono again, Christ doesn't allow you that. He doesn't let you off that hook. Christ says, no, I'm not going, I'm not saying I'm a teacher. Don't call me a teacher. Don't say I'm a prophet. I am God incarnate. And people say to him, no, no, please, just be a prophet, a prophet we can take. You're a bit eccentric. We've had John the Baptist eating locusts and wild hunter. Honey, we can handle that. But don't keep saying you're God incarnate because you know we're going to have to crucify you. Christ was who he said he was. This is Bono again. Or he else was a complete nutcase. And I mean, we're talking nutcase on the level of Charles Manson. of civilization for over half the globe could have its fate changed and turned upside down by a nutcase, for me, that's far-fetched. Okay. Secondly, the resurrection. There's the claims all by itself. That would make him a difficult, I think, you know, the idea that he's either a legend, which means he didn't make the claims, but if he did make the claims, then he's either a liar, a lunatic, or he's the Lord. It doesn't make much sense that a person who lived like that could be a liar or a lunatic. So on top of that, the resurrection. Now here's what I can tell you about the resurrection. Relatively brief, but it's very important. Um, many people say that the very idea of the resurrection grew into a legend because originally Jesus died and his followers just desperately wanted him to be alive again. They wanted him to be alive like all normal followers. And so they sensed he was really with them. He sensed he was, they sensed he was present with them. And as time went on, this sense that he was with them turned into stories that he had been physically raised from the dead. And eventually they were, they were, they were written down and eventually they became part of the Bible. But there was really no empty tomb. And there really were no eyewitnesses to a physical resurrection. Those were legends that grew over the years from that original desire that my, our Messiah would still be with us. But there are very, very, very strong arguments against that theory. Number one, first of all, the accounts of the eyewitnesses are too early again. When Paul wrote in first Corinthians 15, which he wrote 15 years after the death of Jesus Christ, 15 years, there's, there's no doubt about this. First Corinthians is a very early document. Paul said that 500 people saw Jesus Christ risen from the dead all at once. 500 people all at once. And he says some of them have died, but most of them you can consult with right now. And you can't write a public document that gets circulating around and in the churches during the Pax Romana, when it was fairly easy to go from place to place and to say, if you want to, you can go back and talk to them right now. You can't make a claim like that unless Christianity would never gotten off the ground, unless those eyewitnesses existed. Those eyewitnesses did exist. That empty tomb was there. Well, you say, well, maybe they just was wish fulfillment. Well, keep something in mind. Some Jews did believe that some of you who are Jewish know that Jews have always been, um, divided over the afterlife. And there are some Jews that believe that at the end of time, there'd be a resurrection. But N.T. Wright in his great book on the resurrection, he's a, he's a tremendous historian and scholar says that if you understand first century Judaism, you would know that the idea that an individual person in the middle of history could get resurrected was just unthinkable. See, some Jews, but not all some Jews believe that the end of time to be a resurrection and God would make everything right. But the idea that one individual could be raised in the middle of history and death and disease and everything else go on the way it normally went on was just unthinkable. And N.T. Wright points out that there were a couple dozen messianic pretenders during the time of Jesus over for the decades before Jesus and decades after Jesus. There were quite a few Jewish, um, figures who said, I am the Messiah. And almost all of them were executed by the Romans. You know, they were, they were quite, um, they, they kept a lid on things. Not a single other one of those messianic figures had a group of people that started saying he's risen from the dead. Why not? It wouldn't have occurred to them. In fact, even if you say, well, maybe there was a hoax, maybe they stole the body and well, why would Jews steal the body and tell people he was raised from the dead when they would not only would they not even think about it, but they knew that nobody would believe them. Nobody would believe them. Again, it's the Jewish worldview. You and I tend to not believe in the resurrection because we have this scientific materialistic worldview, but the Jews didn't believe in the resurrection of Jesus for equally strong reasons, even though different reasons, their worldview was every bit as much against it. And to think they were just superstitious people in the past that believed in the supernatural. You don't know a lot about first century history. So here's my question. Have I just proven the resurrection? Here's what I can tell you. There was an empty tomb and there were hundreds of eyewitnesses that saw Jesus Christ risen from the dead. That's what they said. That I think is pretty historically secure. Christianity would never have gotten off the ground. The earliest documents all said it. There's hundreds of eyewitnesses. Go talk to them. That doesn't prove it, but it does. There was an empty tomb. There was an empty tomb. believed that sort of thing unless something happened to them. You say, well, maybe there was a hallucination. Well, people don't have hallucinations in groups of 500. Well, maybe it was a hoax. Well, I try to explain as much as I could that why would you pull off a hoax when you had no belief that anybody would believe you? And then don't forget that the people who said he was risen from the dead and they saw him risen from the dead died. They died for their belief. They died for it happily. Now, I'd like to put the onus on you. You say, I just don't believe in the resurrection. Okay. What is a historically possible alternate explanation for the birth of the Christian church? If you rule out the resurrection, you explain all the eyewitnesses. You explain the fact that thousands of Jews completely changed their worldview almost overnight about a man being, a human being being the son of God, about there being a resurrection in the middle of history. You know, worldview changes can happen over a generation. People write back and forth and they debate and slowly things change. We all see that. Overnight, you explain it. And you say, well, I just can't believe in a resurrection. It's just impossible. Now you're doing philosophy, not doing history. You've got a philosophical presupposition that said miracles are impossible. And even though you can't explain the historical phenomenon, you're going to hold to it. Okay. That's okay. I mean, obviously I haven't proven it. You can't prove hardly anything in history. There's always a certain amount of, you know, uncertainty. Now, lastly, if you see the claim and if you see the, uh, the resurrection and you begin to say, Oh my goodness, maybe he is. I still think in the end, it's his message. Now the message looking at the clock, this message I have to give you pretty briefly. Uh, and again, this is one of those few areas that I've been talking to you about that I have a little bit of, you know, I have a experience in, but it kind of goes like this. A lot of people say, look, I, I believe in, I don't believe in God, but I'm a good person. I'm a very good person. Well, uh, imagine that, uh, imagine an older lady who's got one son and she loves him very much and she has like no money, but she sweats and she works two jobs and she does everything to put him through college. And after he graduates, Oh, by the way, while, while he's right, she's raising him, excuse me, she teaches him three things. Care for the poor, work hard and always tell the truth. Care for the poor, work hard and always tell the truth. And then she puts him through college. But when he gets out of college, he hardly ever writes her. He never comes to see her. He acknowledges her existence, sends her a Christmas card or something like that, but basically doesn't give her the time of day. But if somebody says, you don't talk to your mother, you don't do anything. He says, ah, but here's the important thing. I'm a good person. I care for the poor. I work very hard and I always tell the truth. So that's what really matters. Not that I have a relationship with her, just that I do what she told me to do. Would you think that's fair enough? No. He would say, this is not right. You owe her. She did everything for you. Your relationship with her is broken. You've got to make that relationship right. Okay. If there is a God, you should be living for him. If there is a God and he made you and he's keeping you alive every minute, it's not enough that you're just a good person. I'm sorry. If there is a God, you need to have a relationship with him. And if you aren't giving him what he's due and caring for him and loving him and serving him, that's not okay. And that is something that is, that's guilty. So there's a problem. There's a guilt. There's a debt. And we have a, there's a barrier between us and God. Now let me tell you what Jesus says. Dorothy Sayers was the, one of the first women to go to Oxford university. And she was a writer of mystery and fiction, uh, detective fiction in the early 20th century. One of the first women to go to Oxford, writer of detective fiction. And she wrote, uh, stories about Lord Peter Whimsey, who was her detective hero and he solved crimes. She, he was an aristocrat, but he was also single and he was very lonely. And halfway through the, the Peter Whimsey novels and stories, suddenly a woman shows up and comes into his life. She's tall, not particularly attractive. She's one of the first women who ever went to Oxford and she writes detective fiction and they fall in love and get married. What do you think happened? Dorothy Sayers looked into the world that she had created and she fell in love with the man she had created. And she wrote herself into the story and because she saw how unhappy. Isn't that sweet? Okay. That's what God has done. Jesus Christ looks down into the world. He sees us making pretty much a mess of things. This is the Christian gospel. And he sees that there's a barrier between us and God that has to be dealt with. So he loved us. He loved us. He didn't leave us to stew in our own juices and he wrote himself into the story. And he went to the cross and took the debt, the payment. I said there's guilt here. Took the guilt himself. God, in a sense, paying his own debt. If you want to ask me more about that, we can. And now what this means is you are saved what? We keep saying this. If you believe in him, it's not a matter now of what do I have to do in order to be saved? No, Jesus has done everything for you. He's God who's come to do whatever you require. You believe in him and you're accepted. And I've had people say, well, if you're really just forgiven and you're completely accepted no matter what you do, what is your incentive for living a good life? If you're not afraid anymore, you're not afraid of going to hell or you're not afraid of being a bad person. If you're completely loved and all fear is gone, why would you want to live a good life? And I always say, if the only motivation you had for living a good life was fear, you ought to go get another motivation. There's gratitude for goodness sakes. Isn't that a better motivation? And I want you to think of something. If I help the little old lady to get across the street, here's a little lady and she needs help across the street. I help her across the street. And then I go home and say, Lord, didn't you see what I did? Please take me to heaven because I'm a good person. I take little old ladies across the street. I did a good deed. Who did I do it for? class. I did it for me. Did I do it for her? No. I wanted a dookie point in my little, you know, my, I wanted, I wanted, I wanted money in my account with God. See, do you realize until you realize you're saved by grace, that you've been saved strictly because of what Jesus Christ did, that you've been accepted. It has nothing to do with anything that you have done, but it's, a free gift until you realize that you are saved, not by anything you do, but simply because of the grace of God through Jesus Christ. Believe it or not, until you know that your good deeds won't save you, your good deeds aren't good. Until you know that your good deeds won't save you, your good deeds aren't good. They're actually for you. They're selfish. You're not doing them for God. You're certainly not doing for other people. You're doing them for you, for your self-esteem, you know, for your self-image. It's really weird until you see you're a sinner that deserves to be lost, but you're saved by grace. The good deeds you do are basically for yourself. Actually, you're not good until you see you can't be saved by being good. You'll never be good until you see you've been saved in spite of not being good. Do you start to get good? If you say, wow, that's weird. Third, that's Christianity, and it's liberating. Jesus Christ is claiming to be your Lord, but how do I put it this way? An awful lot of people tell me, I'm just afraid that if I give myself to God, he'll kind of control my life. And the answer is, if he was just a God, a kind of abstract God, yeah, I know. But this is the God who came to earth, died on the cross for you, made himself weak, made himself vulnerable for you. See, when God says, make yourself vulnerable to me, serve me, put your happiness in my happiness so that what makes me happy makes you happy. When he says, make yourself vulnerable and serve me, he's only asking you to do what he's already done. He already did that for you. And there is no other religion that claims that that happened. So there's, I'm trying to show you the beauty in what I consider the interconsistency of the message, the resurrection, and the claims. Sorry, a lot to cover, but you made me do it. So let's, let's see what we can do. Start texting in your questions, and Susan, come on up here. All right, everyone, last chance tonight to send in your questions in response to what Tim spoke on this evening. If you'd like to do so, all you need to do is text in to the number above me, or send in an email, and we're going to get to as many as we can in the next 25 minutes. We look forward to hearing from you. right, I like this question. It reminds me of the time I saw the very graphic film, The Passion of the Christ, with a graphic portrayal of the crucifixion. And I remember bringing a friend, and afterward, she just exclaimed, why was that necessary? Kind of alluding to the death. And the question is, if God is all-powerful, then why can't he forgive me without Jesus dying? Well, that's the question, isn't it? I would, just for a second, I think I can answer it kind of abstractly, but I think I probably would, I'd like to go into our own psychology for a second. There's no such thing as just forgiving. I think I can explain that philosophically and even legally, but I'll start psychologically. If, well, let's do economically. Let's just say somebody comes to your house, and they get kind of wild and rambunctious, and they are, you know, kind of full of themselves, or maybe they had too much to drink or something like that, and they knock over a lamp of yours that costs $75, and they break it. They say, oh, I'm so sorry, I'm so sorry. No, forget it. Now, there's a couple things that can happen. One is either you make them pay. They want to pay, you make them pay, and so you get $75, and you get your lamp back. The other possibility is that you forgive them, and you insist. Now, I'm talking forgive economically. I'm not talking about your heart. I hope you're not that angry about a lamp. Okay. But I'm talking about, let me just talk about economic forgiveness. You could forgive the debt and just say, no, don't. I'm not going to do it. Now, what happens then? Does that really mean the debt goes off into the air? No. Either you have to pay the $75 yourself and go buy another lamp, or you pay $35 and get a crappier lamp, or you go without a lamp, which means now you're paying the price in the sense of lower illumination and poor eyesight and having to go get new glasses sooner. So the point is you can't forgive people without some, either the person who wronged you pays or you pay. There's no such thing as just forgiving. Somebody has to pay. You can even see that economically. It's also true, I think, emotionally. If somebody hurts your reputation, they say something very bad and it's really hurt your reputation, there's two things you can do. One is you can hurt their reputation by getting your reputation back. You can go to all the people that he lied to and say, he's a liar. So what you do is you're making him pay. You go back, you get your reputation back at his expense. The other possibility, again, I'm not saying the rightness or wrongness of this. The other possibility is forgive him, which is to say I'm not going to tell people what he did and I'm not going to hurt his reputation. I'm going to forgive him, in which case you've lost reputation. It's going to take a while for you to get it back. So all I know is that when the Bible says that God is a just God and though he wants to forgive us, he can't simply forgive us without there being a cost. Frankly, since that's true in every other area of life, I don't know why I would question it here. My guess is since we're all made in God's image, his own reality, I'm a just God. I cannot just overlook sin. I'm a God of justice. I can't just shrug at it. Certainly if you were the victim of injustice and some judge said, hey, just let it go, you'd say, no, no, that's not justice. And so if we know in every area of our lives that you can't just forgive, even if you forgive, there's a payment. Forgiveness is great. I'm all for forgiveness, but there's a payment. So God can't forgive us unless there's a payment. He has borne that payment himself on the cross. That's why all the blood and guts. All right. You mentioned how it would be very difficult for someone to make up the Gospels. This question asks, for us lay people in the audience, what do you actually see if you see someone risen from the dead? I mean, how do you know this isn't just a figure of speech that was subsequently embellished in the writings 15 years later? Well, the writings, see, Paul is saying this is not a legend. I mean, he says people saw him with their own eyes. When he says, if any of you reading this have any doubts, most of the people who saw Jesus alive are still alive. You know, they're accessible, go to see them. Does that sound like an embellishment to you? That sounds like a claim, a simple historical claim. And so that's not a legend that grew up, the legend of the eyewitnesses. Because the first Corinthians was not a private document. None of those documents were private documents. Again, that gets us back to what we talked about a little bit last year. written by an apostle when mark wrote something luke wrote something uh john peter paul these were documents that were circulated and read in the churches and so these were public documents and so uh uh to make a make a historical claim and to and to uh challenge the listeners the readers of people listening to go check the claim out which is what the eyewitness uh the the eyewitnesses in the text were ways of that they're like footnotes excuse me richard balkham says that when you and i write a document we need to footnote it we need to say where our sources were we didn't just make this up there's this historian that says we didn't just make this up there was a scientist who said found this we didn't just make this up that's what a footnote is we didn't just make this up he says in in uh oral histories what you needed to do to show that you hadn't just made it up was you had to put the name of the eyewitnesses in there so that they were they they could be consulted and that was what paul was doing so that's not an embellishment that's just a strict eyewitness claim that doesn't prove that they actually saw um jesus risen from the dead but it i think does prove that hundreds of people thought they had and don't forget they were jews and they were not prone to believe in uh a son of god a human son of god or a resurrected lord next question is asking you to review something that you've talked about in a previous session could you review again why it is that jesus is the only way i sense truth in your arguments but still question the onlyness of jesus well um there's several ways to come out that question which is a uh which is a nagging question uh we we don't want to be exclusive however i'd say first of all the fact that jesus claims are so much almost infinitely higher than the claims of buddha confucius muhammad he's not saying i'm i'm showing you the way to god i am god in a way that means he is either the way or he's no way at all i think i tried to say that a few weeks ago the nature of the claims is a big part of what irritates people about christianity and i always i always try to say look we christians who say jesus is the only way we're we're please don't get me wrong out there in cyberspace but um we kind of can't help it we're stuck with this savior who claims to be the only way did i really say that i mean i and i don't mean that i don't mean that i resent it at all jesus but um at all but i do mean is that when you have when you've decided this is this is the son of god he was raised from the dead i believe in him and he says i'm the way the truth and the life not i have truth but i am the truth he makes these astounding claims either he is the main way to find god he would have to be the superior way i think or else we decide he's not who he says he is and then he's he falls off the map he's not one more wonderful sage because because of his claims and so i think it's really all or nothing with jesus and in that sense i do think christians do not christians are drawn by the beauty of jesus and the power of his claims to saying he's the only way it's not just because we the natural smugness of the human heart to say we have the the gnosis the knowledge and you do not i know that it's hard not to think that that's just not what christians are doing and frankly i do know christians that i think that is their motivation but if you come right down to the claims of christ that's the reason that's the reason why we say he's the only way because he kind of doesn't give us any alternative you talked a lot about how so many people in the gospels saw jesus living and resurrected the question is are there historical documents or records of jesus and the resurrection outside of the gospels um actually there now there there are there are there are other documents that talk about jesus outside of the bible and there are other documents that talk about the claim that his followers believed he was raised from the dead so there actually are but there's nothing like the accounts if you mean is there some non-christian account of the resurrection or no so there actually are uh one of the books we're going to talk about this uh we've put together a reading list you know kind of further reading list we'll get back to in a bit there's one book by a guy named paul barnett for example has written something about uh finding the historical jesus and there are other books on that list that would help with that but there so there are some uh greek and roman contemporary sources that talk about jesus followers, but they're rather high level, they're brief. Next question is, why would you give yourself to God if the eventual goal is to get into heaven, which seems essentially selfish? Well, I'd like to come clean and say I think in the beginning everybody comes to faith selfishly. I mean, to start with, you usually have a problem and you're trying to get some relief, and that's okay, why not? I mean, if you're feeling weak, if you're feeling guilty and you would like some forgiveness, if you're feeling weak and you'd like some strength, if you're feeling meaningless and you would like some meaning, yeah, I guess that's, it's just like being hungry, if you're hungry and you're looking for some food, I guess that's selfish. It is certainly a first step, but I think when you, frankly, I think in marriage you start to get into this. To start with, you want the person to like you and you want them to love you. Usually you want them to like and love you because there's things that they have that would, you know, either you're attracted to them physically or they have other ways in which you would just love to be with them and it would make you feel fulfilled. And there's all sorts of selfish reasons originally to get married. In fact, why else would you be married? You know, it's not altruism. You have all kinds of passions and things. But I want you to know that eventually, and this is in a book I wrote on this subject, eventually you come to the place where you love the person for who they are. And it doesn't matter necessarily whether you're getting fulfilled or not right now. If the person needs something, originally you tend to love people for what you get out of it and hopefully eventually you move past that to the place where you're loving them for who they are themselves, whether you're getting something out of it or not. That's real love. And I think eventually, to start with, you come rather with a fair amount of self-interest, but eventually the beauty of who he is and what he's done kind of drops a lot of that out and you start to get sold out for him the way you would want somebody to be sold out for you. I mean, if you were married and you had a little bit of money and suddenly you lost all your money and your spouse said, bye, I'm divorcing you, you would say, you didn't love me for me, you loved me for my money. And the answer would be yes, that's right. In the beginning, you tend to go to God because he's rich. But eventually, you really just have to love him for who he is. And I think that's possible. It does happen. Never perfectly, but it does happen. This next question is one of these questions that is kind of meta, asks you to kind of think about the perspective of God. A meta question? Well, just one of these questions that sometimes, well, the kind of question that sometimes makes my brain hurt when I try to think about it. But it says, if God loves us and knows us at our core and knows what we think and do before we think and do these things, why did he even put the tree of knowledge in the Garden of Eden? I don't know. That's what I would say. So, next question. By the way, I was actually told when I was in theological graduate school that that's an unanswerable question. When you get down to the very origins of things, the very origins, and you're trying to figure out wisdom and motive and things like that, I do think at a certain point, you draw a veil of discretion. Or, there is one theologian that said, where God has not opened his holy mouth, I dare not open mine. Well, I think part of the question is, and I've actually had friends ask me this as well, that if God put the tree there and allowed for that free will, then why are we at fault for the bad decisions we make? Oh, well, he didn't coerce us. I mean, in other words, what you could say, and this is where the problem of evil becomes a problem. It is a real problem. There must be some greater glory and good that God is going to bring. I think we talked a little bit about this before. It's hard to imagine. I do know a couple of things. If there was never any evil or sin in the world, there would never have been such a thing as courage. There would never have been such a thing as sacrifice. Somebody said this years ago, and I remember thinking, oh, that's interesting. And aren't courage and sacrifice good things? But honestly, I've been through this so many times over the years. I think that when it comes to trying... to i made an argument three nights two nights two weeks ago that evil and suffering doesn't disprove god unless you are sure that god couldn't have a good reason for allowing it and there's no way that anybody could be sure that if there if a god existed in other words i think i said it this way if you have a god big enough to be mad at for evil you've got a god infinite enough to have some reasons for allowing it that you can't think of so you can't have it both ways but that's a very negative argument and some of you obviously are not very satisfied with it what i just try to say is you can't say you there can't be a reason but you're saying okay well what is that reason and now you're pushing me and the closest thing i know is that uh is the idea that somehow that there would that the the eventual glory and joy will be greater infinitely greater uh you know unimaginably greater uh for for having allowed this but but you know it just seems weak and see whenever anybody's ever pushed me including whenever i've tried to push myself into coming with scenarios they just they fall short but uh my guess is that a little child you know i think i've told you this story when my children were little uh we we moved we moved to new york and uh we took them away from everything everything they knew everything they loved you know every and they were like you know pretty young and um i i remember at that point thinking and i you know they of course now they're all grown up here and they they're all yankees fans and and i've got two grandchildren here and i mean we're looking back on it none of them would ever say of course you had to do it we were just kids you know it looked like enormous anguish and suffering for us at the moment from our perspective as six year olds and eight year olds and ten year olds it was in it was you know inscrutable and excruciating and and horrible and you might say are you telling me that genocide and horrible suffering you're you're likening it to you know a you know a crying child and the answer is yeah sort of i'm i'm just saying that surely even though i was in my 30s and my children were you know eight nine ten years old the 30 years between us was enough that i couldn't even begin to explain it to them i couldn't say well can you're 20 years old you'd be happy you won't even remember this there the distance between us and god has got to be infinitely greater and my guess is that the dynamic will be the same thing that somehow you know god will said say when you're on earth i couldn't i couldn't have explained it to you you had no concept of it and when you actually see the reasons you're going to say oh my gosh of course but i don't know what they are all right um sometimes people talk about how jesus didn't really say he was actually god so can you describe what are some of the words jesus used to claim to actually be equivalent with god himself um the direct i mentioned the one direct claim was in fact when he said before abraham was i am uh the uh you know i kind of went through the list there a little bit there was a uh we have a tendency to think that when he says i'm the son of god that that's not a really a claim to be god but it is you just have to understand the the the uh the parlance uh there's a place in matthew 11 where jesus says no one knows the father but the son okay that's now that could sound like i'm a prophet and i'm the best prophet no one knows the father but the son but then he turns around and says and no one knows the son but the father father and most commentators and people who understand something about ancient texts say that that is an astounding an astounding statement because it's saying that that uh that the father and the son's knowledge of each other is mutually exhaustive and no one knows the son but the father and no one knows father but son is saying both of them are infinite nobody nobody only it takes takes the father the heavenly father to know me it's an amazing claim uh you know there's a place where jesus actually was saying i saw satan fall from heaven like lightning just casually just going he's just going by he said yeah i saw satan fall like heaven from you know like lightning uh and i guess the disciples were sitting there going what he's he makes so many statements about being ancient about being existing before the dawn of time coming back to judge the earth forgiving all sins the reason they kept constantly trying to stone him and kill him for blasphemy is because the statements he made they may not look if if he had just said and he doesn't really say i am god you know which is what a lot it's a spoiler people are people are the text. The point is, what kind of God would that be? Are you talking about the Eastern God, which is in everything? Are you talking about one of the Greek or Roman gods that like Zeus can come on down and be, or what he, when he uses all the terminology of Old Testament Israel to say, I am the, I am, and I'm the judge of all the earth. And, uh, you know, I'm the holy one and I'm the son of God. And he does all that. It's, it's unmistakable. He's actually saying, I am the God of Israel. And, uh, that's the reason why he was, he was slain. I mean, if anybody says, I don't think Jesus really, really, uh, claiming to be God, the answer is why was he killed? You know, I mean, and every one of the gospels, he says, are you the son of the most high? Are you the son of man who's coming with the angels in heaven? Jesus says, you said it. And they tear the ropes and say, we don't need any other witnesses. That's blasphemy. He's claiming to be God. Let's kill him. And so that's what happened. All right. Well, we are almost running out of time, but this is kind of something that might help summarize, um, some of the other questions I've gotten kind of, okay, maybe I like some of what I'm hearing. And this question just plainly asks, okay, so what does it mean exactly to be a Christian? If you mean, how do you become a Christian? Or if you mean, what does it mean to live like a Christian? I would say, uh, two places. One is there's a verse in, in, in John chapter one, where it says, as many as received him, as believed on his name, he gave the right to become sons of God who are born not of, uh, a father's will or, uh, but you know, uh, of the Holy Spirit. So when that terrible, anyway, that was my, you know, see how well I recite scripture. My problem is I'm so old that I had so many different translations of the Bible. I don't know which one I'm quoting from, but what it's saying is that if it's possible to say, father, I recognize that Jesus Christ died for me. And so I believe in him now, I rest in him. By the way, that doesn't mean coming up with perfect faith without doubts. It means basically saying to father, accept me because of what Jesus did, not because of anything I do. The Bible says, if I, if I have faith from the heart at that point, I'm adopted. I become son, a son or daughter of God. I'm brought into the family and I'm, I'm, uh, forgiven. And it happens instantaneously. But probably if you want to know what it means to live as a Christian, I, I think I would probably, uh, go to the place in first Corinthians six, where it says, you're not your own, you're bought with a price. And what that means is once you realize you were, you were, uh, uh, uh, you know, what God did for you, you now live for God and your neighbor, not yourself. And frankly, every single thing, every part of being a Christian is a derivative of that one verse, I think. It means I don't live for myself anymore. I live for my neighbor. I live for, I live for God. So, um, yeah, that's basically it. But that's a, as you may guess, that's a big, that's a big issue. Big question. Lots to say. All right. Well, I think because of the time already, that is going to be the last question for tonight. And as always, this Q and a session, and even just a mere seven weeks is not necessarily enough time. I know to get to everybody's questions. We've been getting so many every night. And that's also why I wanted to take a moment to remind you all that tonight we're having signups for questioning Christianity groups that are going to be starting their eight week groups that are going to be starting the first week of April that will give you all an opportunity to continue this conversation and dialogue. The groups are simply peer led discussion groups that are meeting in people's apartments throughout Manhattan. And they're going to go over content like we've been discussing tonight with people that are thinking the same questions and asking the same questions like you are. And they're actually going to dive into topics that are in Tim's book, uh, the reason for God. And those topics are things that he did discuss during the series, such as why is, um, there's so much evil and suffering in the world. How can Christianity claim to be the only way and so on and so forth. So we really do encourage you guys to check that out. You can even ask more questions tonight on the fifth floor or even sign up this evening again, starting the first week of April and they go for eight weeks. You might want to give it a try. And, um, beyond that, Tim actually mentioned, he puts something together for you all and he's going to share it with us. Well, I'm just going to orient it. It's a, it's a suggested reading list or further reading. And, um, what I did was on the front page of it, I put five basic books that I think would be great books to read. And then after that, I we've talked about or touched on. And you've got a lot of further reading there. Let me just say something about the five basic books. If you're trying to get a handle on Christianity, it's deadly to read a book that's not compelling. So if you pick up any one of these five books on this front, the five books are C.S. Lewis' Mayor of Christianity, for example, which I think is the best single book presenting both the beliefs of Christianity and the truth claims of it and arguments for it. However, Lewis was an Oxford Don. These were radio talks through the BBC and Great Britain during World War II. And he demands that you follow long sequences of logical argument, which actually we're not trained to do much anymore. So some people find it, it's brilliant, it's in a class by itself. Princeton University Press right now is putting out a series of, it has contracted with scholars to put out a series of the ten greatest Christian books. So somebody just put out a book on the Book of Common Prayer, the Anglican Book of Common Prayer, things like that. It chose mere Christianity as one of the greatest Christian books ever. There's a scholar who's writing a whole book on the book, mere Christianity. But it's not for everybody. And there's a book by Francis Bufford called Unapologetic, Why Despite Everything, Christianity Can Still Make Surprising Emotional Sense. It's a new book, it's written by a British author, very funny, very eloquent, very ironic, very colloquial. And actually, it's especially good for people who think it's practically unthinkable that they'd ever become Christians and that all their friends would consider it utterly, utterly unthinkable. It's actually quite an interesting book. There's a book by John Lennox, who's an Oxford professor, called Gunning for God. He's a debater. And if you like a kind of feisty debating kind of tone where he's saying, take that, take that, if you like that kind of thing. If you're an internet infidel, if you're somebody who likes to, you know, likes to spar with people, that's the book. My book, The Reason for God's There, the trouble with it is awfully long. It's the longest book up there. I felt very embarrassed. I need to go back and rewrite it. It's like by 100 pages, it's the longest book. I said, who do I think I am, you know? 200 more pages than C.S. Lewis? Who do I think? And a book by John Stott called Basic Christianity, which is usually not your best first book. It's usually after you're starting to say, hey, there's a lot to this and I want to get down more into what Christians actually believe. So I put little annotations on there. But if you start one of those books and you really don't find after two chapters it's really kind of getting you, don't go through it just because I told you to. In other words, don't plow through it. Pick up another book. Find one that you kind of like and let that be your first book and let the other books supplement that. It's always good to find one book that's your friend. You know, a book where you feel like this person really kind of understands me. So that's that. Can I just say something personal real quick? I have learned a lot from you. Redeemer's trying. Listen, I hope you've been changed. We've been changed by having you these seven weeks. We try to create this learning community. Redeemer wants to be a church on the one. We don't want to be a church that doesn't believe anything. You know, religion institutions that just say, oh, it doesn't matter what you believe. And don't have beliefs and don't promote beliefs. They're not strong communities. Communities have to have common beliefs. But we also don't want to be the fortress that most religious communities are. So that people who come in are either confused or offended by everything, don't understand what's going on. And if they ask questions, are told, there's the door. So we're trying to create a different kind of community that we think actually in our culture today, considering how fragmented it is and how much anger there is between various different groups of people and different sets of beliefs, we feel like it's actually a public service if we can create a church that is more like what you're seeing here. I mean, so I think we have been changed by this. When I say we, me, the leaders, me personally, I mean, I see a lot of things that I say that I think are really, really, really persuasive. So I talk to a couple of you and I say, well, maybe it wasn't. But also, I guess I, I guess I, that wasn't as smart as I thought it was. But on the other hand, I think our, the leaders of the church that have been here are saying, this is the kind of church we want. You know, we want a community like this with a lot of people who are really our friends, who don't share all the beliefs, but really feel included in many ways. So that's not an easy thing to do, to be true to our beliefs and to not be a church that doesn't believe anything. But at the same time, to be pretty welcoming, very welcoming. and make us better in our own responses. So thank you for bearing with us and helping us.
