TITLE: Reading Hearts
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 7:1-6
TOPICS: Sharing Your Faith Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: The Hard Sayings of Jesus 2000
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/reading-hearts/

============================================================

Matthew 7, 1-6, what we're doing every single week that I'm here in the summer, we have obviously it's summertime, so you're not here every week, so I'm not either. It's just quid pro quo. The weeks that I am here, what I've been doing is choosing hard sayings of Jesus, difficult things, things that Jesus says that are difficult to accept or difficult to understand. Now, we're going to look at Matthew 7, verse 6, that's the hard saying we want to look at, because actually verses 1-5 is, to modern people's ears, music, it's music to our ears. Nothing hard or particularly difficult about the first five verses, but in the context we actually, of the entire passage which I'm about to read, you can see why verse 6 is extremely difficult for people and difficult to understand and accept. So, let's read it together, Matthew 7, 1-6. Do not judge, or you too will be judged. For in the same way you judge others, you will be judged. And with the measure you use, it will be measured to you. Why do you look at the speck of sawdust in your brother's eye, and pay no attention to the plank in your own eye? How can you say to your brother, let me take the speck out of your eye, when all the time there's a plank in your own eye? You hypocrite. First, take the plank out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to remove the speck from your brother's eye. Do not give dogs what is sacred. Do not throw your pearls to pigs. If you do, they may trample them under their feet, and then turn and tear you to pieces. This is God's word. Now, what's so difficult about verse 6? It's not that hard, especially to see what's so hard about it. It's especially in the context. Jesus has just said, what is music to our ears in our modern culture? Don't judge. Don't condemn. You know, don't write people off. Don't judge others. And then he turns around and says, he calls somebody, he's calling somebody pigs. He's calling somebody dogs in the old authorized version. It says, don't throw your pearls before swine. He's calling somebody, somebody he's calling swine. And that seems not only to be a complete contradiction to what we just saw in verses 1 to 5. Here he says, don't judge anybody, you swine. Don't call anybody names, but stay away from the dogs. And it also seems to go against many other places where Jesus seems to be saying, take the good news to everyone. Over the years, as you can imagine, there's some people who have used this to mean this. Some people, some lives are so dirty. Some minds are so hostile. Some hearts are so hard that you might as well just not go to them. Don't try to give them the truth. Don't try to help them in any way. Just stay away. They'll just hurt you. Just forget them. And that is a misunderstanding of these two little parables. Because if you look at verse 6, you see what you've got here are two little parables. And they're parallel parables. And we have to immediately ask ourselves, what is the parable? What is the story? There's a very little story. These are little stories. And in order to do that, we have to understand this. And actually, that interpretation, which is very normal, very typical, to read this as Jesus saying, look, there's some people who are so dirty, so hostile, so bad, so hard, it's best just to stay away from them. That's a misunderstanding of the parable. Now, it's true that in the biblical times, dogs could be wild, or they could be domesticated. They could be pets. So, for example, in Jesus' dialogue with the Syrophoenician woman in Mark chapter 7, at one point she says, but now you know that the dogs under the table are fed from the master's hand. And, of course, in other words, dogs could be wild, but they could also be domestic. But pigs were never wild. You never fed a wild pig. You didn't have wild pigs around. If you go to Mark, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, you've got the incident of the demoniac and the pigs that were being grazed. Those were tending the pigs. Do you remember Luke chapter 15, the parable of the prodigal son, where the young man goes economically, comes to the bottom of the barrel, but he goes out and he's, what is he doing? He's feeding pigs, he's throwing them husks of corn. And so what you have here is this. Since these are parallel, and they must be parallel, here's the picture Jesus is drawing. You have animals in your care. And you give them something which is very, very valuable, but is something that they cannot digest. into it, it either hurts them as they bite into it, or else they choke on it, and they turn toward you, and they attack you. Why? At least you are edible. So what's happened is you have animals under your care, you've given them something they can't digest. You've pushed upon them something that might be good in itself, but something that they cannot comprehend, something they cannot handle, something they cannot digest. And then what Jesus is saying is don't be surprised if they attack you. Don't be surprised if they turn on you. In other words, Jesus is not castigating the animals. He's castigating the caregivers. And when you understand the metaphor like that, when you understand the parable like that, it opens up. And we begin to realize that Jesus is both implying and directly telling us. He's giving us answers to some of the most fundamental and ancient questions about the human nature and about how do we find ultimate reality and truth. And I like just to divide it by saying this. Let's look at this little verse and say, what does it teach us about the hearts we have and the help we need? The hearts we have and the help we need. First of all, what does it tell us about the hearts we have? Now, notice that the animals are not infuriated. They're not choked because they're given poison. And they're not choked even because they're given, say, rocks. The problem is that they are not given something below their capacity. Pardon me. Not something below their capacity. Not something below their ability. But something above. The pig is expecting corn husks. In comes a pearl. And, of course, the pearl has a value. It's immeasurably more valuable than a corn husk. Immeasurably more important and better than a corn husk. But the pig doesn't have the ability to either perceive or assess that value or appropriate it or take it up or do anything about it. Now, what does this tell us? Okay. We said, because we've seen that Jesus is not talking to us about some kind of especially vicious set of animals, he therefore is telling us something about normal human nature. See? These animals are acting in accordance with their nature. Jesus is saying, don't be surprised if you do this. This is the way animals are. And, therefore, he's telling us something about our normal human nature. The way we routinely are. And what is it? He's talking about spiritual insensitivity. Our spiritual imperception. In our natural routine state, we are completely unable to even perceive. This is almost better in some ways than another phrase, I mean, I don't want to say it's better. One biblical phrase is better than another biblical phrase. But in some ways, it is actually, at least for our purposes today, it's really a very, very rich way of understanding. It goes even beyond the idea of spiritual blindness. The idea of spiritual blindness is our natural human state is that when the gospel or the truth comes by, the Bible tells us we're blind and we need to have our eyes open. This is even more profound in some ways. When animals find something valuable like a pearl, it's not that they can't see it. There it is. It's something, it's more profound than that. And Jesus is getting across where we are normally. What is normal human nature? Why are we so imperceptible of what is really valuable and what's really out there? We trample upon it. In fact, we might even be irritated by it. Why? Well, I believe what we have here, in the contrast between the pig and the caregiver, the pig and the person who does understand what pearls are like, is we actually have an insight into what eternal life really is. Eternal life. This is one of the most, one of the main themes of the New Testament. Eternal life. What is eternal life? I think when people hear the term, people have a lot of strange ideas. To get eternal life for some people means simply I get a ticket so that when I die, I will go to heaven. The trouble is Jesus talks about people having eternal life now, getting it now. Oh. Well, some people think of it as some kind of maybe, oh, I don't know, an ability to leap over tall buildings spiritually, a certain power to get things done. This is better. Eternal life is a higher order of being, a higher order of life, a higher order of sensitivity, awareness, and perception. The pig is alive, right? Very alive as it bites into your foot. Yes, it's very alive. Human beings are very alive. And yet, if a human being was ever through an injury to be brought down to the pig's level of awareness and perception, we would call that a living death. We wouldn't call that really living at all. So there's order. one. What do I mean? Well, follow me along, please. Plants are alive, unlike rocks. Why? Because they can sense something about their environment. They can sense something about reality. They can sense something about what's out there. They can sense cold and heat. They can sense light and darkness, right? So they're able to sort of have some sense of their environment. Now, not too much. They don't have sight. They don't have hearing. And so here comes the lawnmower. It doesn't matter, you know. You can't, you know. So plants... I don't know how that gets on the tape, do you? Those of you listening to this on a tape, years from now, you'll never know. Anyway, a plant is unaware of most, but it's able to sense some of reality. However, along comes an animal. Animals have a higher level of sensation. They're able to sense more. They have hearing. They have sight. But they can't sense the difference between justice and injustice. They can't sense the difference between happiness and tragedy. They can't sense the difference, really, between, say, kindness and cruelty. And these are things that human beings know are there. If you come upon a person who doesn't understand the difference between justice and injustice, it doesn't bother you that a pig can't see that. A pig can't sense that part of reality, right? A pig can sense a lot of parts of reality. The plant can't. But the pig can't sense all sorts of reality. But the human being can. However, Jesus is talking about something, as we're going to see. He's talking about spiritual realities. What is a human being like without human life? Without eternal life, excuse me? What's a human being like without eternal life? A human being is like this. A pig looks at the pearl and says, so? And a human being without eternal life looks at the holy. See, that's in the parable. Looks at the holiness of God. Looks at the holiness of God. God says, so? Eternal life is the next order of life. It's the ability to see all of reality. That's the difference. The difference between a human being with eternal life and a human being without. Eternal life is the next level. It's the next level of perception. It's the final level of perception. It's the ability to see all of reality. See, not just justice and injustice. To have eternal life means that you sense the holiness of God, the awesome holiness of God, the electrifyingly sweet grace of Jesus Christ, the astonishing death for us on the cross, the infinite eternal value of the human soul, your own resistance and even hostility to God. You sense all these things. Without eternal life, you either find what I just said to you, intellectual nonsense, or you believe them because you were raised that way, but they don't ravish your soul like a blazing jewel. They don't, you don't sense them. They don't affect you. They're not a reality to you. And therefore, eternal life is a higher order of perception. It's moving from a kind of spiritual animal level to becoming fully spiritually human. And Jesus is saying the natural state we have is very, very simple. Let's summarize all this. Jesus Christ is saying, you do not, if you want, you do not have the ability, put it this way, you do not have the ability to take in spiritual truth. You don't have the ability to see all of reality. And what you need is not just to become a fatter pig, because that's all the pig's concerned about, as we're going to see in a minute. You need to become a higher order of being. You need not just to be reformed, you need to be transformed. You need to be brought up. You need to become a new creation. You need to be raised to a whole new level. That's the heart we have. And it's not just simply, I don't believe in the death of Jesus Christ on the cross and now I do. There's all kinds of people who intellectually believe, but they don't sense it. They look at it and they say, so? That's what a pig does. And therefore, Jesus Christ is showing us ourselves. He's not just talking about a particularly vicious kind of person. He's talking about unaided human nature. He's talking about human nature without eternal life. That's what he's looking at. Okay. How then does that happen to us? See, he's giving us an example of the hearts we have. He's giving us a very vivid picture of the hearts we have. So, how do we get those kinds of hearts? How do we get eternal life? How do we move beyond being a dog? There's two things. See, this also shows us the help we need, and there's two things that Jesus says we've got to have. We need the beauty of Christ, and we need the discernment of friends. The beauty of Christ and the discernment of friends. That's what comes out of this verse. Now, admittedly, it's in that order. We need the beauty of Christ first, and the discernment of friends. Certainly, they're not equal, and yet, they're both here. Let's take a look. First of all, the beauty of friends. Pardon me, that too. The beauty of Christ. Let's ask ourselves the question, what the pearl is. What's the pearl? What does it signify? Why is a pearl been chosen? See, if Jesus had just kept the first sentence, don't throw the dogs that which is holy, we would really be in trouble. First of all, a lot of dogs weren't domestic, and so you could have easily, with just the first line, thought that this is really saying, don't give good things, don't tell the truth to these kinds of awful people. But with the second line, it changes. Why the pearl? And most commentators, in fact, all the commentators agree, that Jesus Christ has given us two parables of pearls in the book of Matthew. Two very tiny parables. You not only have this one here in Matthew 7, you also have one in Matthew 13. Matthew 13 tells us about a man who finds the pearl of great price. And when the man finds that pearl of great price, we're told, he gives away everything. He sells everything he has to get it. Now, what is the pearl of great price in Matthew 13? It's the gospel of the kingdom. It's the message that through Jesus Christ, the kingdom power of God, the healing power of God, the power of God to heal all of life, has come through Christ and can be yours in Christ. That's the gospel, gospel of the kingdom. But why would the gospel of the kingdom be shown here as a pearl? And here's how the metaphor helps. Look at the pig. Why is the pig unhappy with the pearl? The pig is unhappy with the pearl because the pig has a belly to fill. And the pig looks at the pearl, and because it doesn't see how the pearl is going to meet its immediate need, the pig looks and says, you can't eat it. It tastes terrible. I know what I need. I need to be full. This is not going to help me. He has a very instrumental approach. He says, is this any use to my agenda? What is my agenda? To feel full? That's what will make me happy. The pearl doesn't help. Very much like a man or a woman who says, Christianity? Okay. If I go to church, if I pray, if I obey the Ten example of Christ, will then my life finally go right? Will my prayers get answered? You see, will I experience inner fulfillment and happiness? If Christianity will do all that, I'll be very happy to come. Will that happen? And that's how we all start. But that's how a pig looks at a pearl. That's why the pig doesn't understand the pearl. What we have in the pig looking at a pearl is an example of why, a beautiful picture of why, the natural human heart looking at the gospel through a religious grid doesn't get it. The natural human heart looks at the gospel through a religious grid like the pig looks at the pearl. What do we mean by a religious grid? Well, what's a religion? Here's what religion is. Religion says, I know what I need to be happy. I need health. I need career. I need success. I need romance. I need my family to go right. I need things to go right. I know what I need. Will this give it to me? See, it's an instrumental approach. Will Jesus be useful to me? In the Old Testament, a perfect illustration of this is Joshua the night before the battle of Jericho. You know, he's the general and they're going to take, they're going to try the next day. Israel's going to try to sack this big city. So on the night before the battle, he walks out, you can imagine feeling just really obsessed. Am I doing this right? Are we going to attack right? Is my strategy right? And he walks out to get as close to the walls of Jericho as he can to look at them and survey them and think. And to his shock, he sees a huge man, a man of war, an armed man with a sword that's drawn. And he looks at him and he says, are you for us or for our enemies? And the man says, no. No. No. And then he says, but as the commander of the armies of the Lord, I am come. And then Joshua falls to the ground, face to the ground. You know why? What the man is saying is this. This is the angel of the Lord, the army, the... the Lord is saying. He's saying, when you say, are you for me or against me, those are the only two categories? I'm sorry, I don't fit in those categories. When you say, will this help me or will this not help me, what you're doing is you're using me as a means to an end. You're asking me if I'm useful. You're being a pig. You're saying, I have my, I know what I need. I need this and this and this and this. Will this get it for me? No. I will not be put into one of those categories. It's not a question of whether I'm on your side or not. Are you on my side? That's the only question there is. I explode your categories. That's what he's saying. What is spiritual pigness? What does it mean to be spiritually obtuse? Why do people continually look at the gospel, holiness of God, grace of Jesus Christ, dying on the cross? You may have been looking at it for years and years and years. You may not believe it. You may believe it and yet not get it. Because you're constantly saying, will this help me? Will this help me get to the things that I know I need to be happy? Will this help me become a balanced person, a moral person, a decent person? Will this be a good basis for my society, a good basis for my family? Will this make me successful? Will this help me become the kind of person I want to be? What the man said, what the Lord said to Joshua is, don't ask me if I can get you what you need? I am what you need. I am all that you need. I am what you need. I am your success or don't have anything to do with me. Don't make me a means to your success. A pig looking at a pearl is the way the natural heart looks at the gospel through a grid of religion. And as a result, over and over and over we don't get it. But here's how eternal life happens. Here's where you begin to start getting transformed. To become a Christian is not to be what the pig wants. The pig wants, what does the pig want? What does the pig want? The pig wants to be a bigger pig. The pig says, I want to eat. I want to put on weight. I want to be bigger. I want, the pig wants to be a bigger pig. And God is calling us to become a fully spiritually human being, a higher order of being. He doesn't just want us to be nicer and better. He wants us to be new and transformed, a whole new kind of person, a new creation. And when that begins happening, pardon me, that begins happening when you start moving from the way the pig looks at the pearl to the way the man looks at the pearl. The pig in Matthew 7, the man in Matthew 13. The pig says, will he give me more of what I have? Will he enable me to get more of what I have? And the man gets rid of all he has to get him. Two utterly different approaches. And why? The pearl is beautiful. The pig asks, is he useful? The man sees he's beautiful. What does beauty mean? As Jonathan Edwards says in the religious affections, a very simple example, uses some philosophical terms, but I still think he's pretty easy to understand. He says, God may appear two ways to a soul. He may either be a bonum utile, a good that profits me, that which greatly serves my interests and my goals, and so suits my ends, or he may be a bonum formosum, a beautiful good in itself. An illustration I often use, and some of you have heard me say before, that when I was in college, I had to listen to Mozart, so I would get an A in my music appreciation, so I would get a good grade point, so I could get a good job. So I listened to Mozart in order to make money. And today I use a lot of money in order to listen to Mozart. I spent a lot of money to listen to Mozart. Why? Because Mozart is no longer a means to an end. It's a beauty in itself. What does it mean to be beautiful? Beautiful, a beauty is something that is not instrumental anymore. It's not useful. It is satisfying in itself. You stand before it. You sit before it. You drink it in. And this is what you want. And you begin to become not a pig, but a person. You begin to actually become a new creation the moment you move from being from religion to the gospel. The moment you go from religion, which it says, if you scratch my back, God, I'll scratch yours. If I do this and this and this, then you owe me and you will reward me and you will do all these things. To saying, because of who you are, I want you in my life. Because of who you are, I must give you my life. Just because of who you are. Just because of the worth of what you are. Just because of the greatness of what you are. I want you in my life. I don't want you as a means to my success. I want you to be my success. I don't want you as a means to finally get the man or the woman I love, I want you to be the one I love. soon as you move from using God, by trying to be a good person so God will have to bless you, to responding to His grace, to responding to His glory, to responding to His beauty, and to giving yourself to Him unconditionally, you've begun to move from being a pig to being a person, from being an animal to being a fully spiritual human being. Somebody's going to say, how does that happen? I'll be as practical as I possibly can be. It happens in two stages. First, when you stop looking so much at what He can do for you, or what you want Him to do for you in the future, to what He has done for you in the past. Look at this verse for a second. Dallas Willard wrote a book called The Divine Conspiracy, which is a commentary on the Sermon on the Mount, which is what we are in. And Willard says, you know, it has bugged him for years that when people get to this verse, they believe that it's talking about certain kinds of people who are so bad and so unworthy we shouldn't even talk to them about the truth. And he says, if that's what Jesus is saying, then He is the biggest living contradiction you've ever seen because Jesus Christ did exactly what verse 6 looks like, what people are saying you shouldn't do. Jesus Christ, Colossians 2.3, is the one in whom all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom are hid. Jesus Christ was the greatest treasure of His Father. And He was offered to us. He was given to us. And we turned upon Him and we trampled Him into the dust. And when He was on the cross, He was on the cross as He was dying. What does He do? He quotes Psalm 22. He quotes Psalm 22. Because it starts out, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? But you know Jesus. If you know Jesus, you know He was thinking of that whole psalm. And in the middle of that psalm, verse 13, it says, Bulls surround me. Roaring lions surround me. They open their mouths against me to tear their prey. Jesus Christ Himself was cast to us, to pigs and dogs, or to people who had no idea what was coming, and we tore Him. I mean, this is a picture of what Jesus has done. And here's what I'm trying to tell you. Instead of looking and saying, What is He going to do for me? Don't stop being a pig. Look at what He's done. Look at what He's done. Why did He do that? Why did He say, Roaring lions surround me, but I give myself to them. Why did He get trampled? Why did He offer Himself? Because He loved us. Because He had to pay the penalty for sin. He had to come and live the life we should have lived and die the death we should have died so God can be both just and justifier of those who believe. So that God could accept us because He paid the penalty that we owe. So God could embrace us. And if you see that, and as you see that, you're going to be melted by the beauty of it, and then you'll start to turn from a pig into a person. There it is. So the first thing we need is to see His beauty by looking at what He did, and then what's going to happen, that will turn you, you say, what's this pig person stuff? Very simple. If Jesus Christ is the ultimate beauty in your life, you are free. If He's not, you are like an animal. You're driven by your belly. You're driven by your instincts. You've got to get people's approval. You've got to get success. You can't let this person jilt you. Otherwise, you have nothing else because those are your pearls, in a sense. Those are the things you need. You're just driven by them. You're moved around by them. John Newton, in a wonderful hymn, says this, Our pleasure and our duty, though opposite before, since we have seen His beauty, are joined apart no more. To see the law by love fulfilled and hear His pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. Or, to put it another way, transforms a frog into a prince. Transforms an animal who's basically being driven by all the things we've got to have to being a human being who can make choices because I'm not fazed the way I used to be. If I lose approval, I lose power, I lose control, I lose comfort, those things don't control me anymore. I'm a man. I'm a human being. I'm no longer a person just driven around by myself. You see, therefore, if you see His beauty, don't come to Him asking whether He's useful. Come and see that He's beautiful by looking at what Jesus Christ has done on the cross, seeing the beauty of it that smashes through your instrumental grids and makes you live a whole new life. The beauty of Christ, the pearl of great price, that's what you've got to have first. And then secondly. Now, the second thing I admit isn't really parallel. In a certain sense, of course, all you need is to see the beauty of Christ. up here. If you want to become a new creation, you only need the beauty of Christ. But I think, what is the purpose of the parallel? Who's he talking to? What is the purpose of verse 6? He's talking to his disciples. We know that from the whole context of the Sermon on the Mount. And this is what he's saying. Even though the beauty of Christ tells us what has to happen inside us, this parable, this little verse, also tells us what has to happen beside us. Basically, we need friends in our lives. Almost always you've got to have friends. Not always, but almost always you've got to have friends. And what Jesus is saying, what is the point of the parable? Here's the point. The point of the parable is this. He is saying to his disciples, don't push the gospel on people in such a way that they can't digest it. Don't be insensitive. Don't just push truth on people in such a way which is not relevant to their concerns or is too quick or not sensitive to the pace of God in their lives. Don't push. Don't press. Be discerning friends. Be gentle. Be careful. Never treat two people the same. What he is saying, therefore, on the one hand, negatively is one of the reasons that most people are so hostile to Christianity is not because just of the sort of sinful nature of their hearts, but because they've had things pushed on them. They've been turned into hostile dogs and pigs by people who have taken the beauty of Christ and the gospel truth and just pushed it on people in such a way that it alienates them. That's negatively, but positively what it's telling us is that we are called, if you are a Christian, we are called to being discerning friends, sensitive and kind friends. We're called to be, in a sense, shepherds. We're called to be people who actually create the context in which people can see the beauty of Christ. How? Let me just give you four quickies, four quick ways that if you're a Christian, Jesus is, I think, calling you in this passage, very, very short passage, to be shepherds, to create context and not turn people into ravening, angry, hostile folk who turn on the gospel because they've been given things, given it in such a way they can't digest. Let me just, quick four things. Number one, notice there's a balance, a huge balance between challenging and listening. A huge balance, I guess I better say, between truth and tears. What's the balance? Well, look, verses one to five is all about don't condemn, don't judge. Be kind. Be very, very, very humble and respectful and never condemning. And, you know, we could have expounded verses one to five, but that's not my purpose today. But if you do, it's an amazing statement of Jesus saying, get rid of every shred of self-righteousness. Get rid of every shred of superiority. There should be a tremendous respect and a tremendous kindness and a tremendous candor when you talk to people about your faith. But on the other hand, verse six tells us, on the other hand, there is a time for challenging. See, in other words, verses one to five is saying, don't be judgmental, but verse six is really saying, and yet you do have to make discrimination. You do have to make evaluation. You do have to decide. You do have to read people's hearts. You do have to see where people are. In other words, don't be a legalist, but don't be a relativist. Or another way of putting it is, make sure that there's a balance in the way in which you treat people between truth and tears. I will never get over, never get over the example of Jesus in John chapter 11 when he shows up at the tomb of Lazarus and he's got two different women, Mary and Martha, and two sisters. And each of them comes up to him and they say the very same thing. Martha comes up and says, if you'd been here, my brother wouldn't have died. Where were you? And Mary comes up and says, if you'd been here, my brother wouldn't have died. I wish you were here. And so you almost, but actually, it was the very same words. If you go back to John 11, you'll see the very same words and yet Jesus responds in two utterly different ways. In the first case, he actually rebukes Martha and says, I am the resurrection, the life. And in the second case, he just weeps. Why? Because he's a wonderful counselor. By nature, you are either a fixer, you like to analyze and tell people what's wrong, or you're a feeler, who just sit there and you emote. By nature, you're going to be a fixer or a feeler. You will not be able to mix truth and tears. You will not be able to both evaluate and yet not be condemning. You will either never evaluate or you will always condemn. That's the way you go unless the gospel comes into your life because the gospel changes you. The gospel says, be bold because God loved you so much he died for you. But be humble because you are such a mess that he had to die for you. time. And it takes us fixers and makes us more feelers, and it takes us feelers and makes us more fixers. And unless you're able to do all of verses one to six, you're not really going to be very helpful to people. That's number one, the balance of truth and tears. Number two, there also needs to be patience with the pace of God in his life, in his or her life. What I mean by that is this. If there's anything verse six is trying to tell us, it is that you can't force truth on people who aren't ready for it. And if there's anything verse six is telling us, it's Jesus trying to show us that our natural human state without divine intervention, we're incapable of taking the truth in. And therefore, if you just sort of lay truth on people and get irritated because they don't understand it right away, at that moment you're forgetting the fact that your own faith is a miracle. Irritation with people, impatience with people, talking very strongly to them, well, you know, this is the truth, and this is what Christians believe, and what's the matter with you? At that point, you are absolutely contradicting the gospel. What you're really saying is, I'm smart, you're dumb. No. You were dumb. You're still being dumb, or you wouldn't be talking like that. If you have any smarts at all, it's a gift. Any at all. You have to be very willing to go along with the pace of God in a person's life. You have to be sensitive to that. Okay? So secondly, there has to be enormous patience. Realize truth doesn't happen without the intervention of God. So you wait for that, and you watch for that, and you can be incredibly patient. Number three, be personal. Notice, notice, it says, do not throw your pearls insensitively to pigs. Your pearls. Isn't that interesting? Your pearls? What's that mean? What it means is, don't just give evidence. Don't just give arguments. Don't just say, here's all the reasons why we have to believe in this and this. Tell them about what Jesus means to you. They need to know your story. They need to see that he's your pearl. They need to see the gospel as it comes out in your life. That's a whole lot better than all the arguments. And number four, you'll never be helping other people unless you get rid of the remaining pigginess in your own life. Now, what I mean by pigginess, the next time somebody comes to you and tries to tell you something that you don't want to hear about what you have done or about who you are, the next time somebody comes and tries to tell the truth, how do you respond to them? Do you bite them? Do you make it, or do you make it safe to criticize you? Do you make it safe to criticize you? If somebody comes in and tries to tell you something, do you get devastated? Oh, you just fall apart? That's not making it, that's really a way of biting them. You know it. Or do you get very defensive or do you get angry? How are you ever going to be able to help other people? Hear the truth. If you're not easy, if you're an easy person to tell the truth yourself. Look, as we go to the Lord's Supper, Pastor Iron Kim's going to come and lead us, but let me just leave you with this. If there's anybody here who says, you know, I'm unworthy. I've done some sin this week. I've done some bad things this week. Once upon a time, Jesus told us a story about a young man who had sunk so low that he smelled of pigs because he'd been working in the pigsty. And yet when he came and he just reached out to his father, his father hugged him, probably smelling of pig. And he will do that for you today because our true elder brother was stripped naked on the cross so that we could be clothed. If there's anybody here who says, I really like to be a person that could really help people find the truth, then confess as we get to the table that very often you are a hard person to tell the truth to. Think about that. Is there anybody who's been trying to talk to you? Or has God himself been trying to show you some truth and you've been biting him? Has God himself been lately trying to show you things that are wrong with you? And have you been just biting him? Be a person, not a pig. Okay? And if there's anybody here who says, I'm not, now that you're, now that I've listened to this sermon, I'm not sure I'm a Christian. I do that to people. I'm sorry. Here's what I suggest. When the Lord's Supper comes around, if you say, I'm not sure I've ever really given myself to Christ in this way. I want to see his beauty. I don't want to be a pig. I don't want to just use him. I want to see his beauty. So if I've never done that before, if I've never given myself to him as Savior and Lord, don't take the cup and don't take the, the, the, uh, don't take the cup and don't take the bread. In other words, don't partake. Why not? Not because there's something wrong with you. It's a great way to nail down the fact that today, if never before, I'm a Christian. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you'd help us become the new creation. You can enable us to be through the power of your spirit. we ask that that would be happening to us today. Some of us need to just find ourselves more open to your truth than we have been. Maybe you have been telling us things that we don't want to hear or other people have been telling us things we don't want to hear. Father, some of us recognize that we have not been a very good friend to some other people. I pray that you would lead us to humbly repent for that. Father, I also, some of us are going to come to you and say, Lord, I'm not sure that I haven't been really coming at you, looking at you as a means to an end instead of making you the beauty, the pearl of my heart and life. And I pray that you would, by your spirit, enable us all to give ourselves to you in that way today. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
