TITLE: Real Faith and the Only Son
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 22:1-14
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: The Gospel According to Abraham
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/real-faith-and-the-only-son/

============================================================

This is Genesis 22, 1 through 14. Sometime later, God tested Abraham. He said to him, Abraham, here I am, he replied. Then God said, take your son, your only son, Isaac, whom you love, and go to the region of Moriah. Sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains I will tell you about. Early the next morning, Abraham got up and saddled his donkey. He took with him two of his servants and his son Isaac. When he had cut enough wood for the burnt offering, he set out for the place God had told him about. On the third day, Abraham looked up and saw the place in the distance. He said to his servants, stay here with the donkey while I and the boy go over there. We will worship and then we will come back to you. Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering and placed it on his son Isaac, and he himself carried the fire and the knife. As the two of them went on together, Isaac spoke up and said to his father Abraham, father? Yes, my son. Abraham replied, the fire and the wood are here, Isaac said. But where is the lamb for the burnt offering? Abraham answered, God himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, my son. And the two of them went on together. When they reached the place God had told him about, Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. He bound his son Isaac and laid him on the altar on top of the wood. Then he reached out his hand and took the knife to slay his son. But the angel of the Lord called out to him from heaven, Abraham, Abraham, here I am, he replied. Do not lay a hand on the boy, he said. Do not do anything to him. Now I know that you fear God because you have not withheld from me your son, your only son. Abraham looked up and there in a thicket he saw a ram caught by its horns. He went over and took the ram and sacrificed it as a burnt offering instead of his son. So Abraham called that place, the Lord will provide. And to this day it is said, on the mountain of the Lord it will be provided. The word of the Lord. We have been looking at the life of Abraham in the book of Genesis and this is the last look. This is the climax of his life. This is the most famous of all the incidents in his life. This story has a, is just generally acknowledged to be one of the high points of ancient narrative, one of the best told stories in all of ancient literature. And it's infuriating, it's absorbing, it's riveting. And as a result people have been spending centuries debating all the various multiple levels of meaning in the text. So here we are going to figure it all out right now. No, but I, uh, I suggest that we're going to really get, uh, the meat and the heart of what we're to get from this and what we're to learn from this and, uh, how we can be changed by this if we attend to three features, three features of the story. Uh, let's attend to the essence of the call, the horror of the test and the wonder of the lamb. Three things I think we're called to look at here is the essence of the call and then the horror of the test and the wonder of the lamb. Now here's the call. Verse two. Then God said, take your son, your only son, Isaac, whom you love and go to the region of Moriah, sacrifice him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains. I will tell you now notice the resonance, uh, with all the other calls that God has given to Abraham, including the original, the first one that we looked at weeks ago in Genesis 12. And, uh, it's the similarities are remarkable then. Then and now Abraham is called to go, see, go, leave the familiar, leave the comfortable, leave the stable, go. Secondly, he's called then and now to a place. I'll tell you later. I mean, even here it says, I want you to go to the region of Moriah and, and on one of the mountains, I'll tell you later about, I will tell you about future. In other words, he's not only called to go, but he's called to launch out and go without knowing where he's going, without knowing. land. And then thirdly, as always, he's not just called to go and to go to a place that I'll show you later, but he's called to offer up. And what he's, you know, in the very beginning, he was called to offer up, well, a lot. He was called to leave civilization, to leave the safety of it, to leave his status in it, to leave his culture, his family. And now, of course, he's called to offer up his son. And when God says, you are only son whom you love, he's not just rubbing it in. Only son means this is the only one left. You know, Ishmael, and that's another story which I can't recount now. Ishmael, his older son, is gone. This is his only son. This is the only bearer of the family inheritance. And therefore, in a sense, the only son means this is your only social hope. We'll get back to that. That's how families looked at things then. But not only that, the only son whom you love means that Isaac had become, not surprising, Abraham's emotional center. And so what God, again, is asking is that every source of finite security and significance be offered up. Now, in a minute, we're going to take a look at how this particular call was. There's particular issues and uniquenesses about it. But it seems like it would be fair at the end of a series that we've been doing on Abraham to ask us to stand back for a second and say, what have we learned about the call of God? What does that mean? What have we learned about the call of God? What is the essence of the call? Now, the reason we need to ask that question is because, for example, St. Paul, in Romans 8, says that God only justifies those he calls. And in Ephesians 1, he says to Christians, the way you're going to grow into maturity and greatness is to come to know more deeply the hope and the riches of your calling. Now, what is Paul claiming? Nothing less than this. First of all, Paul's saying, and the Bible says, that a Christian is not somebody who's just trying to live according to a certain ethical pattern. You're not a Christian unless you've heard God's call. God justifies those he calls. You're not a Christian unless you've heard the call of God. And more than that, it's not just, Paul says, and the Bible says, that the call comes once and that somehow gets you related to God. The call keeps coming. And that's not only how you get in, you might say, to God's presence, but it's how you grow by rehearing the call and coming to grips with it and to go deeper and grasp it more deeply. So the call is what makes you a Christian. The call is what grows you as a Christian. Well, then what is the essence of that? What does it mean? What does it mean to hear the call and what does it mean to rehear the call? Well, what it means to hear the call, my favorite illustration of this still is the testimony, as it were, of Dr. Martin Lloyd-Jones. Martin Lloyd-Jones became a very prominent British congregational minister. However, back in the 1920s, when he was in his late 20s, he was a rising young doctor. And things looked great. He was the assistant to the most prominent physician in the entire country. He was on the staff of St. Bart's Hospital in London. Everything looked great. His future was laid out. He had tremendous prospects and he was religiously indifferent. And then one day, one of the chiefs of medicine of that hospital, a man who, in a sense, had everything the world could offer. He had economically, socially, in every way. A man that, this man that he knew, was dating a woman and this woman died. And he walked into Lloyd-Jones' rooms, sort of dazed, and said, Can I sit by your fire? And sat down and looked at the fire, said nothing, and stared at the fire for two hours. And Lloyd-Jones says it shook him. Not because the man was acting inappropriately. Not because the man, I mean, it's perfectly appropriate. Grief is devastating. There was nothing wrong with what the man was doing. But Lloyd-Jones was shaken because he looked at a man who had everything the world had to offer. And he suddenly realized that even the most powerful, even the most prosperous, no matter who you were, the foundations of your security were radically vulnerable and radically fragile. And he says in his little testimony, When I watched that man staring in the fire, I suddenly realized the vanity of all human greatness. Now listen, plenty of people, plenty of people over the years have watched someone experience grief and been moved by it in various ways. Now listen, plenty of people over the years. Now listen, plenty of people, plenty of people over the years have watched someone experience grief and been moved by it in various ways. But when Lloyd-Jones watched that man stare into the fire, he heard the call. Because what is the call? The book of Hebrews tells us this is the call of Abraham. In Hebrews 11.8 it says, By faith Abraham, who was when called to go, obeyed and went, for he was looking toward the city with foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Now let me define the call. Let me give you the essence of the call. You begin to sense the call of God when you realize that without God there are no foundations. This world gives you no foundations. When that begins to come, many, many people have watched someone experience grief. But as Lloyd-Jones watched that man experience grief, knowing who he was, he began to hear the call. See, for example, let me give you an example. The average New Yorker finds Christianity ridiculous. You know why? Because the average New Yorker finds Christianity ridiculous because there are certain intellectual beliefs, concepts, that educated, intelligent New Yorkers all hold that makes Christianity implausible. And these intellectual concepts and beliefs seem very solid. They seem very established. Everybody knows. All my professors know. Everybody intelligent knows. Blah, blah, blah. And therefore, Christianity can't be true. And it seems very, very, very established and solid. Christianity is ridiculous. But what if you began, what if one day You got a hold of the New York Times editorial page from 1940 or 1950, not that long ago. And you looked at all of the intelligent, educated opinion that all intelligent New Yorkers back then knew, because that's what will show up on the editorial pages of the New York Times. And you realize that now it's embarrassing. The things that are written on the editorial pages of the New York Times that all intelligent, educated, sophisticated, intellectual elites knew back then are embarrassing. They're embarrassingly passé. We're embarrassed by them. And what if all of a sudden you realized, wait a minute. Back then, the reasons that everybody thought Christianity was ridiculous now are embarrassingly gone. Why would today be different? Has time stopped? All the things that all intelligent New Yorkers now know are right and true and obvious, and therefore Christianity can't be true, your adult grandchildren will laugh at you. They will be embarrassed by you. The people in the English classes, you know, 50 years from now, will be unhappy that you ever even existed. And that you said the things that you said. Or you don't believe that. Oh, you think this cultural might be seen. And as soon as you say, wait a minute, there are no intellectual foundations. Every objection to God's truth is passing away. What makes me think that now, you know, that I've arrived at a cultural moment, what's happening? You're starting to sense God's call, that there's no intellectual foundations. Or let me give you another example. There's no psychological foundations. That's what was going on with Lloyd-Jones. Friends, every person, whether you think you're religious or not, every person, whether you think you're religious or not, has something or some things that are so profoundly important to your self-image, your hope, and your joy, that they can be said to be the object of your soul's faith. No matter who you are, I don't care who you are, if you say, I'm not a religious person, there's no such thing as a truly non-religious person. There are certain things in your life, or if there's a certain thing, that if you don't have it, you cannot receive life joyfully. You have no meaning in life. You have no significance. You have no security. That's the object of your soul's deepest faith. But when you begin to realize, when you begin to realize that whatever that is, it's passing away. Life is after it. Life is going to strip me of it. It doesn't matter if it's my family. I can't keep my family together. It doesn't matter if it's my sex appeal. I can't hold on to that. It doesn't matter what it is. And when you begin to realize that everything that means the most to you, that keeps you from jumping off the bridge, is really like a sandbar in a rising river, when you begin to sense that, that there's no psychological foundations, there's no moral foundations, there's no intellectual foundations, and when you begin to realize, if there is no God, or if I don't have God, I've got nothing, and when that begins to dawn on you, you're hearing the call of God. And until that begins to dawn on you, you haven't. It doesn't matter if you're nice. It doesn't matter if you go to church or synagogue. It doesn't matter if you're religious. It doesn't matter if you believe the Christian doctrines. Have you sensed that? Abraham went out when he heard the call. Not knowing where he was going, because he sought the city with foundations. His builder and maker was God. Go out. And you say, well, but, all right, but then how does the call grow you? That's what it means to be a Christian, is to get... no security without God. There are no foundations. If you don't have God, you have no security, no foundations of any sort. Nothing's important compared to him. But that's also what grows you, and here's why. After you've been a Christian for a little while, you'll come to realize something. That maybe when you gave your life to Christ, you granted in general, in principle, that God was your only foundation. But you come to realize as you start to live the Christian life that functionally your heart hasn't changed too much. Functionally, the actual way you live, you may say, oh, God's love is my foundation. But actually, the way you live, certain forms of human approval, status, or power are your real functional foundation. And the fact is, you can never live the big life that Abraham lived, that we've been talking about these weeks. You can never live a life of justice and of courage and of wisdom and of self-control if you're always being devastated by criticism or devastated by failure or always living in fear because you're going to lose this or you're going to lose that. And here's what's going to happen. In a way, over and over, even if you have a fairly good life, life is going to come stripping away. Life is going to come and take away everything eventually that you put your hopes in. And every time something like that happens, every time a difficulty comes, it's God saying, listen to the call. You think, your heart says you have to have this to be happy. Your heart says you have to have this to be of importance. Your heart says you have to have this to have meaning in life, but all you need is me. That call will come back every time there's a difficulty in life. And when you answer that call and you shift your heart's functional rest and trust truly and you offer up the thing that life is pulling from you. You don't just say, no, no, no, and it's going to be ripped away from your hands anyway. Your looks are going to be ripped away. Your friends are going to be ripped away. Everything's going to be ripped away. It's going to go anyway. Why not offer it up? Why not say, my heart says I've got to have this, but you know, what I really need is you. And as you offer it up, more and more you will find nothing can push you around. You see, you got his approval, you have his status, you have his love. And then slowly, more and more, you turn into a man or a woman of greatness, a person who masters life instead of being mastered by life. And therefore, what is it mean to be a Christian? To hear the call of God, that there's no foundations here without God. And what does it mean to grow as a Christian? To continually rehear and grasp that call by offering up and making him first. And slowly, bit by bit, you become a person of greatness. And that's the essence of the call. Now, before moving on, which is important here to move on, because there's more to this passage than this. There's more to the passage than just offering up. A couple of practicals, just a couple of practicals for some of you. First of all, I'm constantly told this, asked this from people, so I thought I would just, you know, make a blanket statement. People ask, look, if I become a Christian, will I have to do this? Will I have to do that? Will I have to give up this? Will I have to give up that? I want to know. Or another way to put it is, I won't come to Christ unless you can tell me if I'm a Christian, am I going to be able to do this or that? But look, it God over and over and over says, go to a place I'll tell you later. God is continually saying, what I want is a commitment to follow me no matter what I tell you. See, if a person says, I'll be happy to come to the biblical God as long as he doesn't tell me I can't do this. Can I give you a working definition of God? God is the non-negotiable thing in your life. That's your God. The absolute non-negotiable, the absolutely sacred. And when you say, I'll come to the biblical God as long as he doesn't ask me to stop this or start this, you're not coming to God at all. You're not coming to him as God. You see, what you're saying is, this is my God and as long as this biblical thing person that you want me to meet, I'll be happy to pray and deal with him as long as he helps me get to my real God. Unless you're willing to say to the God of Abraham, I will go out not knowing quite where I'm going to land. Whatever I discern is your will, I will do it unconditionally. Unless you're willing to say that, you're not going to him at all. The second thing we better notice is the Abraham and Isaac story, if it tells you nothing else, it tells you that sometimes the God who's trying to save you feels like he's trying to kill you. Elizabeth Elliot years ago said it dawned on her one day she was visiting. sheep farm in northern Wales, and one day she saw the shepherd pick up the sheep and take it into a vat of antiseptic, which it had to be in if it wasn't going to be eaten alive by all sorts of parasites and so on, and put the sheep into the vat. And the sheep would come up, and then the shepherd pushed down the head and had to keep it totally up, and the sheep pushed it down. And she's saying, now I wonder what it's like to feel like your shepherd is trying to kill you. And she says, oh, I know. I mean, if the Abraham and Isaac story tells us one thing, it's that sometimes that your shepherd, who's trying to save you, will feel like to you like he's trying to kill you. Sometimes. Now, the problem is that this is not simply tell us about all the calls of God in general. There are some distinct things about this particular call that are unusually and uniquely horrible. And there have been a lot of people who have really wrestled, deeply wrestled, with this particular test, the horror of this test. See, the traditional approach has been like this. The traditional approach of the church, in fact, is also, by the way, this story is also in the Koran. And the traditional approach to not just of the church, but also of Islam is this, that the moral of this story is, no matter how outrageous and how crazy the command, do it. The moral of the story is obey perfectly. Obey God absolutely perfectly. And no matter how crazy and how immoral and how stupid the command, do it anyway. Now, one person who showed, now, by the way, I'm all for unconditional obedience. Didn't I just give you an exhortation? But there's a problem with reading the text as that only. It's a problem with reading the text only horizontally, as if this is a model for how, that basically the moral of the story is always obey God, no matter how crazy and how outrageous it is. If that's, it's all about Abraham's obedience. If the story is only about Abraham's obedience, we've got a problem. Saren Kierkegaard brought this out a few years ago in his famous little book called Fear and Trembling, which he wrote in 1843. Saren Kierkegaard was very irritated that everybody around him would always say how inspiring the story of Abraham and Isaac was, when it just terrified him to death. It created in him fear and trembling. And to show why he felt that people weren't really listening to the story is he, in the book, he imagines a minister preaching a sermon on how the moral of his story is, no matter how outrageous, in fact, the most outrageous, the most horrific commands of God. If you do it, then you show that you really are in submission to him. And he imagines that somebody is, a man is sitting out there in the congregation listening to this sermon and says, okay, and goes home and kills his son. And Kierkegaard imagines the next Sunday, that same minister thunders against the terrible wicked deed that's happened in our town this week. And what kind of, you know, what kind of father, what kind of monster would do such a thing? And Kierkegaard wants to know if, if that man is condemned, why wasn't Abraham condemned? See, if that man is put in prison for what he did, why wasn't Abraham put in prison for what he did, at least what he was trying to do? And the reason Kierkegaard says that, he's right, he's showing that at the strictly ethical level, the story doesn't actually work. And ever since Kierkegaard, there's an awful lot of people who say, I can't handle this. I hate this story. Some people say that God telling, you know, Abraham to murder his son, that what God, that Abraham failed the test because Abraham should have said, forget it. Kierkegaard's resolution of it, he says, well, Kierkegaard's resolution is that God is calling every person to basically live spiritually an insane life, to do absolutely crazy and nutty things. And that's what it means to be a Christian, to make these incredible leaps in the dark. In other words, Kierkegaard points out the fact that the inspirational approach, you know, isn't that right? We should just all do whatever God says. The inspirational approach to this story actually doesn't get at the real horror of it. But Kierkegaard and friends, people who say this is a terrible story, haven't really grasped the true horror of the test. And the reason they haven't grasped the true horror of the test is because they're not actually, they don't know what this command actually meant to Abraham in his historical context. In the last 15 or 20 years, to my delight, that some of the most best and most learned and critical commentaries that have been coming out have been shedding light on what this command would have meant to Abraham. to mean to us. Why? What the commentaries are telling us is two things. First of all, God does not tell Abraham to murder his son. If God basically says, I want you to just do the most outrageous thing, I just want you to murder your son, why didn't he just walk into the tent and stab him? He didn't ask for that. He calls him to offer him up as an offering. And secondly, what we have to realize, because he asked him to offer up his firstborn as an offering, the command to Abraham's ears was not incomprehensible and crazy and nutty. If you want to understand the true horror of this test, you have to understand the meaning of the firstborn. The meaning of the firstborn. What do I mean? John Levinson, Jewish scholar, professor of ancient Near East in Harvard University a few years ago, wrote a book called The Death and Resurrection of the Beloved Son. And in it he explains that we individualistic modern people have trouble understanding the spiritual symbolic significance of the firstborn. Let me help. Drawing from him. First of all, if you want to understand how Abraham heard this, you have to understand that ancient cultures were not individualistic. Look, we have a tendency to think of our hopes and dreams are of individual success, of individual prosperity. But back then, nobody thought that way. Your hopes and your dreams were for the family's success, right? The family's prosperity. We didn't think as individuals. We thought as a family. Second thing you have to realize and know something about is the iron law of primogeniture. Now, the law of primogeniture was something that was universally practiced by ancient cultures. And the law of primogeniture, which means this, that the oldest, the firstborn, got all the marbles. The firstborn got virtually the entire inheritance. And here's why. Because a family had a certain amount of land and a certain amount of wealth. And if it was divided into three, with three kids, or into four, or into twelve, or whatever, it was divided, the family would immediately lose its status and its place in the community. And therefore, it was the firstborn that got everything. And then that firstborn had to be a benefactor for everyone else in the family. And that's how the family kept its place. Now, what's intriguing about this is some scholars have pointed out that the book of Genesis, in the book of Genesis, God is continually undermining the law of primogeniture. Notice, he works with Abel, not Cain. He ends up working with Isaac, not Ishmael. He ends up working with Jacob, not Esau. So the Bible is not giving any way, any kind of blanket confirmation to this kind of hierarchical understanding of society. But, all ancient cultures did look to the firstborn as the ultimate hope of the family. And therefore, God laid down a symbolic structure, building it on the firstborn, to say something that all ancient cultures can understand. And if we do a little bit of work, which we're doing right now, we can too. Because what God says over and over to the Hebrews, over and over in the scriptures, John Levinson points this out, is that God says the life of the firstborn is mine. The firstborn cattle are always sacrificed to God. The firstfruits of the grain are always sacrificed to God. But more amazingly, God over and over and over in the scriptures says, the life of your firstborn is forfeit. For example, the Passover, God brings down his sword of judgment on the Egyptians for their oppression and their wickedness and the enslavement and so on. Whose life is forfeit in that act of judgment? The firstborn. And during the Passover, the Jewish firstborn, their life is also forfeit. God says, they're going to die too. If I bring my sword of judgment down, they're going to die too, unless a lamb is slain. And you say, okay, but that was very interesting and symbolic. But after the Passover, God continues to say it. It's in Exodus 22 and in Numbers chapter 3 and in Numbers chapter 8. Over and over, he says, the life of the firstborn is forfeit unless you redeem it. Unless there's a sacrifice made. Unless there's a payment made. Five shekels. What is all that? Well, you see, the ancients would understand what we don't. Abraham realized, everybody understood, that when God says, every time God said, the life of the firstborn is forfeit, what he was really trying to say is, there's a debt of sin that every family owes to me. If this makes no sense to you, if this command makes no sense to you, I want you to realize it did make sense to Abraham. Listen carefully. If God had said, Abraham, if Abraham had heard a voice that said, Abraham, go kill Sarah, then I'll know you obey me. never done it. He would have said, I'm hallucinating. And God wouldn't have said it, because he would be asking him to do murder. But when he says, Abraham, offer up your firstborn, what he is saying to Abraham, Abraham would have understood. That's what the scholars are saying. This is not incomprehensible, because Abraham knew what the ancient Hebrews knew, and that is, there is a God of justice. All human beings fail to live according to that law of justice. We all live self-centered lives. It's the reason why the world is the mess it's in, and a God of justice can't overlook it. And there's a debt that every family owes to justice, and there's a debt that every human being owes, the debt of sin. And in a family-oriented, not individualistic society, the forfeiture of the firstborn was God's way of saying, no one is righteous, no, not one. There's a debt of sin that everyone has to pay. And when God says, offer up your son Isaac, Abraham realized that God was calling in his debt. And therefore, he realized the real horror. See, now, here's the problem. People say, well, then, what did Abraham feel as he was going up the mountain? Was he saying, oh, this is fine? No, absolutely not. Was he being torn apart? Yes. Was he being confused? Yes. Was he in infinite pain and agony? Yes. But why? Now you're in a position to know the real horror. Hebrews chapter 11 explains it. He says, by faith, Abraham, when God tested him, offered up Isaac, he who had received the promises, was about to sacrifice his one and only son, even though God had said to him, it's through Isaac that the world will be blessed. Now you got it? Listen. The horror was this. The command of God apparently contradicts the promise of God. But the command of God is just. There's a debt of sin that needs to be paid. But the promise of God was that through Isaac, the world would be saved. And so here is, what is Abraham thinking? He is saying, what? How can the God of command also be a God of promise? How can a God of holiness also be a God of grace? How can the God, who rightly can call in this debt of service, this debt of sin, also be the God who says, through Isaac, all the nations of the world will be blessed. How's this going to happen? What's going to happen? That's the horror. In fact, the old commentary, the old German commentator, Gerhard von Rad, puts it pretty interestingly. When he puts it like this, he says, one can only answer all of the scruples people have about this narrative by saying that this narrative is about something much more frightening than child sacrifice. It has to do with a road that God is calling Abraham into. He is calling Abraham into utter God-forsakenness. For in this test, God is confronting Abraham with the question of whether he's willing to give up God's very gift of promise. God appears to want to remove the salvation begun by himself from history. So, what's actually happening is, what's the real horror of the test, how can a holy God be gracious? How can a gracious God be holy? If God is not just, what hope is there for the world? Because what are we going to do about evil? But if God is just, what hope is there for us, for me and you, Abraham and Isaac? The real horror. How will God be both just and justifier of Abraham? How will God be both the holy God of the command? Because Abraham, that's why he's going up the hill. He knows he owes this. And the gracious God of promise. What's the answer? The answer is, as we said, the wonder of the lamb. Every commentator, every analyst, everybody who reads this thing says that the emotional peak, the most poignant spot in the whole narrative, is this fascinating place where the narrator slows down the action. You know how fast it's going? Take your son, your only son, whom you will go early the next morning, he got up, he saddled his donkey, he took him. Then suddenly in verse 6, it slows down. Abraham took the wood for the burnt offering. He placed it on his son Isaac. He himself carried the fire and the knife. Notice that? All the dangerous stuff he keeps. See the tenderness? As two of them went on together, Isaac spoke up and said to his father, and this is the only place in all the Bible where we hear Abraham and Isaac speaking to each other. Father, look how slow the narrator, look at the narrator, slow motion. Yes, my son, the fire and the wood are here, but where's the lamb for the burnt offering? And Abram answered. Now what did Abram answer? See, what pushed Abram up that mountain? mountain saying, I can do it? Because this is all about my obedience. I can do it. I must do it. I will do it. No, that's not in his heart. That's not what's driving him up that terrible mountain. What's driving him up that terrible mountain? What's giving him the ability to go up? God will do it. God will see to it. God will provide the lamb. What is he saying? He is saying, I don't know, Isaac. Do you know what word he uses here? It's a literal word. He literally says, the word for provide is the Hebrew word to see or to see to. And here's what Abram's saying. My son, you can't see the lamb. And oh, my son, I can't see the lamb. But God will see to the lamb. And what he's really saying is, I don't know how God's going to be both holy and gracious. I don't know how God is going to have the debt of sin paid. That's why we're going up this mountain and still be the God of promise who says, through Isaac, will the world be saved? I don't know. No. But he'll do it. See, that's what's getting him up the hill. Not I can do it. I must do it. I will do it. God will do it. God will provide. Not I will provide. The name of the mountain is not in the mountain of the Lord it will be obeyed. The name of the mountain is in the mountain of the Lord it will be provided. In the mountain of the Lord, not I will do it. In the mountain of the Lord, God will do it. He doesn't even know what could possibly be. But he says, God will have to find some way to both pay the price of sin and be the God of promise and grace. Well, we know what Abraham only could intuit. We know what Abraham could only intuit. What do we know? Well, first of all, we know that Abraham's lamb could not pay the price of sin for his family. Abraham's little lamb, Isaac, couldn't have really paid the price of sin for the family. And then, of course, we have the ram that's caught in the bushes. But what does the book of Hebrews say? Well, common sense could tell you this, but we also have the Bible. Blood of bulls and goats does not atone for sin. Well, then why did Abraham have to do it? Second Chronicles has this fascinating little spot where it tells us that the mountains and the hills around Jerusalem, the place where Jerusalem was eventually built, would name the mountains of Moriah. It means that the temple, it means that Calvary were part of the mountains of Moriah. And so here's what we know. The question is, why did not Abraham have to bring his hand down on his son? How could God be both a God of just justice and command and a God of grace and promise? Because centuries later, the father led his beloved son up into the same mountains. And the one and only son was put on the wood again. Think about that. And Edmund Clowney, my old teacher, who helped me understand this passage best, this is what he said, and when the ultimate beloved child cried, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? The father paid the price in his silence. You know, Paul deliberately applies the words of Genesis 22 to Jesus. You know, Romans 8.32, where it says, where Paul says, he who did not spare his own son, but gave him up for us all, how will he not also along with him graciously give us all things? And here is the real answer, not just the theological issue, but the practical issue we started with. Not just the theological issue of how is it that God could be both the just God of the command and the God of the promise. This is how it was done. First of all, this is the answer to that. Abraham could not have walked up that mountain as a traditional moralistic person. Traditional moralism says, if you obey perfectly, God will bless you. If he believed that he was a God of justice only, a God who was not a God of grace, but a God of justice only, he would have never gone up. He would have just given up. I've got to kill my son. He would have given up. You know that. He couldn't have gone up the mountain without hope. But, on the other hand, a modernist, a person who doesn't believe in the depth of sin, he wouldn't have gone, if he was that, if he believed only in a God of love, but not of holiness, he would have never gone up that mountain. He would have said, I don't owe you this. If he believed in a God of love, but not of holiness, he would have never gone up the mountain. If he believed in the God of justice only, not a God of love, he would have never gone up the mountain. You need hope and duty. You need a sense of, this is what I owe, and a sense that this is a God of incredible love and incredible hope. You need both to be a great heart. And it's only in the cross that God could be both. Do you understand that? Bye-bye. Bye-bye. cross, if you don't believe in what Jesus Christ did, if you don't believe in that ultimate sacrifice, you're not going to go up all the mountains and there's going to be a lot of mountains in front of you over the years. You've got to have both a sense of duty that the moralist has, but the modernist doesn't, and a sense of love and grace that the modernist sort of has, but the moralist doesn't. But it's only in the cross that you can become a great heart. And not only does the lamb, the true lamb, the lamb that Abraham knew must be out there somewhere that God would provide that we see answer the theological issue. It also answers the practical issue. And here's the practical issue. How can you really become this great person? In other words, I gave you a scenario in the first point, and here was the first point. Over and over again, I said, life is coming at you. It's already happening. If you're old enough, you certainly see it. And if you're unlucky enough, it happens even when you're in your teens. But eventually the world comes and takes away everything. Everything that you say, this is my worth, this is my significance, this is my joy, everything will be taken from you bit by bit by bit. And I said, what you have to do is you have to turn to God and say, you're my hope, you're my love, you're my approval, right? How do you do that? I mean, that sounds great. The preacher tells you, and you, oh, that's nice. How do you really do that? It doesn't happen by telling yourself, I've got to trust God. I can get up that mountain. I will get up that mountain. I will be perfect. That's not how it works. Let me show you how it works. Why do we have this story? We have this story that's pointed back to from in Hebrews and Romans so that we can have some true human understanding of what the father did with the son. If Abraham had been at the foot of Calvary, the moment that Jesus died, you know what he would have done? He would have taken the words of God to him in verse 12 and turned them around. And he would have looked up at the father and he would have said, now I know, now I know, now I know that you love me because you did not withhold your son, your only son whom you loved from me. How do you know that God loves you and values you and delights in you so much that you can really rest in that and be free from being the enslavement to people, enslavement to situations, enslavement to circumstances? How can you know? How can you know he loves you like that? Not abstractly, not by saying I'm just going to trust in him. By the spirit, you've got to see what Abraham and Isaac going up the mountain was a picture of the price the father paid at Calvary. And it's got to move you and it's got to change you and you've got it from the bottom of your heart with the power of the spirit to say, now I know. Now I know. Now I know that you love me because you gave your son. You did not withhold your son, your only son whom you love from me. You'll never be able to live like Abraham by trying. You have to first believe in the one to whom Abraham points, the one who went out into utter God-forsakenness. You'll never be like Abraham and saying, I'm going to offer up all these pseudo-salvations unless you see the ultimate offering up for you and it move you and it change you organically. Now you know. Let us pray. We thank you, Father, that in this very famous story, most famous story, it's up there with Jonah and the whale and the other stories that so many people know from Sunday school and just from even the popular culture, but in it is locked all the secret we need, all the power and mystery we need to face anything. We thank you, Father, that you and your son were the only ones who ever really had the full horror of the test come down on them and you passed. And you passed for us. We thank you, Father, you walked up into those mountains with your only beloved son. You laid him on the wood and there was no way anyone could stop you. And you knew it and you did it. We thank you, Father, that you do that for us. And we pray that the knowledge of that would transform us. Help us to see, like Abraham, that you are both a God of command and promise. If we don't know both of them, then the meaning of the sacrifice of your son will never change us and make us into the great hearts that Abraham was. We pray that you would affect all this in our lives by the Holy Spirit and we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
