TITLE: Real Confidence and the Blazing Torch
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 15:1-21
TOPICS: Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: The Gospel According to Abraham
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/real-confidence-and-the-blazing-torch/

============================================================

as if indeed you can count them. Then he said to him, So shall your offspring be. Abram believed the Lord, and he credited to him as righteousness. He also said to him, I am the Lord who brought you out of Ur of the Chaldeans to give you this land to take possession of it. But Abram said, O sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it? So the Lord said to him, Bring me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon. Abram brought all of these to him, cut them in two, and arranged the halves opposite each other. The birds, however, he did not cut in half. Then birds of prey came down on the carcasses, but Abram drove them away. And as the sun was setting, Abram fell into a deep sleep, and a thick and dreadful darkness came over him. And then the Lord said to him, Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own. They will be enslaved and mistreated 400 years, but I will punish the nation they serve as slaves, and afterward they will come out with great possessions. You, however, will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old age. In the fourth generation, your descendants will come back here, for the sin of the Amorites has not yet reached its full measure. And when the sun had set and darkness had fallen, a smoking fire pot with a blazing torch appeared and passed between the pieces. On that day, the Lord made a covenant with Abram and said, To your descendants I give this land, from the river of Egypt to the great river, the Euphrates, the land of the Kenites, the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites, Hittites, Perizzites, Raphaites, Amorites, Canaanites, Girgashites, and the Jebusites. And this is God's word. Now we're looking, over a period of several weeks, at the narratives in the book of Genesis that cover the life of Abraham. Why? There's a great line in Macbeth, typically vivid Shakespearean line. It goes like this. Each new morn, new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face. Now we don't want to believe that, but that is absolutely true. That is life. Every morning the dawn breaks, the dawn breaks, and there are thousands more ruined lives. Thousands more cries of death, of disease, of despondency, of disillusionment. Thousands. And even if you have up to now led a charmed life and a sheltered life, it is inevitable that one of those mornings it's going to be you. If it hasn't already. Each new morn, new widows howl. Every morning. Now aren't you glad you came to Redeemer to be today? How inspiring to be told that that's life. These things are going to come at you. They are going to come at you. And the real question is, are you going to be mastered by them? Or are you going to master them? Are they going to master you? Or are you going to master them? The reason that there's three whole world religions, Christianity and Judaism and Islam, three whole world religions that look to Abraham as a model for living, is because it was almost as if he had an anchor to his life. That no matter how much he was buffeted and beaten, the waves, the wind, you know, use that metaphor, he held firm. Oh, he was buffeted, but he held firm. And he stuck to his purposes and he stuck to his principles. And that's the reason why we look at him. Because the real question is, how can we have a life like that? Life's going to come after us like that. Some morning it's going to be you if it hasn't already been you. And it's very often it's more than one morning. Each new morn. So how are we going to live a life like this? That's why we're looking at Abraham. And today we're looking at a particular obstacle to living, the kind of masterful life that Abraham lived and that we would like to live. And that obstacle is doubt. In fact, in the Macbeth quote, it's even hinted at, each new morn, new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face. And I think that's probably a reference to the fact that in the midst of all the pain and misery of life, it's just very natural to say, how can you believe in a God? I mean, it raises doubts. And all of us struggle with doubt. How can we trust God? How can we move forward? can we live by faith? Doubt. Doubt's a huge problem. And I would even go so far as to say that everybody, whether you're inside the church or outside the church or in some kind of transition between inside and outside, all of us are hampered in the way we live because we don't understand or do not know how to deal with doubt, spiritual doubt. But this text, first of all, tells us about the reality of doubt, helps us understand the nature of it. Then secondly, shows us how God deals with doubt. And then, so what I'd like to do is I'd like to say, first of all, let's look at this text under three headings. One is we'll learn about the reality of doubt. Secondly, God's deconstruction of doubt. How does God take it apart? And then thirdly, we'll just ask, how can we apply this to our own situation? The reality of doubt, the deconstruction of doubt, and how can we apply it to our own situation? First, the reality of doubt and the nature and almost we can even look at the structure of doubt in the first eight verses. What we see in these first eight verses is pretty interesting. Abram's scared. That's how it starts. See verse one and two. After this, after what? God comes and says, don't be afraid. If you, chapter 14, which those of you who are coming each week know that we skipped chapter 14. We're not going to get there, but in chapter 14, Abraham has had to rescue his nephew Lot from four marauding kings or chieftains, really, tribal chieftains. And he rescued Lot militarily and he attacked them and rescued his nephew and their family. But now he's scared. What about retaliation? Who's going to come back and attack me? So God shows up and says, Abram, do not be afraid. I am your shield and your very great reward. Now look, if you look carefully, there's something very notable here. It says, after this, the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision. Now this term that's probably, if you've read the Bible, it seems very familiar, but I want you to realize it's unique in the Pentateuch. The Pentateuch is the first five books of the Old Testament, the Hebrew scriptures, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy. And that term never shows up except here. Later on, it shows up all the time with the prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and so on, because it's talking about a revelation of tremendous clarity, a vision, a voice, an audible, clear, rare, firm, overwhelmingly obvious and clear revelation from God. Only Abram gets it in the whole, whatever this is, and it's a little mysterious, but whatever this is, Abram's getting something that nobody else in the first five books gets. So God comes in with this very clear, audible revelation. It says, fear not. I am your shield and your great reward. And what does Abram, how does he respond? Does he say, oh boy, now I feel better. This is, I was losing my grip, but this really helps. I really appreciate it. No. Abraham spews out stuff that's obviously been in there. He says, and basically he says, uh, since you brought up this term, this idea of reward, that child you promised me, where is it? Where is it? So the response to this incredible revelation is doubt. And so what does God do? Look at verse four. Then the word of the Lord came to him essentially again and said, don't worry. And he, and he takes him outside. And this is one of the most loving and wonderful, encouraging assurances that God ever gives anybody almost. I mean, you know, I don't want to be too American and chummy about this, but you can almost see God is takes him outside, almost see God's arm around him. He says, look at the sky, look at the stars. Can you count them? Of course you can count them. That's how great the nation will be. That's how influential the salvation that I bring through your loins will be. That's what I'm going to do through you. And verse six tells us that at least momentarily, look, Abram believed the Lord and he credited to him his righteousness. But then look, verse seven, he also said to him, he goes on and says, I'm the Lord who brought you out of her, the Chaldeans. And don't forget, I'm going to give you this land. And verse eight, but Abram said, Oh, sovereign Lord, how can I know? How can I know? I'm just filled with doubts. I don't, how can I be certain? How can I know? Now what's the first thing we're learning here? It should be obvious. First of all, we're learning the inevitability of doubt. Think about this. man who's deep into a life of faith. He's already launched out. If you've been with us this far, you know he's already launched out. He's already left everything, his country, his culture, his family. He's left everything in trust on the promise of God. And also, here's the man who half the human race, essentially, three world religions, looks to as a paragon of faith, who's just had, first of all, a word of the Lord, a clear, audible revelation. And he's filled with doubt. So how do you think you're going to do? Probably you're never going to get past it. That means there will always be to some level in anyone's life doubt. There has to be. Doubt, in a sense, is a problem that never goes away. It is an inevitable thing. But look at this incredible balance that the Bible, here and everywhere, has what an incredibly nuanced, balanced view of doubt. Do you see when Abraham twice, you know, in spite of these wonderful revelations, twice, Abraham says, but how do I know? How can I really try? How can I know? I'm filled with doubts. Does God say, how dare you question me? Never. Never. And yet, does God say, well, you know, that's the way it is. You know, we all live with doubt and we can't help it. No. On the one hand, God does not condemn. On the other hand, he challenges it. He keeps coming after him. There is a remarkable balance. It's very much like Jesus and Thomas. Thomas says, I won't believe unless I can see the nail prints. If that was a sinful thing, if that was a wrong thing, if that was a thing to be condemned, why did Jesus give it to him? And yet, when Jesus gives it to him, he almost rebukes him and says, okay, now let's move on. He says, stop doubting and believe. There's this fascinating balance in which doubt is never encouraged and yet doubters are completely welcomed and addressed. In fact, another way to put it is, this is completely different than either the liberal mind's sensibility or the conservative mind's sensibility with regard to doubt. What's the conservative mind's sensibility? The conservative person thinks of doubt as a complete evil and thinks of doubt as a total failure. And the conservative mindset creates communities, yes, creates churches in which no one is allowed to talk about doubts. No one is allowed to express intellectual doubts or emotional struggles with fundamentals of the Christian faith. And when you create a church like that, you create a community like that, you're telling the world you can't be emotionally or intellectually authentic and be a Christian. Tons and tons of people have been just so turned off. They see how incredibly unattractive that is. And not only that, but inside those churches, people who do have the doubts are so frightened by them and feel so self-condemned by them and can never actually get any answers. What if Abram said here, oh, fine, I don't have any doubt. He never would have had the second half of this chapter, which is one of the greatest things that has ever been done in history. There is no greater chapter talking about the grace and gospel in the whole Bible, nothing in Romans that goes beyond this. What if Thomas had said, oh, that's okay, I'll just, in other words, when you express doubt and say, my faith is weak, instead of God saying, how dare you, God says, then we, this is the way to give you a masterful life. I will give you more. I will come to you. You see, so on the one hand, the conservative approach to doubt is, you know, it's not right. God is not condemning them. God is dealing with them. On the other hand, the liberal approach to doubt, the liberal approach to doubt is to say it is intellectually sophisticated and it's emotionally mature to always be in doubt about everything, to be skeptical, to be cynical, to have unresolved, eternal doubt about everything. But we all know, do we not, that that's not true. You can't be completely dubious about everything. You know, Bat Boy, the new Broadway musical. Everybody, all the reviewers loved it. And here's why, because it was so deeply cynical. This is New Yorker review. It says, the musical is one of ironies, not idealism, where plot is just the history of abdications, and song extols only the emptiness of all standard creeds, Christianity, family, community, love, redemption, hopefulness, and even Broadway musicals themselves. It is a jejune vision of gleeful nihilism, but at least the writers have the courage of their lack of convictions. Now, the reasons because this is what is considered intellectual integrity and emotional maturity in New York. It's to be cynical about everything, it's to deconstruct everything, it's to doubt everything. But we all know, right, if you've been at Redeemer, you know this, if you can doubt everything, what you're really doing is you're giving yourself an exemption that's not fair. You can only doubt everything if you refuse to doubt your doubt itself. You can only be cynical about everything without being cynical about your cynicism. You say, what do you mean by being cynical about your cynicism? Well, at least be open to the possibility that what you've got here is gutlessness. That underneath all the veneer of cynicism and all the veneer of being so dubious and so skeptical and so sophisticated is really a cowardice. If you're not even open to that, if you haven't even tried that on, if you haven't even looked at that, then you are giving everybody else something that you're refusing to give it to yourself. You can dish it out, but you can't take it. God doesn't do the liberal thing of saying, that's fine. He goes after it. God doesn't do the conservative thing of saying, how dare you doubt. Instead, he says, doubters are welcome because honest admissions of weakness and difficulty and struggle is the way you become Abrahams. Now, if you are willing to start to look at your doubt, which New Yorkers don't want to do, but if you're willing to start looking at your doubt, there's even one more thing I think you learn here about the way doubt is structured before we move on to see how God deconstructs it. And what that is, is there's really, from what I can tell, two components to doubt. You can see it in the two objections. The first objection, look at verse 4. Pardon me, not verse 4, but the first objections in 2 and 3. He says, since you have given me no children, what can you give me? But look at the second expression of doubt in verse 8. O sovereign Lord, how can I know that I will gain possession of it? You notice the dominant words? Here's the two problems we have. In fact, even under the intellectual doubts, when people say, I can't believe in Christianity because I don't believe in miracles, I respectfully ask you to look underneath even the most intellectual kinds of doubts. There's two components. One is, we're saying, how can I know about God? How can I know about you? A lot of people don't want to believe in God because if they do believe in God, then they might have to actually lose control of God. A lot of us who do believe in God are still scared of that. We don't know we can trust Him. We don't know that we can just give away control. We don't know that we can do that. We're afraid He's going to make us do things that we don't want to do. Or do things that will hurt us. Or do things that will give us empty and miserable lives. The first component of doubt is, how can I know about you? But there's another problem. There's another thing that keeps us from entering into a relationship with God and living confident lives. The other aspect of doubt is, oh Lord, how can I know about me? See, that's the other side. One reason people are afraid of moving out into a relationship with God and they actually hide behind a lot of intellectual doubts is because they don't trust God. But there's another reason why a lot of people, I think, even hide behind the intellectual doubts and are afraid to move out into a relationship with God. And that is because they say, I don't know about me. I think I could never keep it up. I will let it. I can't see myself as the kind of person that can inherit this sort of thing. I'm scared of faith. I'm scared of trusting you. A, because of I don't know about you. And B, because I don't know about me. And those are the two aspects of doubt. And God deals with them in the second half of the chapter. In an utterly stunning way. In an utterly amazing way. Now, we're going to have to do a little bit of background if we're going to understand how stunning it is. Look. Verse 10. Verse 9. So the Lord said. Okay, see, no matter what he's doing, no matter what he says, Abraham's still filled with doubt. What are we going to do? So in verse 9, the Lord says, Bring me a heifer, a goat, and a ram, each three years old, along with a dove and a young pigeon. Abraham brought all these to him, cut them in two, arranged the halves opposite each other. The birds, however, did not cut in half. Now, notice something interesting. God doesn't tell them what to do with it. He just does it. Which means that as soon as God says, go get some animals, Abraham immediately knows what God's talking about. God and Abram both know what's going on, but we don't. And here's why. As soon as God said, go get some animals, Abraham knew that God was about to make a cut. going to understand this, we have to realize that in some ways we're different than they are, in other ways we're not. We live in a written culture. We live in not an oral culture, but a written culture, a writing culture. And we have contracts, too. And what if, imagine I'm building a house, and I meet a contractor, and the contractor says, I will give you X number of bricks for X number of dollars. And I say, all right, great. And three months later, he comes by with the bricks, and he charges me quite a bit more. He says, oh, I'm sorry. They went up, or this happened, or that happened. And I'm so upset, and my friends say, you idiot. You should have made him write it down. If he puts it on paper, and if he signs it, then you can go to a judge. Then there's consequences for breaking the promise, see? See, in a written culture, you've got to have it written down. Then there's consequences. Then there's a penalty. And so what I should have done is I should have said, when I met him, I should have said, oh, great contractor. How can I know that you will give me X number of bricks for X number of dollars? How can I deal with my doubts about you? How can I live in peace? How can I sleep in peace in Manhattan? And thinking about you, I mean, so, oh, great contractor, how can I know? How can I deal with my doubts? And the contractor says, I know. I will sign. And when I sign a contract, that means that I am saying I'm willing to pay a penalty should I fail to fulfill my promise. I'm willing to pay a penalty. I make myself accountable to pay a penalty if I don't do my promise. And if I see him do that, then I say, ah, okay. Abraham lived in a written, not in a written culture, but an oral culture, a storytelling culture. And therefore, the way they made contracts was they acted out ritually. And they dramatized the consequence of breaking the covenant. See, in one way, they're just like us. In other words, you've got to find a way to make the promiser accountable to pay the penalty. Then we can know. Then we can know he's going to come through or she's going to come through. Then we can know, right? But what was the animals about? Well, here's what the animals are about. Now, in Jeremiah chapter 34, I think it is, verse 18, there's another cryptic spot. But I think when we put the two together, you'll start to understand. This is what the Lord says. You have not obeyed me. The men who violated my covenant and have not fulfilled the terms they made, I will treat like the calf they cut in two and walk between the pieces. I will hand over to their enemies. I will hand them over to their enemies, and their dead bodies will become food for the birds of the air and the beasts of the earth. Now, you see what's going on? Here's how you made a covenant in those days. You cut an animal in half, you walk between the pieces, and what you were doing is you were ritually identifying with the pieces, and you were actually acting out the consequence, the penalty of breaking the contract. And what you were saying is, oh, if I do not do all the words that I am saying today, may I be cut off, may I be cut up, may my flesh be strewn out on the desert to be the food of birds and beasts of the wild. So what you're actually doing is, you're going through, you're identifying it, and you're acting out. But what you're doing is exactly the same as the contractor is doing, and that is, you are making yourself accountable to pay the penalty for failure to fulfill your promise. Now, this is pretty effective. Next time you build a house, suggest your contractors do this instead of signing a piece of paper, and you'll probably get better service. In fact, it was so effective. Think about it. In fact, it was so effective that it was actually something that it was always done when a great king entered into relationships with vassals, servants. And it was so, by the way, it was so prevalent to do it this way in the Near East that even in the Hebrew here, even in the place where it says they made a covenant, look at verse 18. You see where it says they made a covenant, on that day the Lord made a covenant? That's not literally what it says in the Hebrew. Literally in the Hebrew it says, on that day they cut a covenant. The term in Hebrew for making a covenant is kerat barith, to cut a covenant. Because cutting was of the essence of making a covenant. did a malediction. The promiser took on the covenant curse and said, if I do not do everything I'm saying today, may this be true of me. Maybe. But though God was willing at this point to enter into this kind of cultural form, it was a Near Eastern form that everybody understood. When Abraham heard about bringing the animals, he said, great, this is fast. This is going to be terrific. He understood immediately what God was going to do. But when God enters into a human cultural form, he also transforms it. He enters in, but he transforms it. And two things that God did in verse 17 and 18, two stunning things, must have utterly astounded Abraham. And you know what? There's no more doubts at the end of this. There's no more spewing out of how can I know at the end of this. This finally does it. And what are these two stunning things? The first stunning thing is who passes between the pieces. Verse 17, when the sun had set and the darkness had fallen, a smoking fire pot with a blazing torch appeared. Now, what in the world does that mean? First of all, if you go back up to verse 12, let's explain what the setting is. It says, as the sun was setting, Abram fell into his sleep and a thick and dreadful darkness came over him. Now, that's not quite what it looks like. First of all, notice the word dreadful. It literally means when it was getting dark physically outside, a darkness of dread fell on him. A darkness of horror. Dreadful darkness doesn't just mean, oh, it was the darkness was dreadful. It's talking about as the sun was setting, something else happened. There was a darkness in the darkness. darkness. There was a darkness of horror and of terror that came over Abram. And even though it says, uh, he fell into a deep sleep, it's not the normal kind of sleep because you see down in verse 17, he saw the sunset. What we're talking about is an overwhelming sense of darkness and horror and terror that, that crushed into the ground. So he couldn't even sit up. He couldn't even hardly stand up. He was crushed into the ground. There was an incredible heaviness over everything he was doing. He had no idea what was coming. And then what appears is a blazing torch and a smoking fire pot, a billowing smoke and a fiery blaze appear. Now these are hard words to translate, but one thing we all know, and every commentator I read said so, is the same two words that describe the top of Mount Sinai when God came down on it, a billowing smoke and a fiery blaze. And these are the same two words that describe the pillar of God's presence that, that went before the children of Israel in the wilderness. Because you remember in the daytime when the sun hit it, it looked like what? A cloud of smoke. But in the nighttime when the sun went down, it looked like what? A pillar of fire. What has appeared is the emblems of God's actual glory presence. A searing streak of lightning appears and holds its shape. And then with all of its sparks and thunder and smoke and fire, it goes down down the aisle, formed by the pieces. And speaks and says, I will give you this land. And Abram would have been utterly dumbfounded because there's only one thing this could mean. There's only one thing this could mean. This is God saying, Abram, you want to know how you can know? You want to know about me? If I don't bless you, may my immortality suffer mortality. May my immutability suffer mutability. May my infinitude suffer finitude. May the impossible become possible. May I be cut off. May I be cut up. May I die. Is that enough? You say, wow. But you know what? That's not all God does. And here's the reason why it's not all that God does. If that's all God did was that he passed through the pieces, we still got that other half the problem. Remember the anatomy of doubt? Maybe I'm speaking for myself, but I don't think so. Or I wouldn't be telling you this. I wouldn't be wasting your time. I look at that and I say, oh, wow. But I never really, really, really, really was scared that you wouldn't keep your part of the promise. I mean, you wouldn't... me and you say, I shall be your God. You will be my people and I will be your God. That's the covenant. Okay. I know you'll be there. I know you'll come through. I know that you're willing to take the penalty. If you should fail, you're that committed to me. I know you're going to be my God, but I don't know if I'm ever going to be able to be your person. I don't know if I want to enter into a relationship like this. I don't know how I can walk out there in life and try to live according to these great principles when I just can't see myself getting to the finish line. I'm going to fail. I'm going to let you down. I'm going to let me down. And because our problem is not just, I don't know about you, but our problem is also, oh God, how can I know about me? That there's a second thing that happens. And that is verse 18. And that is after God goes through on that day, the covenant's made. Do you see that? After God goes through the covenant's cut. After God goes through the covenant's made. It's over. It's done. The first stunning thing is who goes through the pieces. And the second stunning thing is who doesn't go through the pieces. We know from history and we know from archaeology that when a great king would make a covenant with a servant, a vassal, sometimes if the king was really nice, the king would go through the pieces as well as the servant. Now, you'd have to be pretty nice because a lot of kings didn't bother. A lot of kings did not be enter into a covenant relationship with their servants by going through because after all, the king, he holds all the cards. You know, the king in a sense says, hey, I don't need you like you need me. Why should I go through the pieces and make all these vassals? I'm not going to do that. You come through and come through and you promise to be a good vassal and then I promise to protect you and to do this and do this and this. But, you know, I'm not going to go through the pieces. So we know that if you had a particularly nice king, he would go through the pieces and the servant would go through the pieces or else the covenant was made with just the servant going through the pieces. But this is the only covenant we know of in which God alone goes through the pieces and then says the covenant is made. It's made. How could that be? Well, there's only one thing that could mean. What does it mean? God is saying, Abraham, I will bless you. No matter whether I fail, I will pay the penalty. No matter whether you fail, I will pay the penalty. I will make myself accountable to pay the penalty if I should fail my part of the covenant, but I make myself accountable to pay the penalty should you fail. I will absorb the cost for both of us, either of us, including you. This is a one-sided covenant. Unbelievable. This is God's way of saying, I will be torn apart if I fail or I will be torn apart if you fail. If you fail, I will take the consequences. I will take the penalty. I will do it. And Abraham had no idea the cost of this oath of grace. But centuries later, a darkness came down again, right? And it was so great and so dreadful that it put out the sun at noon. Because Mark 15, 35 says, and at the sixth hour, which is noon, darkness came down. And it enveloped the cross and enveloped Mount Calvary. And on the cross, what happened to Jesus? When he said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? What happened to Jesus? Isaiah 53, 6 says, he was cut off from the land of the living. Cut off. That's covenant language. That's the curse. When he says, my God, my God, what is he saying? I'm in the dark and I'm alone and you've cut me off. Why? This is God saying, I'm going to bless you unconditionally. If you believe in me, if you enter into this relationship with me, not only will I not fail, my failures are not going to get in the way of me blessing you, but your failures are not going to get in the way of me blessing you. And that's the reason why Paul has the audacity to put it like this. When he's meditating on Abraham, he says in Galatians 3, 14, Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us. He redeemed us in order that the blessing given to Abraham might come to us all through Jesus Christ. Now, what does this mean? Let me apply it a bit. Let's talk about two kinds of people in the room. There always are, except there's always a third party that doesn't know which party you're in. So there we go. Whenever I say there's two of you, but there's really always a third group because you're not sure which you are. So there's A, there's B, and there's the people who are not sure whether you're A or B. But there's some of those of you who've never really made a commitment to Christ. you started going to Redeemer. And I've thrown you into doubt. Okay, anyway, but the point is, there's some of you who have never made a commitment. Why not? Some of you say, because I've got all these questions and doubts. Oh, do you think you've got to get it all together before you step out? Is that it? Don't you realize you're actually contradicting the faith at its heart? Because at the heart of this faith is that you, if you can't handle the fact that you're always going to have questions and there's always going to be flaws in your faith, then what you're really doing is rejecting the heart of this faith. Every other religion makes you go through the pieces. Every other faith, even if you make up your own religion. I'm not knocking the other world religions. Every other approach to living confidently. Every other approach to living confidently. Says, this will be my shield. This will be my reward. I'm going to be a moral person. I'm going to be a good person. I'm going to be a liberal person. I'm going to be a conservative person. I'm going to be, I'm going to liberate people. I'm going to be a tolerant person. Everybody's walking through the pieces. Then I know. Then, then I know I can face life and you are going to fail. So, you're going to fail. Because God wanted to make the unchanging nature of his purpose very clear. So, he confirmed it with an oath. And we have this hope as an anchor for our souls. Firm and secure. If you say, I'm having lots of doubts and I'm afraid to give myself to God, I want you to see that you can't avoid giving yourself to something. Your anchor is down in something. There's something that you're using to say, if I have that. You're putting your anchor into friends or into your talents or into your looks or into your career or something. But I know this. I don't know much about anchors. But I used to, I used to take my kids out on Lake Erie every summer when they were little to fish. And I was just such an incompetent sailor and such a landlubber. I would let the anchor out and I would let it out and let it out. And you would be on a rope. And I would let it out and I'd say, that's got to be far enough. Next thing you know, I'd be in Canada. I hadn't let it go down far enough. And here's the reason why. Anchor is useless unless it's in a rock. If it's in the water, the water is ebbing and flowing with me and I'm just going to be swept away. Do you have, do you, what do you think will always be there for you? What are you putting your anchor down in? See, if you say, I don't want to give myself to God and to the promise of God. But you're giving yourself to something and it's water. It's ebbing, it's flowing. Is it your family? It's going to go. Is it your looks? It's really going to go. Is it your talent? It's going to go. I'm very, very proud of my memory. I'm 50. Somewhere, I was reading a book somewhere that said, it won't be long. I'm very proud of that. And I'm wondering about that. Everybody puts their anchor down into something. And unless it's the promise of God, unless it's something that will never change, this thing is what God has said he will do for you. He says, every other religion puts your anchor down into your performance or your good works. Or if you're not religious, you're putting it down into something else. But here's something that will outlast heaven and earth. Here's something that will outlast the rocks on the bottom of Lake Erie. When he says, I am your shield, what is he saying? He says, unless I'm your shield, you don't have a shield. Unless I'm your security, you don't have a security. It's just silly to think you've got any security. So you're afraid of giving yourself. Why aren't you afraid of not? And secondly, Christian friends, I want you to think about this. Do you know that all of your problems are coming because you don't have your anchor down far enough? Let's just extend the metaphor for another 60 seconds. I found out that I could actually get the anchor down and hit the bottom. In other words, being a Christian is like this. When you realize that you've been trusting other things for your salvation and you say, I'm going to trust in Jesus Christ, and you really, in a sincere act of faith, do that, you give yourself to Christ, you're a Christian. It's like the anchor hitting the bottom. But I also found out it's got to grip the bottom. I can still be to Canada if it's sort of dragging along the bottom and it doesn't grip anything. And once you become a Christian, you may say, oh, I'm not trusting in my talents or what people think of me or these things. I'm trusting in my talents. why are you worried tonight today why are you worried today you're worried you're if you're really worried if you're really anxious it's because you're saying I'm afraid God's not really going to come through for me and that's because though you intellectually believe he did this and he said all these things and he walked between the pieces and he was torn to pieces for you and he's unconditionally committed to you you don't emotionally know it if you're if you're bitter because somebody has insulted you and he makes you look bad and you can't get past it you can't forgive you see worry doesn't get you don't get over worry just by trying not to worry and you don't get over bitterness just by trying not to be bitter you have to say who needs what people think when God loves me like this look what he did for me your anchor's not down far enough you're not going to overcome your problems just by trying you've got to see this when I get that anchor down in the bottom of Lake Erie there's a lot of pressure on that anchor but it holds you know all that pressure all that water but when Jesus Christ went down under the wrath of God and divine justice that was worse than Lake Erie and he stayed and he held for me now when you think about him doing that for you does it move you to make you cry a bit does it make you say why am I not realizing this more ah your anchor is going down and that's what we're going to do right now with the Lord's Supper you know what the Lord's Supper is the Lord's Supper is a way of ritually acting out what Jesus Christ did he was broken to pieces he was cut to pieces just like the stuff the bread that's coming around to you so that he could say I will bless you and you can know about me or you it doesn't matter if your hearts condemn you God is greater than your heart and therefore the Lord's Supper is a way for us to get the anchor down further and to be able to face life like Abram the Lord's Supper should shut us up just the way this shut Abram up finally his poor heart how do I know how do I know how do I know how do I know this will shut it up let's pray bow with me our father when we come to your table we are in a sense looking at even in our written culture an acted out uh an acted out sermon it's the message of the gospel and we want to know we want to know how can we know that you'll be our shield and you say look at the bread in your hand I was broken for you and we want to know how do I know you'll be our great reward and you say look down your hand my blood was poured out for you this is how we know this is how we can live lives of confidence this is how we can face anything and we pray that as we partake of the Lord's Supper you would make yourself so real to us yourself so real to us that we find that our anchor gripping gripping what you have done for us and now we ask this in Jesus name amen now let's renew our covenant with him let's stand we do this by confessing our faith of the apostles christians what do you believe i believe in god the father almighty maker of heaven and earth and in jesus christ his only son our lord who was conceived by the holy spirit born of the virgin mary suffered under conscious pilot was crucified dead and buried he descended into hell the third day he rose again from the dead he ascended into heaven and is seated on the right hand of god the father almighty from there he will come to judge the living and the dead i believe in the holy spirit the holy catholic church the communion of saints the forgiveness of sins the resurrection of the body and the life everlasting amen please stay standing let's pray together father we approach you now we know that as we partake you have promised that you would forgive our sins you would strengthen our faith you would renew us how dare we approach you how dare we approach your table and the answer is you have said my immortality did become mortality my immortality my immortality did become mortality my immutability did become mutability the impossible did become possible my body was broken my blood was poured out so that on the basis of what was done on the cross you can approach me and I can welcome you father on the basis of the merits of what your son has done not on the basis of what we have done we approach we give ourselves to you afresh give yourself to us we can ask that confidently in the name of Jesus amen
