TITLE: Reason for Life
SCRIPTURE: John 1:1-5
TOPICS: Creation Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/reason-for-life/

============================================================

Our scripture lesson this morning is found in the Gospel according to St. John, and we're going to be reading just the first five verses of the first chapter. John, that's spelled J-O-H-N, not J-O-N-A-H, because we've been looking at the book of Jonah for a number of weeks, and some of your Bibles just opened to Jonah, but we're going to have to find a new spot in your Bibles for this particular series of messages. We're looking at the Gospel according to St. John. Let me read verses 1 to 5 of chapter 1. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was with God in the beginning. Through him all things were made. Without him nothing was made that has been made. In him was life, and that life was the light of men. The light shines in the darkness, but the darkness has not understood it. The Word of the Lord. We're going to be looking at the book of John instead of the book of Jonah, where we've been for a number of weeks in the summer. And some of you have expressed deep regret over losing Jonah, feeling, here's somebody I can really relate to. Somebody said that one person suggested that there might be separation anxiety on the part of some people. But you see, the glory and wonder of the Bible is that you're not leaving Jonah when you go to the book of John. What's instead happening is you're coming to look at a greater than Jonah, of whom Jonah is a living analogy. Like Jonah, this greater one was also thrown into an ocean and went under an ocean, but it wasn't an ocean of water like with Jonah, but instead it was an ocean of the omnipotent anger of God on evil. And like Jonah, this one down in the deep prayed for deliverance, that the cup would pass from him. But there was a difference. There's a great poet, the Anglican priest, George Herbert, 17th century priest, and wrote a line in which this one was looking down from the cross and speaking, and the line goes like this, all ye who pass by, behold and see, man stole the fruit, but I must climb the tree, a tree of life for all but only me, was ever grief like mine. Did you hear what the poet did there? Man stole the fruit. Humankind decided in the Garden of Eden to steal the fruit, but it wasn't the fruit, it wasn't the orange or the apple, it was the attitude of the heart. Man decided, determined, to live life without submission to God. And the only way that this one could save us from the inescapable consequences of that kind of treason was if he had to climb the tree, but the tree was the cross, and he turned by climbing that tree across an instrument of torture into a tree of life on which he died. It was a tree of life for everybody but him. Man stole the fruit, but I must climb the tree, a tree of life for all but only me. See, this one, like Jonah, cried out from the deep and said, oh Father, let this cup pass from me. When Jonah cried out from the deep and said, deliver me, God said, yes. But when this one cried out from the deep, let this cup pass from me, God said, no. And the reason he did was because this is a tree of life for everybody but only him. Who's this one? The short answer, it's the Lord Jesus Christ. The long answer is the book of John. That's the long form. And the reason we're looking at the book of John is because many people make a case that it's the most comprehensive and penetrating answer to the central question of history, and that is who is Jesus Christ. Now, you know, where do I have the gall to say that that question is the central question of history? I don't think it's that hard a case to make. If you get a bunch of educated persons together and you ask them to make a list of the six men and women who have had the most impact and influence on all of human life, every single one of those lists would have to have at least on it four names. Buddha, Jesus, Mohammed, and Karl Marx. Those four. But among those four, only one of them is put forth as Every other person who ever made a claim like that has been dismissed as a crackpot. But this one, how did he get away with it? Why would one of the three or four, or maybe even the most influential figure in the history of the world, make claims like that? And therefore, you see, no thinking person can possibly go ahead and form a philosophy of life without first asking the question, who is Jesus Christ? I have to find out whether those claims of his are a sham or not. There's no way I can go around them. I have to find out. I have to look at it. I have to think about it. It's the only honest way to develop a philosophy of life. And therefore, we go to the Gospel of John. And the reason we do that is because of all the people who have ever written about Jesus, of all the people who have ever written, this one has got a unique claim. You know who John was? He was Jesus' best friend. Now, you know, outside of Marx, those four people, it's interesting about those four, Buddha and Mohammed and Jesus and Marx. Not one of them was a public figure. Not one of them was a ruler. Not one of them had any kind of power. Not one, in fact, three of the four never even wrote anything. They were philosophers. They were religious leaders. Jesus never wrote anything. And therefore, the best place to go to find out about him is to his best friend. That's who John is. In the old early church, whenever the different Gospel writers were depicted, ordinarily John was depicted as an eagle. You know why? Have you ever seen that in stained glass windows at some of our older churches? John would be depicted as an eagle. And one of the theories on why that was true is because the eagle is one of the few birds that can fly into the sun. One of the few birds that can actually gaze on the power and the beauty and the glory of the sun. And as a result, we say that about John because John is someone who can get us to look straight into the matchless majesty of Jesus. And if what I've just said is true, and it's hard to deny that in Jesus Christ, a new and immense power has entered human life, but where is it from and how does it operate? What are the rules of its operation? That's a question. And therefore, your life hinges on the answer. And John is the guy to get us there. Now, John, in the first few verses gives us a number of astonishing claims about his best friend. One of the most matchless things about Jesus' majesty is that you could have someone who, on the one hand, has got a best friend, a guy, John, who leaned against Jesus' chest whenever they had a party. And yet this man was convinced that Jesus Christ, among other things we read here in these first few verses, was the Word. In the beginning was the Word. Now, that's all we're going to look at today. In the beginning was the Word. Jesus Christ was the Logos, the divine Logos, the Greek word that John penned, Logos. What does that mean? And all we're going to look at here this morning is the fact that there's two meanings to it. Number one, it means Jesus Christ is the rationale for life, and secondly, that Jesus Christ is the authority for life. The rationale for your living and the authority for your living. Unlike any Buddha, Mohammed, Marx, none of them would claim to be the rationale for life. They would say, I'm going to give you guidance for how to live your life. But none of them would, you know, Mohammed would pluck his beard out and take your head off if you said you are the rationale for life. And yet Jesus accepted this kind of claim from his own best friend. What does that mean? Here's what it means. First of all, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was God. Jesus is the divine Logos. Now, that's a loaded term back then. You know, today we debate lots of terms like equal rights and human rights, but in that day, Logos was a greatly debated issue. It was a philosophical term. It was a loaded term, and John knew exactly what he was saying when he said it. Now, Logos, the Greek word means, it can be translated logic, but he's not talking about the kind of logic that some of us may have read or seen when you get a book on logic that you may have taken philosophy class or something like that. That's what we're talking about. The Logos that the Greeks debated about was the reason for life. See, the Greeks debated at a philosophical level what every thinking person has thought about at the informal level, and that is this. What am I living for? What is life for? If you went to somebody's apartment and you discovered that they had this wonderful coffee maker, functional, new, looks great, and they were using it as a doorstop, what you would conclude is two things. One is... its potential and that the the owner of the coffee maker was not realizing the potential the coffee maker because the the owner did not understand the logos of the of the coffee maker what is its principle for existence what is it for that's why it's not realizing its potential you see or suppose you saw somebody cooking a steak dinner over a space heater now what you do is you right away you say to yourself first of all probably the food will taste bad it probably won't work but secondly this is a dangerous thing to be doing you shouldn't be cooking over a space heater why is it dangerous why is it ineffective because the person doing it doesn't understand the logos doesn't understand the function you see this doesn't understand the principle of existence what is the space heater for and until you understand what the coffee maker is for and still you understand what the uh the space the space heater is for you cannot realize the potential and you're playing with fire literally at least in the one case so you begin to understand this why the greeks debated on trying to find the logos of life because see if if we could understand what life is for if we could understand what we are for if we could understand that principle of existence and if we could bring our life in conformity with it then what would happen we'd realize our potential like the coffee maker only when a soul when a human being realizes potential we finally find what we're built for and and the deepest potentialities that are latent in us erupt and we become everything we're supposed to be and of course everybody wanted to find out what is the logos but by the time jesus came along by the time john was writing the philosophical schools had fractured and fragmented and and because nobody could come up with any real consensus nobody could find it nobody could agree on it and by the time that uh jesus came along the philosophical schools had gotten to the place where they were saying you know what maybe there is none now that is the the ancient version to say there is no logos is the ancient version of what we say today when you hear someone say i guess there just aren't any answers now anybody who says there are no answers anybody who says there is no logos you have to recognize that if you if you're sane if you have any brain in your head you realize that you could never say such a thing with a shrug i've seen people say it with a shrug i've seen them say ah there just aren't any answers what is right and wrong what am i living for what is the meaning of life i guess there aren't any answers anybody who says that with a shrug doesn't know what he or she is saying the greeks know everybody who thinks about it knows nietzsche knew when he says there really is no answers what it means is there is no way to define anything why get up in the morning why go on living why be kind to my neighbor right why get up and try to work and make a contribution to society who's to say these things are valuable anyway what's the use of even going on that those are the inevitable questions now what happened in the day of john was that certain schools of thought grew up and they had names to try to answer try to say now that we know that there are no answers what now the epicureans came up and they said well there's no answers the only thing to do is to have a good time to live for pleasure to go to it to party hardy it was a philosophical school there was another school called the stoics the stoics sounded a lot more noble and what they said is you even though there are no answers we have to live actually as if there is right and wrong be strong be moral be generous be good live that way or else the world is a as an intolerable place and not only that life is intolerable there are no answers but let's live as if there are now that is actually a very very modern those two the epicureans and the stoics that's a basically what you're dealing with in new york and unless you have come to understand what john says which we'll look at in a second you've had to come to one of those conclusions or the other that's one of the reasons why religion is not a polite thing to bring up in new york conversation you know why because see the epicureans and the stoics as different as they look the stoics were real moral types you know and the epicureans were real wild types but the one thing they agreed on is the way to deal with the fact that there are no answers is don't think about it and the reason that religion is an impolite thing to bring up in new new york society is that's how everybody They don't want to be reminded. It's impolite to remind me that I have not got any real reason to get up in the morning. That I've got no real way to decide what's right and wrong, what's violent and what's humane. I don't want to be told about that. Woody Allen, at the very end of his film, Crimes and Misdemeanors, the last film, I guess there's another one coming soon, good, but then I can use the new one for sermon illustrations for a year. I've used this one for a year. At the very end of Crimes and Misdemeanors, he gives you a stoic answer. He says, look, there are no answers to these big questions, but he says what you have to do is you have to get meaning in life by living day to day and just deriving the pleasures of work and family and living in that. You know, what is he saying? He's saying, don't remind yourself all the time that there are no answers. Instead, walk in Central Park, smell the flowers, take a boat ride, hug a child. That's how thoughtful people deal with the fact that there are no real answers. Now, you know, that sounds awfully artistic and it sounds awfully courageous, but, you know, it's the philosophical equivalent of the behavior of the ostrich. Look, of course, listen. Jacques Manot, he was a nuclear, no, I think he's a molecular biologist who won the Nobel Prize. He says, look, there are no answers. The universe was not pregnant with life nor the biosphere with man. Our number came up in a Monte Carlo game. Is it any wonder if, like the person who has just won a million at the casino, we feel strange and a little unreal? And C.S. Lewis picks up on that and he says, there are no answers, right? We're supposed to just take a walk, hug a child, just enjoy life as much as you can, live, be strong even though there's no answers. He says, he talks about the ostrich approach to philosophy and he says this, begin by supposing that nature is all that exists. Let us suppose that nothing has ever existed or ever will exist except this meaningless play of atoms in space and time, that by a series of a hundredth chances it has produced things like ourselves. Well, what then? You can't be in love with a girl if you know that all the beauties of her person and character are a momentary and accidental pattern produced by the collision of atoms. You may still, in the lowest sense, try to have a good time, but insofar as it becomes very good, just insofar as it ever threatens to push you on from cold sensuality into real warmth and enthusiasm and joy, so far will you be forced to feel the hopeless disharmony between your own emotions and the universe in which you think you really live. You see, you go on out there and you hug a child and you smell the flowers, but reality keeps breaking in and you keep saying, wait a minute, wait a minute, I start to have a good time and then reality keeps breaking in. Can I really live my life by constantly repressing that there are no answers? You see, if you say there's no logos, you've got something that Lewis is talking about, you've got something that Woody Allen is talking about, you've got actually an impossible balancing act. This is not just a problem the Greeks had, it's a problem that we had, and therefore John's statement bursts on our consciousness as big a bombshell as it did then. When John says Jesus Christ is the Word, in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, He came down. What John is saying is, get this, there is a logos, but it is not an abstraction, it is a person. It's a person to be known, it's a person to be served, and a person to be loved. The logos is not less than a bunch of abstract and absolute principles, but it's infinitely more. God Himself has punched a hole in the roof of the world and has climbed in. And you can not just know about the logos, and it's not just a bunch of philosophical principles. What John is saying is that, whereas Christianity answers the philosophical questions, it is not a philosophy, but instead it's a comprehensive thing that covers all bases and covers all aspects of a life. It's a dynamic, it's a power, it covers all parts and depths of life. And John says, if you know Him, if you serve Him, if you love Him, it'll fill up your mind, and He'll fill up your heart. He'll fill up all your senses. Come, he says, know the one who is the truth. Now, does this sound kind of esoteric and philosophical? Let me get it down to earth. What John is saying is, here's a person who can be your Alpha and your Omega. Is he your logos? Let's pray. What John... you wish . Here are fourier... your main reference point in all your decisions? Is living for his pleasure and honor your greatest pleasure and honor? Is he what you're living for? Is he the highest priority of your life? And if he isn't, then you've got to manufacture your own Logos. And it's a hard thing to do. Let me tell you. For example, what does drive you? What does get you up in the morning? Is it your image? Is it your beauty? Your wrinkle? Is it a couple of very important relationships, either professional or personal? You'll be bitter because those are people. Those are human beings you're putting all that in. All of that hope in. It doesn't matter what your Logos is. There was a man years ago who was on a fast track to the top of his profession. And he tells this story. In his profession, there was a man who was about 20 or 30 years older than he was, but who had accomplished everything in his profession that he aspired to? He was a model, a great model. One day, this older man, this mature man, the model for the younger man, came to the young man's door and said, I just need a place to get away. Can I stay here in your apartment? This was in Britain. And he walked on in and he sat down in front of a fire and he stared at the fire for two hours. The young man realized what was happening. This man had been in love with a woman who had just died. And the young man said, as I watched my model, as I watched my hero staring into the fire, I suddenly realized he had no answers to the only important questions. And what are the important questions? What should we do this weekend? Or how do I deal with death? What am I doing in my life? What am I accomplishing? What is it all for? And the young man said, I didn't know really what was going on so much in his heart, but I suddenly realized that the shallowness of my life, the total emptiness of my life was revealed. If you try to manufacture some other Logos than the one that John puts forth as the rationale for your life, you absolutely, for sure, definitely will end up staring at the fire. A lot of you have. A lot of you are. Jesus Christ is the rationale. What is my life for? But Jesus Christ is not just the rationale. We've got to say one more thing about this. Jesus Christ is not just the Logos, meaning he's the goal, but he's also the Logos, meaning he's the guide. It's not just that Jesus is what you're after, but Jesus Christ also gives you the guidelines to get there. Because when John calls him the Word, he's not only saying that he is the answer to the philosophical issue, but also he's saying Jesus is the truth. The Word means he's the truth. It means he reveals to us real truth, how we should live, who we are. When Jesus was transfigured on the mountain and Peter and James and John were watching him being transfigured, the Father came down and spoke these words, this is my beloved Son, hear ye Him. You see, Christianity is not a mystical experience of God consciousness merely. It's a relationship based on a communication of truth. Jesus Christ has come and he's the Word. That means that by what he did and what he was and by what he said, he gives us a body of truth that guides us. He's our authority for living. Around New York, I only ever seem to find two basic approaches to truth, and I've given them names. There's the scientistic approach. Now, scientistic, I didn't say scientific. Now, listen, scientistic approach basically says everything is made of matter and molecules anyway, and therefore, though there are empirical facts, there is no truth. There's nobody to tell you what's right and wrong. There's no morality. There's no answers for the big questions. So, you know, you have our old friend Bertrand Russell who says, man is a product of the accidental collocation of atoms, and all human genius will someday die in the vast death of the solar system. Scientistic. There's facts, but there's no truth. And on the other hand, besides the scientistic approach, around New York, you also got what I call the new agistic approach. And see, the new agistic approach says, oh no, there's truth. But the truth is that we are all God, and we find truth by looking into ourselves and coming to recognize and realize our own divinity and our own greatness and, you see, our own power. Now, as different as those two of you are, each other and scream at each other, as much as they denounce each other, the scientistic types just ridicule the new-agistic types, and the new-agistic types, you know, scorn and confront the scientistic types, and yet, basically, they're the same. You know why? No matter which kind of truth you've got, when you get up in the morning, there's nobody to obey but me. I have not got a body of truth that I have to submit my mind and heart to. I don't have a body of truth outside of me that exists despite how my inner consciousness is. There's nobody that I've actually got to submit to. There's nobody I've got to obey. I'm my own master. You know, when Leonard Bernstein said in that wonderful talk on Beethoven's Fifth, a lot of you know how fascinated I am by what he said. He said, Beethoven leaves us with the feeling that something is right in the world, that something checks throughout, something that follows its own laws consistently, something we can trust that will never let us down. Now, if you asked Leonard Bernstein, do you believe that God has revealed his truth in Jesus Christ, and therefore, God has revealed his truth in actual words and deeds? It's a body of truth completely consistent, that checks throughout, that can never let us down. Of course, I'm sure he'd say no, and yet his heart yearns for it. What possible explanation could there be that we would yearn for a God who speaks real words to us and gives us real truth? The only explanation that I think is plausible is that there must be one. Why would we want one? Where would the idea even have come from? It's actually a very threatening idea. A truthless world is unbearable. Why? Because it's not a truthless world. And there's another way to put it. Jesus Christ is the author. We're told here in verse 3, and we're going to get back to this in future weeks, but I'll just mention it here before I close. Through him, all things were made. Without him, nothing was made that was made. He's the author. That's why he can speak with authority. Look, a lot of you have done this. Some of you are students still. You come, you're in a class, and there's a bunch of people sitting around a desk, and they're sitting around a table, and they're all saying, what does this poem mean? And everybody's, you know, no matter how weird and wild your opinion is, the teacher will say, well, you know, because everybody's opinion is of equal authority. What would happen if suddenly the author walked in, opened the book and said, I wrote this, yes, 20 years ago, and this is what I meant when I said it? End of discussion. Why? The word authority comes from the word author. When the author speaks, nobody's got anything else to say. You can't say, no, you didn't. Jesus Christ is the author of your life. Who are you going to believe? You know, for example, who are you going to believe? How are you going to decide how to use your sexual capacity? Are you going to be one of the people who says, no one has the right to tell me what to do with my body but me? You realize the premise that you smuggled in there that is absolutely indefensible, and that is the only person who could speak to you authoritatively would be your author. Did you make yourself? You know that your own soul and your own body are mysteries that you just barely understand. The only person that could, yeah, everybody has an opinion, but your opinion is just like any other kid in that room, and the author walks in and says, I built the body, I built sex, I invented sex, here's how to use it. At that point, you either submit, or you just admit that I'm just one kid shooting the bull, my opinion is good as your opinion. He's the author of life, and we submit to his truth. Listen, somebody's got to be here saying, I don't believe this. Here it is, the last decade of the 20th century in the middle of Manhattan, and there's somebody saying these things. There's somebody out here saying there's absolute truth from God that we have got to submit to. Not truth inside New Ageistic, or not truth as, I mean, this kind of truth, I can't believe it. Listen, you have every right to your scorn. I just want you to admit your real position. You are a kid sitting around the table, and everybody is talking about what life means, and one person's opinion is good as the next. You have no way to tell anybody what is right and what is wrong, what is humane and what is violent, what life is for. Recognize where you are. You live in an unbearable world, and as soon as you start to feel joy, you've got to say, wait a minute, I'm sticking my head in the sand. There is no truth. There really can't be any love. yourself. You know why you need a God, a personal God, who reveals truth, real truth to you and speaks to you? Because there is one. Conclusion. Jesus is the rationale for life. Jesus is the authority for life. Some of you are here, and you believe everything I've said. You've believed everything I've said for a long time, and yet Jesus is not really the rationale for your life. You've got other logoi in your life. You've got other things that are driving you, other things that are more important, and as a result, you do not know what verse 3 says, in him was life, and the life was the light of men, until you actually don't just believe that he's the rationale for life, but make him the reason you get up. Put him in the place he's got to be. Give him the authority that he is due. Until that happens, my friends, you're not going to have the life and light that comes from people who are realizing their potential because they put him in the center. Make him your king, and you'll find out what you're built for. And maybe are there some other people here saying, I see what you're saying, and it's fascinating to me, and I almost wish I could believe it, but I don't. Oh, well, there you go. I don't believe it. You know, what can you do about that? And the answer is, a lot. Jesus is the prophet to end all prophets. He's not like Buddha. He's not like Mohammed. He's not like Marx, because he's still alive. He is a prophet who doesn't just bring the truth, but he is the truth. His voice is the truth. He spoke to Lazarus, and he said, Lazarus, come forth, and Lazarus was dead, and Lazarus heard him. You see, because Jesus is the truth, he can speak his truth down into the deadest and numbest and hardest of hearts and inflame it with the beauty of his truth. And so what you need to do is not just say, well, I'd like to believe it. You can say, I have no excuse. I'm coming to you. I'm coming to you. I'm going to look at your truth. I'm going to look at you. I see, oh Lord, that you climbed the tree. Man stole the fruit, but you climbed the tree and made it a tree of life for me, but not for yourself. I give you myself. I give you myself today. Open me up. Come on in. Be my truth. He hears that. He will hear that. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. In him was life, and his life was the light of men. Let's pray. Our Father, we simply ask now that as we reflect during this time of offering, as we offer up music, as we offer up our gifts and tithes, we also are going to offer up ourselves. We now spend time considering what other things have pushed themselves in to the center of our lives, so that you are no longer the center. Father, we're going to consider giving ourselves to you in unprecedented ways. Speak to us. Help us. And, oh Lord Jesus, inflame the inner parts of our hearts with your truth, because there's a lot of hardness, and there's a lot of deadness there. We ask that now in Jesus' name. Amen.
