TITLE: Relationships
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/relationships/

============================================================

The Proclamation Presbyterian Church, Mark has terrible handwriting, so I'm trying to follow this the best I can. Let me see here. Melinda has had several home businesses. She recently sold one which was a table linen supply business. Mark is a partner in a law firm and is a member and is involved in many civic organizations. I always thought it was impossible for lawyers to come to know Christ. I'll be listening. So why don't you come up, Mark, and Melinda and share with us. Good morning. This is our first Creative Living Conference, and we will definitely walk away with knowing not to sit with Phil and Carla Harden for dinner, because this is what happens. Actually, we're very grateful to be here, because I have a lot to look back at and be very grateful that I'm standing here. When I look back for where I was, I would have to sort of sum it up with restless. I was very restless. I had just a real desire to get involved in all kinds of activities. As Kirby said, I had a couple of businesses, and I was very involved in volunteer work, and I just always looked for new opportunities, new exciting challenges, something that would just make me feel good and make me feel really worthwhile and significant. Now, along with this frenzy going on, I invited Mark into it, and he got sucked into this chaotic lifestyle, and he often didn't know what was going to happen. He'd come home, and the wallpaper could be ripped off the dining room wall impulsively or 20 people coming for dinner the next night. There were all kinds of frenzy, chaotic things going on. And that caused a lot of conflict, because I was always looking to have that need met in any way, any activity. I wasn't into maintenance. I was only into the new activity. And as we went on and we had children, our life got a little more hectic anyway. And I always wanted to be a good mother, but I even put that on hold, because it wasn't very exciting. It wasn't even rewarding sometimes. And so I always wanted to keep these activities going to keep that satisfaction or trying to find that. Well, things were definitely getting more and more chaotic as our third child came. And I now, thanks to Tim, have the perspective that God was taking me into the gym with that child, because he is lovely and wonderful, but very stubborn, very strong-willed, very active, can't really be left alone. So that was really causing a lot of conflict with all my activities. Now, alongside of this, my parents became Christians when I was in high school. And so I'd had a lot of, you know, exposure to Christianity, talk, lingo. And Mark got involved in it, too. We even went to some dinner, some outreach dinners. We heard the gospel. We didn't reject it. We just sort of put it on the back burner and thought that was okay. At least we weren't rejecting it. But we really didn't have a need for it. You know, I sort of felt that, and I think Mark felt this way, too, that, you know, it was okay for my father to be a religious fanatic, because he was already a partner in a law firm. And, you know, they were getting older, and they had, they were worrying about what was going to happen to them when they die. And we were really just getting our lives launched. So we really didn't have a need for it. But as this third child came into the picture, and about a year ago, I really think that's really what brought us to the end of our self-sufficiency. And really kind of a fluky thing. of mine from school at a movie theater. Her parents, the McCaves, are here, and she told me about this new church, and that was interesting because we hadn't been to church for about a year and a half because we just sort of weren't really getting anything out of it. So we went, and we liked it, and we went back, and we went back, and we went back, and it was really there that it all kind of came together for me. I really began to realize that the reason that I had this restless feeling and always this searching feeling was because I was separate from God, and that sin is what made me separate from Him. And I had a lot of trouble with that part of it because I really, my view of sin was that we were going to, stuff that you went to jail for, and somebody explained to me that it's going your own way apart from God's will. And I knew I'd been going my own way, and it wasn't working. So I prayed right then. It was just about a year ago. And really, it's been a wonderful thing. I think it's very hard for me in such a short time to have perspective on the changes because I really feel like I'm still in it. But I know that there's a real change in my heart. I feel like I have an understanding now of what it means to have a relationship with Jesus. I feel like I have an understanding of what the priorities should be in my life and what God wants for us. It's been a tremendous thing for Mark and me because we can now sit down. Well, we never sit down, but we can talk about money and disciplining the kids and all those kind of big topics that we used to get into such arguments about because we were always bringing our self-centered need into it. And now we can look at it from God's perspective and what God wants for us. And it's been really a tremendously unifying thing in our marriage. For me personally, I struggle every day with control. I just really have a hard time giving that up, but I do it every day. I still struggle with a lot of compulsive behavior, a lot of impulsive desire to be involved with things. But I'm working on it. And I just know that this was not an impulsive decision to invite Christ in, but it really was probably the most important and the one that's bringing me the most happiness. So I'll give you Mark. We've heard such wonderful music this weekend that I'm a little embarrassed to admit that my tastes in American folk music run a little lower than yours. One of the songs that Linda doesn't like, that the kids like and I like, which we play in the car very loudly and bother everybody with, one which is an American folk tune. And in it, the chorus yells at the lead singer, do you need any help? Do you need any help? And he yells back, I can handle this job all by myself. And that about sums up my attitude for so many years of my life until I made a commitment to Jesus Christ at, fortunately, about the same time that Melinda did. I felt that I was in total control, and I was very happy to have it that way. And although, from what Kirby said, you might think that I define myself in terms of my profession, the real defining factor is the fact that I'm not just an only child, I'm an only grandchild on both sides. And I don't think it would surprise you to find out that I went to the compulsive behavior seminar yesterday. I was expected to do a lot of things, and I tried not to disappoint. And this meant that I placed tremendous premium on certain types of achievement. And it just wasn't enough to go to Yale. I had to be at the top of the class. I had to get that Phi Beta Kappa key my junior year. I had to be captain of the crew. I had to do this. I had to do that. I had to be at the top of my law school class. I had to go to one of the top firms in Philadelphia to work. I had to make partner right away. And there wasn't time for a lot of other things along that way. So what if I was intemperate? Perhaps I pushed a little too hard at times. Worked unreasonable hours and so forth. commitment to perfectionism that I couldn't see beyond that. Was I there for my family? Was I there for Melinda? Was I there for the children? Well, of course I wasn't. And I didn't know until I really began to have a relationship with Jesus Christ. This was mere chasing after the wind. I didn't really understand that. And this was purely for my own self-aggrandizement. It took me a long time to come around to that realization. You might say, well, what changed? What went wrong? Well, nothing really too much in our lives. But as members of my family died, as some very close friends died untimely. And as the group that I knew in college, or extraordinarily gifted group of people, began to experience really severe problems in their lives, to the point where of a group of, say, a dozen people that were my closest friends, only one other has children, the rest are probably at this point, if they're statistically about half married, most are on their second or third marriage now. I began to look around, began to say, this prescription for success, which I've been using to rule my life for such a long time, obviously, is not the right one. What else? Well, spiritually, I, as you might expect, exemplified all the outward traits of respectability. Well, I went to Episcopal Church, quite a nice one. Did they teach the word there? No, of course not. But on the other hand, I didn't have to open the prayer book or the hymnal. I knew all of that by heart, because I'd grown up with that. And the ritual was very reassuring and comforting. But did I understand what Christianity was about? Well, of course not. I had no idea. And, you know, this from somebody who, Jack Markle will appreciate this. I got the religion prize my junior year in high school, Jack, at a school that Jack's the chairman of the board of. Very fine school, and I knew nothing. So spiritually, I was in dire need, and I didn't even know it. Well, thanks to the many Christian friends that we had, I began to look into these things. And I think they felt pretty sorry for me, but they were pretty restrained. Some of the people in this room know me pretty well, have known me for a number of years. And I thank you for your concern, because it took ten years, but here I am. And I began to read the Bible, and I began to realize that I could accept everything that was there. I believed that the scriptures are the inerrant word of the Lord. And once you accept that, logically, there's no turning back. And then I realized, I realized that it wasn't through all this really mindless striving that I was going to justify myself, but that every one of us is given this gift of grace through faith so that none of us can take credit for it or boast about it. And that was a hard realization for me, and it's taken me, well, a great deal of work with Belinda to turn my life over to the Lord. But once you realize that that is what the Bible says, that is what Jesus taught, and that is what works, it seems like the most natural thing. But it took me a long time to get there. In John 12, 25, it's written that the man who loves his life shall lose it. And the man that hates his life in this world shall find eternal life. And in my earlier life, I loved my life. But now I realize that those things that I put the most stock in are those that are not the things of eternity. And so, really... Thank you. of God, at about the same time, Melinda and I made what has become for us the most important decision of our lives, which is to turn the control of our lives over to Lord Jesus. Thank you very much for letting us share this with you today. Good idea. Thank you. You turn to me. You already turned to me. Will you turn with me? Those of you who are facing that way, will you turn around and look this way? Will you turn with me, if you have a Bible to look at, to Colossians chapter 1. And I'm going to read just from verses 15 through 23. Eight little verses. Colossians 1, 15 through 23. He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation. For by him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities. All things were created by him and for him. He is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he may have the supremacy. For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood shed on the cross. Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior, but now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you holy in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation. If you continue in your faith, established and firm, not moved from the hope held out in the gospel, this is the gospel that you heard and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven and of which I, Paul, have become a servant. That's God's word. I'd like to say something this morning that in a sense summarizes what we've been saying, and I wanted to turn to this passage for this reason. We've been saying that stress is something that is inevitable, and we're not talking like a stoic. Remember we said last night, I don't think I used the word, but remember we said last night that one of the things you were not supposed to do was despise stress? It says, don't despise the hard things that are coming into your life. Don't make light of them. The way you make light or despise stress is to do the stoic approach. Marcus Aurelius, keep a stiff upper lip. Don't let it get to you. I'll show these things. They can't get me down. That kind of defiance. The Bible says, don't despise stress. In other words, don't simply steal yourself against it and say, I won't let it get to me. Instead, learn from it and grow through it. There's an interesting book that I haven't been able to find lately. It was a book, maybe some of you have seen it, but it was a Christian book I put out some years ago that I don't remember much about the insides of it. In fact, I wouldn't say it was necessarily a great book. My memory of the reading of it was that it was a good average book, but the title was great. And the title was, don't waste your sorrows. Don't waste your sorrows. Don't despise them. In other words, stress is not something just inevitable. But a Christian realizes stress is something that's there because we were not ever built for a world full of death and decay and losses. The Bible, when the Bible tells us what we're built for and what kind of a world God is bringing and what kind of world he's going to take us to, a world without losses, a world where you never have to say goodbye, a world in which instead of things getting weaker and weaker as time goes on, they get stronger and stronger, a world in which there is no death or decay. When we hear those descriptions, we say, yes, you know intrinsically, inherently, instinctively, that's the kind of world you were built for. And since we're living in a world that God never really designed us for, a world of death and decay, stress has come, and therefore to be stressed, to feel stressed, is not wrong. The Stoic approach, it says, and there's another it get to me, is wrong. It's a way, in a sense, of despising it. When you look at how Jesus went through life, you will see that he was continually stressed. Can't be wrong. He was sinless, and yet he sweated blood. Now there's stress. Yes. Some years ago, I read an article by B.B. Warfield called The Emotional Life of Our Lord. All it was was a simple article written by a theologian who went through and looked up every spot in the Gospels where Jesus' emotions were talked about. And after he pulled all those verses out and laid them out in front of him, he said, Now, what did we see about Jesus' emotions? And one of the things that was absolutely striking was that he was always crying. He was constantly crying. He was constantly sighing. He was constantly, his inners, his insides, his bowels. Now, that's the way the Greek, because you see, for the, we talk about the heart being the center of our emotions, even though we know it's just a physical thing that doesn't have emotions in it, but we talk about the heart. However, in the Greek language, the bowels was the seat of your emotions. And so, even though, of course, when we translate the New Testament in English, we don't use those words because it doesn't communicate that anymore. But literally, what it's always saying was Jesus was moved to the depths with feeling. He was continually in emotional turmoil. He was continually in upheaval. He was always crying. It can't be wrong to be stressed. The point, the issue is, what do you do with it? Don't despise it. Don't say, I'm not going to feel it. I don't want to let it get to me. Don't say, I'm not going to feel it. That's not the way Jesus dealt with it. Jesus was sinless, and yet he was constantly stressed. The real issue is, how do you respond, or how do you use it? How do you deal with it? If you look at the scripture, you will see that what makes a Christian kind of unique in attitude towards stress is a Christian is actually both, according to the Bible, a sadder person and a happier person than other people. At the same time, when you become a Christian, you will find that you are going to become both sadder and happier than you were before. You go to a place like, for example, 1 Peter 1, verse 6, it says, where Peter says to the people he's writing to, In Jesus, in him, you rejoice, though right now you are in heaviness through many trials and sorrows. And if you look at that verse carefully, you will see that he says, he doesn't say, you used to rejoice, but right now you're in heaviness. That word heaviness is another word that could be translated stress. You're crushed down with the weight of the burdens of sorrows and sufferings in your life. He doesn't say, you used to rejoice, right now you're in heaviness, nor does he say, you're rejoicing right now, though you used to be in heaviness. He says, both present tense, you are rejoicing, though you are in heaviness. Because, you see, the Christian approach to joy is that Christian joy, unlike any other kind of joy, coexists with sorrow. Because it's not based on things here. Let's see if I can put it this way. A Christian, in some ways, is sadder than other people, because Christians, once you get your hope, once you get your joy, once you realize who you are in Christ and realize the inheritance that's your guarantee, you no longer have to deny, and in a sense, you no longer have to avoid or deny or withdraw or repress or stay away from suffering and troubles. You can admit, finally, that life is as bad as it really is. If, here's two people, and they both have $1,000 in cash in their wallet, and for one man, that's all the savings he's got, that's all the discretionary income he's got in the whole world, that's it. And the other man is a billionaire. Both of them have their pockets picked, see? So, the same action, the same trouble, the same trial, the same affliction, you might say, the same attack is coming into both of their lives. One of them is completely shattered. The other one says, hmm, what's the difference? You see, here's two people right alongside of each other, and they have the same experience. One of them can handle it, one of them can't. Why? Because, you see, the person who had the $1,000 lost, and that was all he had, he's shattered because his life's over, because that's everything he had. That's all he was. The other man, of course, has got a much bigger economic world than that $1,000, whereas in the first man's case, that $1,000 is an entire economic world. Now, what happens, as soon as you become a Christian, before you were a Christian, you might have had a vague understanding of belief or hope in the afterlife, but you didn't know God personally, and so you had no, there was no reality to it. When you become a Christian, as we talked about on Friday night and Saturday morning, Paul says, the way a Christian deals with stress is you look not to the seen, but to the unseen. That means suddenly your world becomes much, much larger. has to be afraid of death or deny death or deny the troubles of this life because a Christian looks at them and says, there's a bigger world than this. There's more to life than this. You know, I was talking with one of you about the post-traumatic stress syndrome that a lot of Vietnam veterans have. You know, if you go through a tremendous traumatic shock, like watching dear friends blown to pieces, like seeing tremendous suffering, and you go through something like that, like many people did in Vietnam, you may find that you live with the trauma of it afterwards for years. I had two Vietnam vets. I probably had more than that. There are two that I knew of and talked to about this in my former church. One of the most interesting things that they told me about it was they said that one of the best things that ever happened to them in dealing with their past and their memories was becoming Christians. Why? Now, here's what they said. One guy I remember once said, you know, when you see all that death and you see all that decay and you see all that sorrow and you feel like this world is all there is and this life is all there is and this is all I've got. It's like your whole world is coming apart. But he said, and I try to jot down what I remember him saying, he says, when I became a Christian, I could tell myself this world is only a small part of my reality. You know, I live for 80 years and 80 years is going to be what? I'm going to, three billion years from now, I'm going to be sitting around the Lord's table with you laughing and eating and drinking and talking and crying, crying with joy. And so he says, because I began to realize this life is only one part of the whole reality, I began to be able to deal with my memories. And he said, I began to realize that there's light and high beauty forever beyond the reach of the shadows. Now, what happened to him? You see, originally he couldn't handle the past and he couldn't handle the stress in his life because he was like a man who had been, his pocket had been picked of a thousand dollars and that was his entire economic reality. That was his whole world. It was gone. In a sense, he was trapped in this world. You see, because in other words, this world had to carry all the freight of all of his hopes, all of his dreams, all of his comforts. When he became a Christian, he began to say that the world is very important, but it's only one part. It's one room in a much bigger house. And therefore, I don't know if some of you know what it's like to live in only one room with somebody else. And if that one other person is a difficult person to live with, if there's a lot of discomfort and there's no place else to go, you know how stressful that is, but how much nicer it is if you have to live with a difficult person in a very big house so that you can be with them. But other times you can go someplace else and get by yourself. In the same way, a Christian is somebody who suddenly realizes the universe is a big house. I'm not trapped in this one room. I don't have just this thousand dollars. That's the reason why you could hear this in some of the testimonies. Some of the, basically, if you listen carefully to testimonies, you very often heard all of my life was wrapped up in this. This is all I had and I couldn't handle even the slightest threat to it. This is all my thousand dollars, but now that I'm a Christian, I'm a billionaire. And therefore, what happens in my business or what happens in these relationships, what happens to my children? Whatever happens to these things, no longer, this is not everything that I've got anymore. And I can handle it. So you see, what's interesting, Christians in one sense, I find, become sadder than other people because they don't have to spend their life being stoics anymore. They don't have to sort of steal themselves and stay away from discomfort. They don't have to stay out of the lives of people who are hurting because they have to, at all costs, have a comfortable life. They don't have to deny the reality of death. I haven't been doing, I don't do funerals anymore since I have such a young church. But when I had a normal church, when I had a normal church, I used to do funerals continually. And one of the things that always was amazing, whenever you did a funeral of a young person, a younger person, and all the people were at the funeral were young people in their teens or their twenties and so on, you could see that they were, they just couldn't wait to get out of there. They had to be there because that was their friend. They had to pay respects to him or her. They couldn't wait to get out of there because they did not want to be reminded that they were mortal at all. And you could see that they were basing their lives on a denial of their death. Christians no longer deny that. Christians no longer have to have to look at the world through rose-colored glasses. Christians no longer say, oh, I don't believe people really can be that awful. Very often whenever you hear somebody doing something, some terrible crime, the way in which we deal with the reality of that is we say that person must have been sick. Christians realize that there's all kinds of awful things in everybody's heart. Christians no longer have to do things in everybody's heart. Christians no longer have to We deal with the reality of that as we say, that person must have been sick. Christians realize that there's all kinds of awful things in everybody's heart. Christians no longer have to deny their own wickedness, their own evil, and the depths of their own selfishness and what they're capable of. The reason they don't have to deny it anymore is because they've got God, because they've got protection, because they've got redemption. They don't have to deny their own evil. They don't have to deny the world's evil. They don't have to deny the sadness of the place. So on the one hand, Christians are sadder than other people. They're more tender. Their hearts of stone have become hearts of flesh. They feel the inhumanity of the world. They feel the sadness and the lostness of the world. And yet, at the same time, they've got a joy that can coexist with losses and trials, because that joy, the locus of that joy is in heaven. Their joy is not how well they're doing this year financially. Their joy is not how good they look. Their joy is not how well their children are doing. That's part of their joy, but that's not the final joy. That's not the locus. That's not really where the bulk of their wealth is. Now, therefore, oh Christians, it's not unchristian to be stressed, to be crying, to be sweating blood. The real issue is, how do you deal with your stress? And how do you respond to your stress so that your stress makes you grow? If you remember the little chart we've been working at, every single one of those little slices I've been giving you, there's worry stressors, and there's performance stressors, and there's relational stressors. And as some of you are going to remind me, I'm sure today, I didn't get through them all. And I won't get through them all. But I'd like to tell you what the theme is, the theme here today. The one thing that in every single one of those areas, the common thread of how you should be responding to stressors so that the stress changes you, grows you, so that the stress is something that isn't wasted, but rather is something you're responding to properly. And the common thread is this. In every stressful situation, you have to take the crown off of your head and you have to lay it at his feet. You see, in every situation, the anti-stressor is acknowledging his kingship and recognizing that it's the natural tendency of your heart to want to be your own king. And this passage tells us that everybody needs a king. Why? Because verse 15, 16, and 17, it says, He is the image of the invisible God, for by him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth. We all were created by this king. We were all created for this king. And that's why it says in verse 17, He is before all things, and in him all things hold together. When you come under the management of the creator, you reach your potential. When you are following the instructions and the rules and the laws of the creator king, then and only then do you really find your potential. For example, I've got a computer software program that my wife continually tells me. I haven't even begun to tap the... This is a word processing program. I haven't even begun to tap the power of it. She says, you're using it as a glorified typewriter. You might as well have a typewriter. She says, you don't have any idea of all the things that are in there, all the power that's in that program, how much faster you could be working, how much more productive you could be, all the things you could be doing. And I'll tell you the reason why. Because when I turn to the will of the creator of that program, I see this massive manual with all these little tabs. And I open up, and the very first page I see it tells me something that I never realized it could do. And I try and say, that's great. But there's 500 more pages. And I say, well, I don't have time for all that. But Kathy's constantly saying, you need to submit to the will of the creator. Because you are just a shadow of what you could be if you were willing to come in under the management of the creator of this thing. There's actually lots of illustrations. If, you know, when you buy a car, there's an owner's manual. It tells you to change the oil every so many thousand miles. If you disobey the will of the creator, what happens? You kill your car. Because the car was built to be under the management. The person who invented it, in a sense, says, I know what I created. And therefore, come in under the authority of what I say. And you will reach your potential. In other words, listen to me, and all things will hold together. Don't listen to me, and your car will fall apart. The Bible says that stress, stress is a threat. Stress brings things into your life that are trying to break you apart. What must you do? What must you do? What must you do? What must you do? the human heart, is to be your own king, to be your own god. And that's the worst thing you can do in the face of threat. The thing you've got to do, and the thing you've got to see in every one of those little slices, is that there's going to be a temptation for you to act as God, try to be your own king, instead of saying, Lord, I take the crown off of my head and I put it at your feet. I'll think about it for a minute. For example, when worry begins to deal with you, in other words, the anticipatory stressors, the future looks bad and bleak. Now, concern for your family, for example, let's just say, it looks like you're going to lose your job, and you're concerned for your family. That concern arises out of love, but debilitating worry, what's debilitating worry? See, the stress is there because you love your family. There should be a concern. But debilitating worry comes when you say, God, I know what's got to happen, and I'm afraid you're not going to get it right. I've got an agenda. I know what's got to happen. I've got to keep this job. I can't possibly lose this job. If you let this happen, I'll know you don't know what you're doing. You see, debilitating worry comes when you say, God, I know how my life's got to go, and I know how history's got to go, and I'm afraid you're not going to get it right. When you act as if he is the servant and you are the king, then worry will just kill you. If you start to say instead, Lord, you're the king. You know what's best. I'm your servant. As soon as you begin to act as if he's the king and you're the servant, you will find it doesn't mean it gets rid of all your concern. Concern arises because you love your family and you have concern. But concern becomes worry when you refuse to take the crown off of your head. When you refuse to see that only when I crown him a king will all things hold together. You will literally come apart. You know, the doctors will tell you that. If you worry, if you let it get to you, if you let the concern get to you, your body will start to come apart. The blood pressure, the hypertension, all the stuff, the ulcers, all the stuff we talked about, you will literally come apart. It says on the other hand here, if you crown him king in that situation, in him all things hold together when you make him king. Only when you come in under his management, the management of the creator, only when you treat him as a king, concern is all right. But worry happens when you decide to treat him as the servant and you as the master when you think about your history. Or, for example, we never really got to all the relational stressors, but let me give you a couple of examples. Some of you, in your stress, you need the anti-stress force of an emotional support team. You need to reach out, you need to talk to some other people about how hurting you are, and get some other people who you can talk to who can give you emotional support. And a lot of you are not doing it. You know why? You want God's job. Only God needs nobody. Only God doesn't need anything. The only person in the whole universe that needs nothing and needs no one is God. If you're isolated because you're afraid to let somebody else know that you're weak and let somebody else know that you need a listening shoulder and you need to let somebody else know that, what you're doing is you're, again, you're keeping the crown on your head. You're trying to take God's job. You're trying to play God. Do you see that? You will be destroyed by your stress. You will come apart unless you're willing to say, I am not the king. I am not God. I'm a creature. I'm a servant. I need help. Or let me give you another example of a relational stressor. I one time talked to somebody about the fact that he would not forgive his daughter. The fact he was cut off from his daughter, the fact that he was angry and bitter at his daughter was a tremendous stressor. And the only anti-stressor was to forgive her. And at one point I said, you need to forgive her. What she did was wrong, but God's forgiven her and God's forgiving and you need to forgive her. And he turned and said, he snapped and he says, well, I'm not God. The idea of meaning I'm not God. So don't expect me to be loving and forgiving. I can't do it. But you see, I didn't say this, but I thought about it on the way home. Like most normal human beings, I have all my best thoughts on the way home after a meeting. And I said, you know what? He says, well, I'm not God, but he was, he was, he was taking God's job because only God has the right to be a judge. And if you won't forgive somebody, what you're doing is you're keeping the crown on your head and you're refusing to put it at his feet and refusing to say, I'm the servant, you're the king. When you hold a grudge, you're taking God's job as judge and only he's qualified for it. And you will come apart. Literally, he will fall apart because only by giving him the kingship do all things hold together. We've, and of course we talked about performance. One of the reasons a lot of you are falling apart. It just. of not doing well in business or the stress of... We talked about this yesterday. You notice, for example, if your salvation, if the thing that really gives you meaning in life are your looks, and as you get old they start to fade, it's okay to want to look good, but when they fade, if you're ready to throw yourself off a bridge, that's been your salvation. That's the way you know you're a worthwhile person. Or if you're an athlete and suddenly you retire and now you're supposedly a successful businessman, but you just don't have the adulation of all the kids anymore and you want to throw yourself off a bridge, it's because your athletic prowess was your salvation. Or if when you find out that one of your children is... His or her life is almost a disaster and you feel like, I've been a bad father. I've been a bad mother. And you don't feel like your life even is worth living if you're a bad mother. Then you see, your motherhood and your successful mothering has been your salvation. And the reason you're under stress and the reason you're coming apart is refusing to crown God king and say, I can't be my savior. You have to be my savior. You see, you have to look, as I was mentioning, you have to look at your job or your business or your relationships and you have to say, you are not my honor. You are not my glory. You are not my crown. Jesus is my savior. Jesus is my crown. He's done everything. As we see right here, it's because of Jesus down in verse 22. He has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you wholly in his sight without blemish and free from accusation. The only way you're going to be an acceptable person, the only way you're going to be loved and brought into heaven is not through your own performance, but through what Jesus, through Jesus' performance.
