TITLE: Responding to Jesus’ Birth
SCRIPTURE: Luke 2:8-20
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Christmas 2012
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/responding-to-jesus-birth/

============================================================

The scripture reading is from Luke chapter 2, verses 8 through 20. And there were shepherds living out in the fields nearby, keeping watch over their flocks at night. An angel of the Lord appeared to them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified. But the angel said to them, Do not be afraid. I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all the people. Today in the town of David, a Savior has been born to you. He is Christ the Lord. This will be a sign to you. You will find a baby wrapped in cloths and lying in a manger. Suddenly, a great company of the heavenly hosts appeared with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men on whom his favor rests. When the angels had left them and gone into heaven, the shepherds said to one another, Let's go to Bethlehem and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has told us about. So they hurried off and found Mary and Joseph and the baby, who was lying in the manger. When they had seen him, they spread the word concerning what had been told to them about this child, and all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them. But Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart. The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard and seen, which were just as they had been told. This is God's word. Now, this is maybe the most famous of all the Christmas texts. And if you just, there's a lot you can see in it or find in it, but if you just ask the text a question, a simple question, how should we respond to the birth of Jesus Christ? The Son of God is born into the world, Christmas. So, what should we do about that? How should we respond? And I think the text will give us three answers. They're in each of the main paragraphs, but I'd like to work from the bottom to the top. And the three things I think that the text tells us we should do is, hear well, make peace, fear not. Hear well, make peace, and fear not. First, look at the last part of the passage, which would be pretty easy to, it's actually the least famous part of the passage. And yet, in it, I think, you see that Luke's talking about hearing. So, we're told in verse 20, the shepherds return, glorifying and praising God for all the things they had heard. And now they saw. The angels told them something, and they went and they saw it was all exactly the way they had been told. So, they heard something. Then we're told in verse 17, when they'd seen him, Jesus, they spread the word concerning what had been told to them about this child. And all who heard it were amazed at what the shepherds said to them. So, second stage is that they heard a message. Then they went and saw, and it says they spread the word. The word word there is the Greek word rhema, which means message, and they spread the message. And then, the people were amazed, and they believed. And so, we have stages. The angels speak to the shepherds, and then the shepherds speak to everybody else. And everybody else, and there's one other person, which is verse 19, is Mary, who's not only heard it from the shepherds, but we actually know from chapter 1, she's also heard from the angel. Now, what's all this about? Luke is telling us something about the importance of hearing well, and how we can hear the message, the word of God. One of the ongoing issues in my marriage is how well I really listen. And so, many, many times, something will happen to me that surprises me, and my wife, Kathy, will say, why is that surprising you? I've been telling you about this. I've been talking to you about this. I've been warning you about this. Didn't you listen? And the answer usually is yes and no. Yes, I heard it. Yes, I remember saying okay. Yes, I remember acknowledging it. But no, did I really pay attention? Did I really understand? Did I think out the implications? No. Now, what Luke is actually telling us about is how easy it would be to hear and not hear. How do we hear the message of God? How do we hear the word of God? And what should we, how should we respond? And Mary, by the way, here is being held up as a model. There's two lessons, two lessons in this little paragraph, very easy to miss. One is don't miss the ordinariness, the ordinariness of how the word of God comes to most people. The word of God comes to most of us in a very ordinary way. else just got a shepherd. See, now, the shepherd got an angel. The angel shows up and he speaks, and listen, there's no problem, if any of you have ever seen an angel, remember, it was really not any trouble to pay attention. You know, when angels appear and, you know, you fall to the ground and you feel the searing brilliance of their glory, it's very hard to do anything else, but notice that you have an angel talking to you. It's very easy to pay attention to angels, right? How many of you? No, never mind. It's New York, so at least three or four of you have seen angels because New York's very diverse and there's a high percentage. There's a little bit of everything in New York, but see, when an angel comes and speaks to you, no problem paying attention, no problem understanding, no problem listening and hearing, but even though the shepherd's got an angel, everybody else just gets a shepherd, and shepherds, as many of you know from coming to Christmas services, shepherds were not scholars, they weren't magistrates, they weren't even soldiers, they were just ordinary people, and so they're the ones who come and give us the Word. Now, what does this remind me of? I'll tell you what it reminds me of. In the Bible, we see the authors of the Bible. We see Moses. We see Isaiah. We see Peter. We see Paul. We see the people who wrote the Bible, and these are people who had revelations. Some of them did see angels. They saw visions. It was very easy for them to pay attention, so they got visions. They got revelations. They get the spectacular, but the rest of us just get a book, just a book, which, by the way, is extremely easy to not pay much attention to. It's hard. It's difficult. How many people said, January 1, I'm going to start reading through the Bible, right? So many people die about Leviticus 3. There's so many of those New Year's resolutions die the death of Leviticus 3. And it's very hard to pay attention. A lot of it doesn't make sense. You have to ask questions. You have to pay attention. You have to go back. You have to go back. See, that's the point is. The point is, and I love this, Mary, and that gets us to the second point. The first point is, so much, most of us get the Word of God in very ordinary ways, ways that would be very easy not to listen to, not to really attend to. But Mary, remember, Mary's heard from an angel in Luke 1. But here we're told, verse 19, all who heard were amazed at what the shepherds said. They heard, but Mary, so Mary's the model, but Mary treasured up all these things and pondered them in her heart. What I love the fact about Mary, many things about Mary, but she didn't say, hey, I don't have to listen to these shepherds, shepherds. I had an angel come right directly to me. No, she not only has listened to the angel, but she listens to the shepherds too. And what does she do? She ponders and she treasures in her heart. The word ponder is more of a cognitive word. It actually, literally, it's a Greek word that translates, ponder translates a Greek word that means to put in context, to connect. It means to say, how does this fit in with everything else I know? How does this make sense of the rest of my life? How does this actually connect to how I'm living now? So you're connecting. So you're thinking out. You don't just say, oh yeah, I know that. You say, okay, well, what does that mean? And what does it mean to everything else I know? And what does that mean to the way I'm living? Connecting. And she's pondering, which is a very, very intense mental discipline. But the word treasure has more to do with the emotions and more to do with the heart. Because to treasure literally means to keep something alive. Like to keep a fire alive by feeding it or to keep a little kitten alive by nurturing it. To treasure, it's a word that actually means to relish, to savor, to keep something alive. And here we're told, she doesn't just ponder the word of God and the message of God and know it cognitively. She fans the flame in her heart. She takes it all the way down in until she relishes it, until she experiences it, until it means everything to her, until she senses the reality on her heart. This is not so much, the treasuring is not so much a technique as it is an attitude, attitude, a spirit. But you see what she does. Listen, do not underestimate your ability to hear and not hear the word of God. Do not underestimate that. Remember the parable of the sowers where Jesus talks about the fact that the seed is the word of God and it falls on some soil and there's no germination at all. In some soil, it comes up, but then it burns away with the sun. In some, it's choked by weeds. What's all that about? The fact that the seed some people just don't believe it, but a lot of people say, oh, I believe it, and yet they don't treasure it, they don't ponder it, it doesn't come in, it doesn't change their lives. Do you want to be like the crowd that just marvels, or do you want to be like Mary? Or put it another way, when you come, I'm glad you're here, and you should hear the Word of God preached and taught, excuse me, did I say teach? My gosh, unbelievable, I did it, but it rhymed, you know, and I'm up here, I'm an oral communicator. So anyway, you should come here and hear it preached, but those of us who are up here, it's our job over the years to develop a skill, and that skill is to be interesting. It's our job to be compelling and interesting and persuasive and to make presentations that hold your attention. But can you hold your own attention with the Word of God? Can you interest yourself? Can you sit down and treasure and ponder and bring the truth of the Bible into your heart, screwing it down until it catches fire in your mind, your will, and your emotions? That's what Luke is suggesting. That's what he's calling you to do. Hear well. Okay? Secondly, he's calling us to make peace. And that comes from the middle part. This middle part where it says, suddenly a great company of the heavenly host appeared with angels, praising God and saying. Now, every time you read this in a modern translation, surely it grates a little bit on you, because this is what the angels say. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men on whom his favor rests. And a lot of you say, wait a minute, I thought I remember somewhere. Yeah, because every Christmas carol says, glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill toward men. That's the traditional, older King James rendering. But there's almost a universal consensus on the part of scholars that the King James Bible at that point was basing its translation on a Greek text that wasn't the most accurate. It wasn't a text that was really true to the original. And that actually, it doesn't say, peace on earth, goodwill toward all people. It's saying, peace on earth toward those people on whom God's will and his favor and his grace rests. And that's what it's saying. Now, at first sight, it looks like the older way meant that Christmas is good news for everybody, and the new approach, or the more accurate approach, is that Christmas is just good news for Christians. It's just good news for the only people who get the peace are people who grasp God's grace. The reality, though, especially in light of verse 10, where it says, don't be afraid, I bring you good news of great joy that will be for all people, the reality is somewhere in the middle, and here's what the reality is. First of all, when Luke comes and says, when you grasp God's grace, one of the great benefits, what it means to become a Christian, grasp God's grace, is it means you now have peace with God. And one of the most counterintuitive and radical and important themes of the New Testament, which you especially can read in chapters 5, 6, 7, and 8 of Romans, where Paul lays it out, is that before we become Christians, we're at war with God. See, most of us do not believe that. In fact, almost nobody believes that. Many people say, I disbelieve in God, or maybe I'm not passionate about God, or maybe I'm indifferent to God, but almost none of us say, I'm angry at God, I hate God. And yet Paul says in Romans 5, Romans 8, excuse me, he says, the natural heart is enmity toward God. The natural heart hates God. That's what he says. You all hate God. And until you see that you're mad at God, and you're hostile to God, and you're angry at God, you don't really understand yourself yet. You don't understand one of the great mainsprings of your life. That's a radical statement. I wish I could spend more time. I can't, because this isn't the text or passage that really gets into that. But what Paul says, just, I can tell you this. See, what Paul does in Romans, he goes like this. Here's the irreligious person, and the irreligious person is overtly asserting his or her independence against God. An irreligious person is overtly saying, I want to live the way I want to live. So here's the religious person. But the religious person, according to Paul, covertly asserts his or her independence against God, because the religious person says, I'm going to obey the Bible, I'm going to follow the Ten Commandments, and I'm going to pray, and I'm going to come to church, and I'm going to do everything, and now God has to bless me, he has to answer my prayers, he has to give me a good life, in which case, what's going on? You're trying to control God. You're trying to show that you don't trust him, basically. You're trying to, you're asserting your independence. And what Paul... you are, whether you believe it or not, you are hostile to God. You can't stand the idea that he is really in charge. And you are deeply committed to the idea that only if you are in charge of your life will you be happy. And Paul says, the mark of a real Christian, and not just a nice person, and not just a religious person, but a real Christian, is the real Christian comes to see that hostility and comes to realize, oh, not only have I done bad things, but even the good things I've done have been done for the wrong motives, to assert my independence from God. And therefore, a Christian says, I need to be saved by grace. Because even my good things were done for bad reasons. I need to be saved by grace. And when you say that, and you rest in what the Lord Jesus Christ has done, and you turn away from the way in which you are living, you're making peace with God. It's a peace treaty. The war's over. You're at peace with God. And that's the reason why Luke here can actually say grace and peace go together. Those who have grasped the grace of God, who have the grace of God, are people who now have peace with God. But does that mean that that's all it's saying? I don't think so. Because first of all, it does talk about peace on earth. And also in verse 10, it says it's good news for everybody. And here's what we have to remember. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus says that all his disciples are peacemakers. Blessed are the peacemakers. What are peacemakers? I'll tell you what they are. Peacemakers are, first of all, people because they have peace with God. Because they finally learned to make peace with God by admitting their flaws, admitting what was wrong, by surrendering, by not standing on their dignity, by swallowing their pride. And they found peace with God. When that happens, you know how that changes you? It means that when you go out in the world, you no longer have to stand on your dignity. You no longer have to save face. You can swallow your pride. You learn to do it with everybody else. In other words, Christians are people who, first of all, make peace with God. And then second of all, go out and make peace with everybody else they can. Christians should be fanning out into the world being peacemakers. We know how to admit we're wrong. We know how to forgive. We know how to reconcile. And by just doing that, injecting ourselves in every part of society, we become forgivers. We become agents of reconciliation and peacemaking between the races and classes, between members of a family, between neighbors and neighbors. Christmas means, first of all, that on the basis of the grace of God, peace with God is available. And if you take peace with God, then you can go out and make peace with everybody else. And the world is better off for it. The world is better off because not only does peace with God come to those who grasp God's grace, but then peace goes into the world through people who grasp God's grace, you see. So make peace. Hear well. Make peace. Finally, the last of the lessons is fear not. Now, having just kind of trashed the King James Bible, now I wish, now I want it back because the first part is so familiar and I like it better when it says, and the angel of the Lord appeared to them and the glory of the Lord shone round about them and they were sore afraid. They don't write things like that anymore. Sore afraid. And by the way, that's good. Why? See, here it says they were terrified. You know what the Greek actually says? The Greek word literally says they were megaphobic. It uses the word phobia, which is the Greek word for fear. It uses the word mega, which is the Greek word for magnify, you know, mega. They were megaphobic. They were terrified. And the old English way of putting it was they were sore afraid. And the angel doesn't ignore that. The angel comes and says, do not be afraid, except that's what it says here. But you might remember that the old King James, the old King James, the angel says, fear not for behold. And by the way, the word behold, look, see is in the original Greek text here. It's been smoothed out to make it more, uh, make it more, uh, colloquial, make it more familiar to us. But what I like, and I want you to listen, the angel says, I know you live a life of terror, but you don't have to be afraid anymore. If you look at what I'm showing you, fear not for behold. Let's break this down. First of all, let's notice that when God shows up, people are terrified. Why? This reminds us of the Garden of Eden because you know, this happened, if you, if you're reading the whole Bible, it's kind of hard to get here and not remember the first time when God showed up. of Eden, and here's what happened. Adam and Eve originally were put in paradise in the Garden of Eden, and because they had a perfect relationship with God, there was no fear in their life at all. And I want you to consider this. If you had a perfect relationship with God, there'd be no fear in your life at all. So what are the things you would get afraid of? Well, we're afraid of rejection or failure, aren't we? But if you were just completely filled with God's love, you wouldn't care what people thought. You wouldn't care how you looked. You wouldn't care about that. You would not be afraid at all. Okay, here's something else we're afraid of. We're afraid of the future. We're afraid of circumstances. We're afraid of bad things happening. We're scared of that. But if you had a perfect relationship with God, and you knew he was in control, you would trust him. The reason you're scared, the reason you're worried, the reason you're anxious, the reason you're afraid, is you don't trust him. If we had a perfect relationship with God, we wouldn't be afraid of rejection or failure. If we had a perfect relationship with God, we wouldn't be afraid of the future or any circumstances. And if we had a perfect relationship with God, we wouldn't be afraid of death. We wouldn't be afraid of death. because we would know his love and we would trust him and we would know, therefore, we're going to be with him forever. But, of course, when Adam and Eve sinned, when they turned away from God, when they decided to be their own masters, to be in charge of their own life, the first thing you see, if you go back to Genesis 3, you'll see almost immediately, no matter what translation comes up, almost immediately they fear. And you know why. Anyway, see, what went into their heart, and we've already talked about this, what went into our hearts, I'm sorry, was the lie of the serpent. And do you remember what the lie of the serpent was, basically? Let me put it to you in a nutshell. The serpent said, you need to be in charge of your own life. You need to call the shots. Don't let anybody else, including God, be in charge of your life. Because if anyone else is in charge of your life, you won't be happy. Especially if God's in charge, you won't be happy. You must be your own master. You must be the captain of your soul. You must be the master of your own fate. And that has gone down into every human heart, every single one of us. And it is one of the great mainsprings. We talked about this. It is one of the great mainsprings of our behavior, though we may not see it. But it creates a base note of fear. It creates fear all over the place. We now are afraid of rejection and failure. You know why? Because we have to earn our self-worth. We have to earn people's love. And if we're not constantly getting affirmation and love from people, we just die. So we've turned from God. We might even believe God loves us, but we're so alienated from him it's just an abstraction. And as a result, we are slaves to what people think of us. And we're slaves to our performance. And we're slaves. We're filled with fear. We're driven by fear. Also, we are afraid of the future. Because, see, now we're masters. But we cannot control history. We can't control life. It's one of the reasons why great tragedies happen. It freaks us all out because we realize we are not in control. Bad things can happen all the time. So we're afraid of the future. We're afraid of circumstances. We're afraid of rejection. And we are afraid of death. Oh, yeah, we're afraid of death. No matter what people tell you, no matter what people say, oh, I'm not afraid of death. You know, you just, you go to nothing. You know, you don't know anything. There's nothing to be afraid of. Oh, yeah, you're not afraid of losing everything you love, of losing love, of losing everyone, of losing the sun on your face. You're not afraid. You are. We are afraid. We're filled with fear. We're, we've turned away. We're sore afraid. Adam and Eve were sore afraid as soon as they turned from God. But here's what's weird. When God actually comes to the Garden of Eden, they're even more afraid. And actually, everywhere in the Bible where God shows up and his glory is revealed, people are terrified. They're not like, you know, in Steven Spielberg movies like Close Encounters of the Third Kind, E.T., whenever spacemen or ships show up, everybody goes, wow. But whenever God shows up in his glory, nobody goes, gee, look at that. Nobody does that. They're terrified. Why? Why is it that when we're far from God, we're afraid, and when we get close to God, we're even more afraid? And my best way to explain that would be with some illustrations. If you're impersonating a policeman, you're nervous, probably. But if a real policeman started coming to you, you'd really be freaked. Because that would expose you. Or if you're at a party, or if you're at a, if you're in some, some place and you're posing as a rocket scientist, you'd be nervous. But if a real rocket scientist came into the room, you'd be petrified. Or if you are really proud of being smart, and then you get in the presence of somebody infinitely smarter than you, or proud of being good looking, or proud of being talented, and you get into the, into the, into the presence of somebody infinitely, infinitely more talented than you. what it is like. See, we are our own masters and we are unqualified for the job and we know it. If you're ever in a job and you are terribly unqualified for it, you're just filled with fear all the time. And we've taken a job. And that job is we are our own masters. Even those of us who say, well, I'm kind of religious where I go to church. We're still the ones deciding what's right or wrong for us. We're still in charge. We're still masters. And that's the reason why we're afraid. Fear of failure. Fear of the future. Fear of death. But when God comes near, we're terrified. Because it shows us. His beauty shows us our ugliness. His power shows us our impotence. His glory shows us our darkness. And we can't take it. And so our lives are filled with fear. We get near God, even more afraid. We get far from God. We're still afraid. And the angel says, I've got the solution. And you know what the solution is? Christmas. Because what he says is, fear not, for behold. Which means, to the degree you behold the things I'm telling you. To the degree you see them. To that degree, these fears will be undermined. And what are those things? A savior is born who is Christ the Lord. Now, first of all, look at that. A savior is born. If you want to get over your fear of rejection, you're over your fear of failure. If you want to be filled with his love. If you want to be completely forgiven. You want to lay down the melancholy burden of self-justification. You rest in his salvation. You stop trying to save yourself. And that gets rid of that fear. But what about the other fears? How can we be sure that he really, how can we trust him with our lives? How can we trust him to obey him? How can we trust him that the things that are happening around us are for our good. And that he knows what he's doing. How can we trust him? How do we get rid of that fear? And the answer is, that the baby born in the manger is the Lord. The New Testament writers knew what they were doing when they used this word. This is a Greek word, kurios. By the way, from which the word Caesar comes. Kurios, believe it or not, Kaiser or kuria, it comes from the Greek word for Lord. But the reason why it was so significant is that when the Jews, around the century or two before Jesus came along, there were enough Jews who spoke Greek that they translated the Hebrew scriptures into Greek. It was called the Septuagint. And in the Septuagint, the translators made a very important decision. Whenever you're translating one word from one language to another, you have certain unique words. And you have to choose a word in the new language that signifies the meaning of the word in the old language. So you have to make a connection. Every place that Yahweh, every place that the name of God that was revealed in the burning bush, every place that the covenant name of God, the creator, the transcendent one, every time the word Yahweh shows up in the Hebrew scriptures, when they put it into Greek, they translate it as kurios, Lord. And what this means is the baby born in a manger isn't just a savior, isn't just a sage, isn't... He is God himself. And if God would come to earth and do this, you can trust him. And that should get rid of your fear. And to drive this home, let me tell you this story that I like telling more than any other story this time of year. In 1961, when I was 11 years old, work that out. I remember very clearly the Russians put the first man in space, and he orbited the earth once. His name was Yuri Gagarin. Every American elementary school child knew his name. And also Nikita Khrushchev, who was the premier of Russia at the time, Soviet Union, excuse me. When he landed, one of the things... Of course, they were bragging about this great accomplishment. It was a great accomplishment. But one of the things Khrushchev said was that when we went into space, there was no God. Okay? See? Another blow for atheism. We went to heaven, and nobody was home. So there was no God up there. And in response to that statement, C.S. Lewis, who was still alive, wrote a little article called The Seeing Eye. And in that article, he said this. He says, now think about this. If there is a God who created us, you couldn't find him by going up in space. We would not relate. God would not relate to human beings the way a man on the first, a second floor relates to a man on the first. Right? See, a man on the second floor... Amen. Amen. Thank you. each other? Well, the man on the first floor just goes up. There is the man on the second floor. But he says, now, if God is really, if there is a God who created us, he wouldn't relate to us the way a man on the second floor would relate to a man on the first floor. He would relate to us the way Shakespeare relates to Hamlet. Because, you see, Shakespeare is the author, the creator, and he created Hamlet, and he created Hamlet's entire world. And, therefore, Hamlet and the characters in that world could only know about Shakespeare if Shakespeare writes some information into the play about himself. See, Hamlet can't find Shakespeare by sort of going up into the rafters of the Globe Theater. I mean, the only way he's going to find anything else about Shakespeare is if Shakespeare writes something in. And, therefore, Lewis says, the only way we're going to know about God is not by going up into outer space, but if God has revealed himself. Now, one of the more interesting examples of this, what Lewis is talking about, was a friend of his, Dorothy Sayers. Dorothy Sayers was one of the first women who ever graduated from Oxford. She was a writer of detective mystery fiction. And she wasn't a particularly attractive woman. By her own, by the way, by her own statement. She wrote her most famous detective stories were the stories of the Lord Peter Whimsey. Peter Whimsey was a fictional character she created. He was an aristocrat. And he was a detective. And he was a sleuth. And he solved mysteries. And she wrote a whole series of short stories and novels. About halfway through the series, a new character emerges. A woman, her name is Harriet Vane. And Harriet was one of the first women who ever graduated from Oxford. She's a writer of mystery fiction. She's not particularly attractive. And she and Peter fall in love and get married and solve mysteries together and live happily ever after. And what some Dorothy Sayers scholars think is that Dorothy Sayers looked into the world that she created and looked at the man that she created and fell in love with him and wrote herself in because he was lonely. And she solved his problem with herself and lived happily ever after. And some of you are out there saying, aww, isn't that sweet? Isn't that sweet? But do you realize that the claim of Christmas is infinitely more wonderful than that? Because Christmas means that God looked into the world that he created and he looked at us and he saw the mess we were in. And he wrote himself into the real world. And he came into the real world as Jesus Christ. And he didn't come just to embrace us, but to die for us. That great God in that feed trough, that's who the baby is. He lost his glory so that we unimportant people could have glory forever. He lost his peace so that we could have infinite peace. He was kicked out. There was no room for him in the end so we could dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Look at what he did for you. Now, won't you trust somebody who did all that for you? Why can't you trust him with your future? Why can't you trust him with your life? If he did all that for you, you can trust him. So you see what the angel is saying? You want to stop all your fear? Behold. Look at Christmas. Look at what he did. And to the degree you behold it, to the degree you grasp it, to the degree you treasure and ponder it in your heart, to that degree those fears will start to diminish. Fear not. Behold. Let's pray. Our Father, how we thank you that we can behold what your son did for us. We can behold what you did through your son, the great cost of what you did. If you did this, Lord, we can trust you. We can rest in your love. We can trust your sovereignty. And our fears start to just ebb out. Lord, we are fearful people. Even those of us who believe in you, we haven't really pondered and treasured these things in our hearts until our fears are gone. And we're still, to a great degree, driven by our fears. Take them away by helping us this Christmas in particular to behold the Savior, Christ the Lord. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
