TITLE: Revival on Broadway
SCRIPTURE: Acts 4:23-35
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit
SERIES: Revival
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/revival-on-broadway/

============================================================

When they heard this, they raised their voices together in prayer. Sovereign Lord, they said, you made the heaven and the earth and the sea and everything in them. You spoke by the Holy Spirit through the mouth of your servant, our father David. Why did the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of the earth take their stand, and the rulers gather together against the Lord and against his anointed one. Indeed, Herod and Pontius Pilate met together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed. They did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen. Now, Lord, consider their threats and enable your servants to speak your word with great boldness. Stretch out your hand to heal and perform miraculous signs and wonders through the name of your holy servant Jesus. And they prayed. The place where they were meeting was shaken. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness. This is God's word. I said I'm going to play college professor because there's a sense in which the Bible exposition tonight and the series I want to get into digs a little deeper than usual, or maybe I should say not spiritually deeper, but we're going to aim for understanding to get a better grasp on the kind of ministry I think that God would honor in the city today. And I'm pretty certain that it would, well, we'll see. I'm pretty certain that it will lend itself to questions. So when I'm done, I'm going to see if I can't get people to ask questions for clarification, for elaboration. So we take notes and consider the possibility of asking questions when we're done. We'll see. Okay. First of all, what happened here? In Acts chapter 4, we have a pattern that shows up not only in Acts, but I'm going to try to show you. It's shown up throughout the history of the church. It's a pattern of what I'm calling right now restoration or renewal or revival. The Bible calls it all those things. Here's how it goes. Number one, there's a crisis. The crisis we didn't really read about. You have to go back to verse 17 to read it. And that crisis, in this case, is persecution from the outside. There's a crisis. There's a problem. There's a major obstacle in the way. Number one. Number two, in response to that tremendous obstacle, the people of God band together and kind of transcendently come out of themselves. And in an extraordinary way seek God. They seek God in an extraordinary way. Together, corporately, in a prevailing, persistent way, and they seek God. Thirdly, there's a shaking. And that means, and I'll get back to this word again, there's a visitation. Again, a word that doesn't really convey much in English. Unfortunately, in our modern translation, it's just about taken out of the Bible, most places where it's used. Because it doesn't convey much. A visitation of God. A shaking. A descending of God. And, then, lastly, there's a crisis. There's an extraordinary seeking of God. There's a shaking. There's a theophany. There's a visible manifestation of the presence of God. And lastly, the people are so transformed that they turn their faces to the world, and they cut through the world, and they make an impact on the world. They cut through the world like a knife through hot, a hot knife through butter. So, there's the crisis. There's the seeking of God. There is the visitation of God. And then, lastly, there's this transformed, radiant community of people whose faces are turned away from the inside to the world, and they move on out and have an impact that's electrical. Electrifying. Now, this pattern, this cycle, is what I want to talk about tonight. It happens, actually, throughout the book of Acts. It also happened in Acts 6. In Acts 6, there's a crisis. What's the crisis? Jesus is gone. He's gone. And because he's gone, the band of disciples get together in the upper room, and secondly, they begin to pray. They begin to seek God in an extraordinary way. Thirdly, in this case, there's no shaking. There's a rushing, mighty wind. There's tongues of flame on their heads. But anyway, there's a visitation. The mistake, of course, is to demand that the visitation is the same every time. It's not even the same between Acts 4. How in the world do we expect it to be the same every time? then lastly, there's this transformed community that's so radiant and so attractive and so cosmically potent that it begins to have this remarkable impact on the world. In Acts 2, we see, after the visitation, Peter gets up and preaches, and one day there's 2,000 people that are converted and added to the church. That's not bad. There's 120 the day before. And then the next day there's 3,000. Crisis, seeking, visitation, world impact, the cycle. Well, you say, that's the book of Acts. It doesn't happen anymore. It's just not true. It ain't true. I'm trying to show you it's not. It's happened throughout history. Sometimes it happens in the small, sometimes it happens in the large, but it happens. Let me give you three examples of large cycles. One of them is the 1720s. One of them is the 1850s. One of them is the first decade of the 1900s. And I'll just be real brief about this because I am not a history professor, but at least I read up a little bit on these things. 1720. The crisis was, in America in particular, the church was becoming as dead as a doornail. And here's the reason why, especially in New England. In New England, the original, so many of the original settlers were ardent and vibrant and solid Christians. And they pictured a golden age because they said, we're going to have a Christian nation. And that, in early New England, in most of those states, you had to be a baptized, converted Christian to vote, to run for office, and to be part of the civic life at all. It didn't work. And here's the reason why. Because, as we all know, it's very difficult sometimes to raise your children in the faith. If you've ever noticed, tremendously vibrant converts to the faith, maybe converted in their 20s or their 30s or their 40s, who raised their children, and their children come up lukewarm, insipid, the spiritual backbone made of lasagna, and just very, very little spiritual power. And this happened. It happened. And it's very normal, as a matter of fact. That all those thousands of original citizens in New England were ardent, solid, converted Christians. And, of course, like everybody experiences, some of their children were converted Christians, and some of them weren't. This created a civic crisis, which I can't get into. And that is, suddenly there's all these people running around that couldn't vote and couldn't run for office, and they went into something called the halfway covenant. And the halfway covenant was you only had to be baptized, and as a child and come into the church, but you don't have to be converted in order to vote. And what happened, it led to a lot of deadness. And in 1720, the church was in such a dismal state that Cotton Mather, a great New England minister, congregational minister, in the last year and a half of his life, organized prayer cells to pray for a mighty visitation of God. And he himself got up every day and spent all day of the last 400 and some days of his life praying all day for a visitation, for a descent of the presence of God. So there's the crisis, and there's the extraordinary coming out. He died, Cotton Mather died in 1727. And in 1727, a revival broke out. It broke out in New Brunswick, New Jersey. But here's what's interesting. At the same time, in 1727, a group of Moravians, led by a guy named Zinzendorf, Count Nicholas from Zinzendorf, started a 100-year prayer meeting. That means they set aside a room and a place in which they were going to pray for a mighty visitation of God in the world, and they decided somebody would always be in there praying. At least one person would always be in that room praying for that, so that prayer meeting would never stop. And it went on from 1727 into the 1820s. It's called the 100-year prayer meeting. Started in 1727. What happened on both sides of the Atlantic was an extraordinary outpouring of the Spirit of God, a tremendous movement that historians still can't figure out. And what happened was, just literally, crowds and thousands upon thousands of people who showed no interest in Christianity began to flock into the church, began to pack the churches out to listen to the Word of God preached, and were converted in droves. People like to think that, well, way back in those days, everybody was religious. That's silly. You know, today, something like 40 to 50% of Americans go to church. Back around the year 1800, it was something like 10% of Americans went to church. It's not true. In the same time, get into all of them, but when I lived in Virginia, I decided, I knew that the Great Revival happened on both sides of the Atlantic. And that means ministers who were used to small crowds found that they had to preach three and four and five times. Just to get all the people in. Found people coming to want to be converted constantly, every single day. There was a man, I did a little research in a place called Dinwiddie County in Virginia. And Dinwiddie County, that central area of Virginia, I found the records of the Anglican Church. There was a man named Daravu Jarrett, who's got a town named after him now, who lived back in those days. And during this Great Awakening, his ministry was tremendously blessed. And I checked out the records and found out that this Anglican minister, on the average, over a three-year period during the Great Awakening, had 10 to 20 converts a day. I averaged it out. 10 to 20 converts, on the average, a day. That didn't mean every day he actually saw and baptized 10 or 20 people. But that many people were coming to Christ at his meetings. Over a three-year period, to an Episcopalian. That's what happened. That was happening all over the place. 1720s. Let me tell you about the 1850s. 1855, London churches were dead in a lot of trouble. There was a great big Baptist chapel called New Park Street Chapel that seated 1,500 people. And only 150 or so people were ever there. And it was a typical big city church. Great big sanctuary, you know, built for all these people. And there's a little tiny group of people huddled together in one corner. And they called a 19-year-old man to preach at that church. He was 19 years old. He had never even gone to high school. Finished high school. His name was Charles Spurgeon. Spurgeon led lots of people to begin to pray for a visitation of God. And he even developed a structure whereby the people, there was always a group of people praying for him whenever he preached. For the rest of his life, he had people who never probably ever heard him preach because they always prayed for him when he was preaching. There's 150 people in that church or less when he got there. One year later, there were 3,000 people coming and he baptized 300 converts. It got worse and worse. They had to knock the building down. So while they were building a new building, they went into something called the Surrey Music Gardens that seated 10,000 people. And sure enough, whenever he was in there, 10,000 people showed up. At one point, they went to something called the Crystal Palace, which seated 27,000 people. And sure enough, 27,000 people showed up. In the year 1859, the revival broke out across the world. In 1859, not only did Spurgeon have 1,000 converts get baptized and come into his church, but in that year, a little group of people started praying. Businessmen at Fulton Street, a group of six, started praying in September, I think, of 1858. And by a year later, there were 10,000 businessmen praying every noon for a visitation of God. It broke out. And some of these names may not mean much to you at this point. I think, what makes you think that I need this? But some of these names might not mean that much to you. But Hudson Taylor, who went to China. Dwight Moody, who was a great preacher and mover and founder of colleges and so on. The Cambridge Seven, which was not a group of people who were up on charges in some courtroom. But it was seven graduates of the University of Cambridge who went into missions. All of the men and women who were to leave the church for the next 40 years were all converted that year. 1859. We believe that, for example, during that tremendous awakening, one-third of all of the population of Northern Ireland was converted and brought into the church. At least two million new people joined the churches in the northeast United States from 1858 to 1859. Two million back when the population was considerably smaller. Now, you know, I'm looking at the time, and I can't keep on going. In the early 1900s, there was a major crisis in Korea. Korea was under the oppression of the Japanese. And the people were incredibly depressed. The little, tiny, little, weeny, teeny church in Korea that was very small. Korea was not a Christian nation, of course. It was dominated by Buddhism and Confucianism. Thank you. Thank you. the few pastors together for a week of prayer and Bible study, and in that week, a tremendous awakening broke out. The church in Korea has been growing ever since. The largest churches in the world are in Korea. The largest Presbyterian church in the world is in Seoul. Young Mac Presbyterian church with 55,000 people attending. The largest Methodist church is in Korea. The largest Assembly of God church, many of you have heard of it, has over 700,000 members. It's in Seoul. Because, by the way, the other thing about Koreans is they, the Korean church there, seeks God in an extraordinary way. Anyway, my wife and I, I won't forget the time we went to do a retreat for a Korean church, a large church in Philadelphia with over 1,000 members. And on Saturday night, I spoke, and everybody thanked me for it. And, you know, I was interpreted, and everybody thanked me for it. And then I went off to bed. And, you know, all night I kept hearing, I thought I kept hearing singing. And I kept saying, you know, at 3 in the morning, I said, somebody's got a record on. It turned out that they sent me to bed, but they all stayed up. And it was called, it's called Going to the Mountain. And in Korean churches in Korea, and many of them here in America, it's normal that once a month on Saturday night, you meet for a prayer meeting and you pray all night. And that's what they did. Got up in the morning, made themselves some breakfast, listened to me speak again. I said, this is a miracle! The same cycle started, and the awakening that started in Korea actually also broke out in Wales and a number of other places in the world and so on. What I'm trying to say is, there's a cycle, a crisis, an extraordinary seeking of God. You know, Jonathan Edwards wrote a major work on the subject of this cycle, and he had a nice short title for his book. He called it, A Humble Attempt to Promote Explicit Agreement and Visible Union of the People of God in Extraordinary Prayer. You got that? Jonathan Edwards, who was part of the Great Awakening in the 1720s, 30s, and 40s, recognized, there's a crisis, there's an extraordinary seeking of God, and there's a visitation. Now, I keep talking about visitation. What's visitation mean? What happens in verse 31 is that there's a shaking. The shaking is the sign of the presence of God. In Exodus, we know that when God descended on Mount Sinai, there was an earthquake, and it was a sign of His presence. It means He visited. Now, this is a very tough thing for people to understand, because people say, I thought God was everywhere, so how in the world can He come and visit? I mean, isn't He here? Isn't He everywhere? I thought God's everywhere. So what's this stuff about visiting? And yet, the Bible talks about it. For example, I'll take your, I don't think this is going to help, but it tastes so good. Don't you wish you could have some? A small reward for the way I'm punishing myself right now. Yeah. It's just a hot day. The Bible talks about God, hey, it worked. The Bible talks about God visiting people constantly. For example, in Genesis 21, we're told the Lord visited Sarah, and she became pregnant and bore a son. What? We see it again and again. Again, in Psalm 69, in a completely different context, the psalmist says, you visit the earth and you water it, enriching it abundantly. The streams of God fill the earth with grain. When God visits the earth, things begin to sprout. Things begin to blossom. Things begin to grow. And in Psalm 80, there's a prayer for revival, where the Israelites pray this to God. God, restore us, O God, almighty. Show us your face and make your face shine upon us. Return to us. Look upon the vine you have planted and visit us. What's it talking about? Every time the Bible talks about visitation, it's talking about, O Lord, come near, so that the latent potential for growth, the latent power that's within us will blossom. When God comes to Sarah, she becomes fruitful. When God comes to the earth, it blossoms and becomes fruitful. When God comes to the vine, that's Israel, that's the people of God, it comes near. It's restored. We're renovated. We are restored to our primeval, pristine, grandfathers. Bible's talking about. The visitation simply means that God's presence comes near, and when that happens, we blossom. We open up. We open up. The Bible talks about this in many ways other than visitation. For example, in Isaiah 64, this is the prayer. Oh, that thou wouldst rend the heavens and come down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence. What's this? I thought God is everywhere, and yet here, they're saying, oh, Lord, come down and step on us and bring yourself down, and what it's saying is the presence of God is so real. When the presence of God envelops you and you experience it, it is more real than the mountains. It is more enduring, so enduring that the mountains look like brevity, so solid that the mountains look like liquid. They run down. When you've experienced the presence of God, something happens to you. Things that look like mountains look like jello. Things that look absolutely immovable become absolutely surmountable. Things that seem that they stood in your way and there's no way you can get around them suddenly become small-looking. You see the things that are important, the things that will last, things that you feel like, I can't do without that. I have to get that. I have to have that, even if it means cheating or disobeying God to get it, and now suddenly, in the presence of God, you say, what was that? What was that I wanted so much? What was that? Who knows what that is? Because only God becomes solid-looking and everything becomes ephemeral, everything else. The presence of God, a visitation of God's royal raw presence coming down into the midst of the church. That's what they were seeking, and that's what they got, and that's what the Bible talks about all the time. Now, quick. One of the reasons people get very confused is they say, I thought God's presence is everywhere. How can we talk about God's presence coming down into the church or coming down here or there? And the answer is, the Christian understanding of God is very different than the New Age understanding of God, and the Eastern understanding of God, from which the New Age gets its understanding of God. In fact, if you were to think about theologies, there's really only three. You've got a Western theology, you've got an Eastern theology, and you've got a Christian theology, and the Western theologies, you know, the old Western religions, the Norse religions, and the Greek religions, the Roman religions, had personal gods, but who were not infinite. They were personal, but not infinite. They were personal. You know, Zeus, Apollos, all those guys, they were personal, but they weren't infinite. They made mistakes. They did dumb things. They could get too angry and afterwards regret it. Personal, but not infinite. On the other hand, the Eastern understanding of God, from which the New Age gets its understanding of God, is God is infinite, but not personal. God is a force. God is everywhere. God is the authentic ground of being. But you don't talk to God, and He certainly doesn't talk back to you. He doesn't say things to you. He can't speak to you. You can become conscious of Him. You can tap into Him in His power. But even using the word Him is just an anthropomorphism. It's not the right way to talk, because He's infinite, but He's not personal. The Christian God is both personal and infinite. He's a person. He can talk to you. He can know you. He can speak to you. But He's also infinite. And that means, therefore, there's two aspects to His presence. You see, in the Eastern understanding of God, you tap into God, but there's no obedience. Why? Because He's not a person. He makes no demands on you. You know, there's no accountability. Any of you that have ever had a love relationship with any human being, with any person, you know that you have got to deal with their desires. You've got to submit yourself to their interests and their concerns. There's a sense in which you have to put yourself under that person's desires. There's, in a sense, you have to obey their needs. In the Eastern understanding of God, there is no obedience. There's no personal dealing. In the Western understanding of God, you know, God is someone that you just have to manipulate, sort of like your father. You know, you know what, you know, he's a good guy, but also he's got some faults and you have to give him what he needs in order to deal with them. But the Christian understanding of God is He's personal and infinite. And so that means, in one sense, He's everywhere. But there's another sense of His presence, which means His relational presence. All of you are actually in my presence. And yet, the counter-communication... We're having... you can hear me, I think. But if some of you come down front afterwards and sit, and I sit down and we talk face-to-face, don't you see what's happened is the communication level, the relational level, has been deeply intensified. You're in my presence, but you can be more in my presence, you see. And what we mean by presence is the level of relation, the level of intimate knowledge. When we talk about the presence of God, for example, when Jonah, which we talked about this morning, when it says Jonah fled from the presence of God, Jonah wasn't a jerk. He knew he can't flee from the omnipresence, the fact that God's everywhere. He was fleeing from the felt presence of God. He didn't want to deal with God. He didn't want to talk to God. He didn't want to deal with him personally. The visitation that Peter prayed for, that the apostles prayed for, that Cotton Mather prayed for, that the Koreans prayed for, that Spurgeon prayed for, that the 100-year prayer meeting prayed for, they knew what they wanted. They asked for it. They had read about it, they had heard about it, and they were after it. What were they after? They were after a completely transformed community, transformed by a visitation of the presence of God in their midst. They wanted God to come down into the church and into our lives. And just like Psalm 69 says, when God visits and waters the earth, all kinds of wonderful flowers and plants and fruit-bearing trees come up. So when God comes near our hearts, there's all kinds of latent potentialities for greatness, for majesty, for grace, for love, for wisdom just come springing out of our hearts. That's what we want, that's what we want, they said. And they went after it. And they wouldn't take no for an answer. Isaiah 62 says, Take no rest and give God no rest until He makes Jerusalem the praise of all the earth. An incredible statement. That's a command that says, That's something that these people wanted. That's something these people knew could happen. And they went after it. And because they went after it, the church, not just in Acts 2 and not just in Acts 4, but also in the 1720s and also in the 1850s and also many other places and times, knew a complete renewal, a renovation, a restoration to New Testament normalcy. And the impact they had on the world was unbelievable. Even the historians, even the historians, most of whom, have got what you might call naturalistic spectacles. They take a look at history and they have to look at it, not through the eyes of faith, but they look at it through the eyes of a kind of, you know, a kind of scientific method that's stripped of any possibility of the supernatural. And they look at it and they still don't know what to make of it. Now listen, why am I bringing this up? I've just given you a theology of renewal, of visitation, of revival. What is a revival? What's a revival on Broadway? Revival on Broadway is some great thing we've heard about from the past and we want to experience that again. And usually, we don't. But we're talking about a different kind of revival on Broadway. Now look, the notes I've given you are notes that we will be working through over a period of time. But I want to point out several things in the next seven minutes and then that gives us time for questions and answers. I hope your questions, I hope some answers, I don't know. Now, I've given you a definition of revival, but I also at this point want to show you something. I'm getting dangerously close to making distinctions I don't usually like to do in public, but I am not trying to criticize any churches at this point. But what I want to do is I want to lay a groundwork for an understanding of how God's power relates to a church that really sets our ministry apart from most other churches. Not because I want to be unique, but simply because I think this is the way in which the church ought to operate. And I hope this particular approach spreads all over the city. Look, the top of your handout. A revival is a work of God in which the church is both beautified and empowered because the normal operations of the Holy Spirit, conviction of sin, enjoyment of grace, and access to the presence of God are intensified. You got that? Have you memorized that yet? actually four views of revival. Four. Now, the average church doesn't think it has a view, but almost every church does. Because the first view is not one that I've mentioned here. I'm going to call it the view of mainline religion. The mainline religion church's view of revival is, there's no such thing. The mainline religion view of revival is, who needs it? And I feel kind of insulted, and it sounds emotional, and I don't think that we need that kind of fanaticism around here. I want you to know that virtually all of the Ivy League colleges were originally started because the college that was started a few years before had lost its view of revival. Harvard was started. A few years later, Yale was started because Harvard no longer believed in revival. Princeton was started later because Yale no longer believed in revival. In fact, when Princeton University was started, you take a look at the documents and you will see that it was built to raise up people who believed in the revival of religion. They believed in the particular cycle and dynamic I'm talking about. Because the other institutions had fallen into what I'm saying is the first view of revival, and that is that there's no such thing. It's just a lot of hooplets, an awful lot of emotionalism. Emotionalism, we don't need it. And it's kind of insulting for you to even imply that we do. That's the first view. The second view of revival is a view I'm calling a fundamentalist view. And the fundamentalist view of revival is something, if any of you have lived in the Midwest or the South and have been around those areas, you'll see every so often that you'll find churches that out front will put a sign up and it'll say, Revival, from September 29th to October 8th, 7.30 to 9.30 every night. Now, have you ever seen that? A lot of you said, what? You haven't seen that. That's outside of your experience. But some of you have seen that. And, you know, of course, I'll tell you something. Cotton Mather would laugh at that. How in the world can you just decide to have something that only God can send? Especially two hours a night from September 29th to October 8th. A particular understanding of revival has developed over the last hundred years that says, Sure, we can have a revival. We can pack the church out. What we have to do is we have to have enough advertising. We have to have enough music. We have to be really well-oiled and have a lot of people bringing people. And we have to have prizes for the people that bring the most people. And we've got to have a lot of people. We've got to have a really loud preacher, one that doesn't lose his voice. And we've got to do this. In other words, if we orchestrate it properly, we can have lots of attendance. We can have lots of decisions for Christ and so on. And that's a view that I don't think the Bible in any way supports. It doesn't mean, frankly, that you shouldn't try to get lots of people to come to church. It doesn't mean that you shouldn't have wonderful music. It doesn't mean you shouldn't advertise. It just means that none of those things, none of those things ever have brought what Peter prayed for, or what Cotton Mather prayed for, what the Koreans prayed for, what Spurgeon was praying for, they realized that that's not something they could pull off themselves. Because the dynamic of revival starts inside. It takes the people of God, and it revolutionizes their life, so that they are turned outward toward the world, and they have a remarkable impact. There's a third view of revival, and I call it the charismatic view. Now, I've got to be mighty careful here, because, you know, there's a certain sense in which there's a whole lot of overlap in the evangelical world, in my mind, between fundamentalist, evangelical, charismatic. I'm using a lot of words that are jargon words right now, and a lot of you are lost. I'm sorry. Maybe you want to ask me some questions about that. But I'm not going to try to define myself at this point. When I use the word charismatic, I'm just saying there is a tendency in the charismatic churches to have a view of revival that goes something like this. Now, you see, that's a very unscientific statement. I'm not saying all churches that call themselves charismatic believe these things. I'm not saying that. I'm not saying everything that the charismatics believe about revival is wrong. I'm not saying that either. I'm saying there's a tendency for this view to be promulgated in those churches. And the view goes like this. It says that the essential marks of a revival is when extraordinary acts In other words, when people are healed, when people are getting words from the Lord, when there's tremendous miracles happening, then you know we have a revival. That's what a revival is. Now the problem is, both biblically and historically, you can't make that stick. Because even though there have been some wonderful revivals in which there have been miracles, there have been other wonderful revivals in which there haven't been. And you can even see from Acts 2, where they ask for God's shaking and coming down, and down comes a rushing mighty wind and tongues of flame and so on. But in Acts 4, they pray for the same thing, and it's something totally different that happens. An earthquake, and no tongues of flame, and no speaking in tongues in Acts 4. You cannot make it stick. The essence of revival are the three things I've mentioned right here. In fact, as I read them, I'll read them and then we're going to be done. But a man who, one of my heroes, George Whitefield, who was a great preacher in the early 1700s, he was one of these ministers that was seeing 10, 20, 30 people being converted a day, and whole communities transformed. And there was a little group of people that was something called the Fetter Lane Society, a Moravian prayer meeting, with a bunch of people that knew him. And they wrote him a letter, and they said, we're praying for you. We don't believe the power of God has really fallen on you, and you haven't really experienced revival because there's no miracles happening in your ministry. And George, in a very humble way, wrote this back. And when I read this letter, it sealed it for me. He said, alas, what need is there of miracles such as healing sick bodies and restoring sight to blind eyes when we see greater miracles done every day by the power of the gospel preached to them? And if we have the thing already, which such miracles were only intended to introduce, why should we tempt God in requiring further signs? You see what he's saying? He says, what's the point of miracles? Look in the Bible. The whole point of miracles is to get people to believe the gospel. And if people are believing the gospel in droves, and there's both social and emotional and spiritual healing in communities because the gospel is running like lightning through the community, but there are no miracles, why do you need miracles now? Hmm? What's the big deal, he says. The whole idea of miracles is to get the gospel believed. And therefore, the essence of real revival is not the extraordinary operations of the Spirit, but the ordinary operations of the Spirit, the joy we have, the reality of God being real to you, conviction of sin, the ordinary things the Spirit does, making God so real to you that the mountains look like jello. That is the essential work of the Spirit of God in a great time of renewal and visitation. And therefore, the three marks of revival are these. I'll just introduce you to them, and then we stop. In every one of these cycles, in every one of these dynamics, and you see what I've said, that the dynamic I'm showing you differs from the popular view that says we've got to have a lot of miracles. That gives you hype. That tends to force people's emotions. It does. But it's also different from the attitude that basically there's nothing higher to expect than the kind of church life we've got right now. Oh my gosh. Instead of that, we're talking about a theology revival that has high expectations but refuses to think that we can pull this thing off on our own. It gives us a balance. Therefore, every time I've ever seen this dynamic working, it's got these three marks to it. Number one, there's an outpouring of the Spirit on believers. What's that mean? It means that the presence of God is amongst us in such a way that we begin to actually find Christ more real to us than ever. That's the essence of it. We're overwhelmed by his nearness and reality, and as a result, our relationship to Christ and the church is more important than anything else in our lives. We become much more attractive. We don't suddenly become more eloquent people, but our character becomes such that it gives punch to what we say to people about the Lord. This renewal begins always with a deep conviction of sin and proceeds to a concomitant wonder and enjoyment of grace and love. It was grace that taught my heart to fear, and grace my fears relieved. That's the first mark. Secondly, as a result of the outpouring of the Spirit, the people of the world are attracted to the people of the world. way. The people of the world are attracted and sought out by believers. In other words, people who are not sure what they know about God, they say something's going on here, and they find themselves being drawn in. On the one hand, unbelievers are attracted by powerful changes in life. There's a beautified community of the king. On the other hand, believers are burdened to pray for and seek out other people. And as a result, whenever there's revival, you know, it's silly to say we're growing in quality, but we're not growing in quantity. That's really impossible. How could that be? How could you say, I'm growing more like Christ, but I'm not getting more and more effective at actually talking to people for him? I mean, Christ was tremendously effective in the lives of people. He saw how he would reach out to people. He wasn't afraid to talk with them. He wasn't afraid to dig in there. He wasn't afraid to listen. He wasn't afraid to be vulnerable. And as a result, he was the most winsome person, and people followed him. How in the world can you say, I'm growing more like Christ qualitatively, but there's nobody coming to Christ in our church? That can't be done. One, qualitative and quantitative growth have to increase together because they have to. It's impossible to have one without the other. Thirdly, there is an impact on the community and even the society surrounding the church. When people are really changed, it's not just a private thing. One of the scariest things about the so-called evangelical resurgence that the media talks about a lot, it talks about all the big churches full of born-again people, and I doubt very much that what we have been going through in this country over the last 20 years could be called a revival. And the reason for that is because whenever there has been a real revival, there are massive social changes. Massive. The Great Awakening in England in the 1720s, 30s, and 40s, historians will say it was probably one of the reasons why England did not have a bloody revolution at the end of that century the way France did. Because masses of the poor were won to Christ, and a lot of their bitterness was taken away, and the church began to reach out and help. And there was not, because of the massive spread of the gospel through the poor, there was not the same kind of alienated, incredibly bitter underclass that there was in France that created that bloody revolution. In this country, almost all of the original great colleges and universities in this country, especially in the Northeast, not all of them, but a tremendous number of them, so many of the hospitals, so many of the orphanages, so many of these things were started by Christians. In countries and in villages where the gospel spread through, there was a tremendous change in the crime levels, tremendous changes in the attitudes, in the relationships between management and labor. There was tremendous social healing within families. There was a tremendous impact in the society, and that's why we put down here that the result always of real revivals is that people of different social classes, having been won to Christ, begin to bear fruit in the culture, bringing mercy and justice there. Thus, a large number of real Christians change a community in all its dimensions, economic, social, artistic, political, intellectual, and so on. Last thing. These three effects of revival, back, and that's all, may be small or large, they may be long or short, they may be dramatic or kind of quiet, they may be white-sprayed or localized, but they are subject to different degrees. And yet, without these dynamics in place, a church can grow in numbers, but the growth might not have much lasting results. Actually, lots of churches in America grow rapidly, but they have telltale symptoms of lifelessness. This dynamic has got to be engaged if the church is really going to have the impact on a city that we are seeing. Now, if you understand what I've said tonight, and I'm not sure you do yet, because I'm not sure I was all that lucid, you see that there's a kind of ministry that we could develop here that really, in some ways, borrows from other traditions, and yet isn't, you know, we have four different kinds of views. We've got the view that says we don't need revival, we've got the view that says we can have one anytime we want, we've got the one that says, well, there's got to be certain miraculous signs, and it sort of forces and hypes it, and there's a view that says, no, no, no, no, the dynamics of revival we need, but we cannot pull off by ourselves. We expect tremendous things, but at the same time we humbly seek for them. So that gives us both an expectant, and yet at the same time a very down-to-earth and realistic... going to work, and I'm going to ask this. If somebody, in taking notes, said, I don't understand something, or I'd like more elaboration on that, or I'd like you to give me another example of that, now's the time to try it. If this doesn't work, by the way, and nobody asks any questions, or if my answers are horrible, I won't do this again. But we've got a couple minutes, and this is more in the line of sort of a teaching series, even more than a preaching series. So I'd like to hear from you right now to see. Also, I need to find out if I'm on the money at all, if I'm getting through. Who's got a question? Anybody write something down? Anybody got something? Raise your hand and try to say it so that I can hear it. Then I'll repeat the question for everybody.
