TITLE: Rigoletto: Can an Opera Reveal the Meaning of Life? (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Sin
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/rigoletto-can-an-opera-reveal-the-meaning-of-life-an-open-forum/

============================================================

One of my favorite comments ever by an artist was Flannery O'Connor, the great short story writer. When somebody asked her about one of her short stories, she asked her, could you please tell me what that short story is really all about? Could you put it in a nutshell? And she said, if I could put it in a nutshell, I wouldn't have had to write the story. And the fact is, of course, art stands on its own, and whatever I say here can't improve on it, but it might throw some of the things that you just saw into relief. Why does a man like Giuseppe Verdi, by the way, Giuseppe Verdi, my wife always says, you know, he sounds really impressive, so you realize in English his name is just Joe Green, okay? Giuseppe Verdi, okay. So, okay, now that we've done a little bit of demystification, why did Joe Green write that? He was attracted to a great story, a play by Victor Hugo, that had been written, of course, in French and with all French characters. It was exactly, almost exactly the story you just saw. Victor Hugo's story was actually banned because the king of France thought that the duke seemed an awful lot like him. And it was banned, and Verdi actually says that when he read the story, he thought it was, especially the character of Rigoletto, was one of the best characters, he said, one of the most important creations of the theater of all countries and ages. Now, what's interesting is that Victor Hugo himself, at one point, wrote a one-paragraph synopsis, kind of disproved what Flannery O'Connor said, a one-paragraph synopsis of what he thought his play was all about. And even though his character was not named Rigoletto, it was named, the hunchback was named Tribolet, I'll just put the word Rigoletto in his comments here, just to make sure you understand so it's not too confusing. And he says this, this is Victor Hugo talking about the story you just saw, Rigoletto is deformed, Rigoletto is unhealthy, Rigoletto is a court buffoon, a three-fold misery which makes him evil. Rigoletto hates the duke because he's king, the nobles because they're nobles, and he hates all ordinary people because they do not have humps on their back. His only pastime is to set the nobles unceasingly against the duke, crushing the weaker by the stronger. He encourages the duke in tyranny, in ignorance, and in vice. He lures him to the families of gentlemen, pointing out the wife to seduce, the sister to carry off, and the daughter to dishonor. He uses the duke to ruin the lives of others. Meanwhile, Rigoletto's only joy and good in the world is his daughter. He hides her away in a deserted part of the city. Nobody even knows she exists. The more he spreads the contagion and vice in town, the more he seeks to isolate and immunize his daughter from the poison he fosters. But the same duke whom Rigoletto urges to rape will ravish Rigoletto's daughter, and the vengeance Rigoletto wants to bring down upon the duke will slay his only child. Now, there's no doubt what kind of story this is. There's a lot of different ways of categorizing narratives, and this is a tragedy. And it was Aristotle who gave the best definition to tragedy, the classic definition. Aristotle says tragedy is not melodrama, because in melodrama, you've got, and this is what the typical Hollywood movie is, a melodrama. You've got very good, one-dimensionally good characters, and very evil, wicked, one-dimensionally villainous characters. But a tragedy is a person who's very good in many, many ways, but who overreaches, and who overreaches in a couple of different ways, who in some cases puts a thing in the place of God or puts himself or herself in the place of God. And as a result, what happens is, though things are going very well, it's what Aristotle calls the peripatea, which is the reversal, that a fairly good person, even maybe in some cases a great person, who's up here because of a tragic flaw, because of overreach, because of putting something in the place of God or himself in the place of God, there's a reversal, and suddenly he's destroyed, and that's a tragedy. And that's obviously what Rigoletto is about. Rigoletto is by no means a one-dimensionally villainous person. Rather, he's a person, especially as you get to know him, he's a person that you really feel for and you admire in many ways. He's an incredibly loving, doting father, but he overreaches in three ways. And in this way, we're going to see how Rigoletto, the story, does tell us something about how we ought to live. And here's the three things. The three things that Rigoletto does, the three, remember I said Aristotle says, you know, the features of tragedy are a good person, even a great person, who overreaches in several ways and brings about this reversal. at the bottom. And what are those things in Rigoletto? There's three things that Rigoletto does. He experiences tragedy by, one, putting his daughter in the place of God as the only hope. Two, putting himself in the place of judge, you see, as the only judge. Putting his daughter in the place of God as the only hope. Putting himself in the place of God as the only judge. And thirdly, envying the inner ring. And these three things, I'm going to play off of the only thing I know much about, which is the biblical literature. I'm not going to try to, I think in some ways Rigoletto shows us what some of the things the Bible says mean. And in many ways, I think some of the things the Bible says help us understand what Rigoletto teaches us. But anyway, the first thing is, the first thing he does, he puts his daughter in the place of God as the only hope. This is the first great spiritual mistake, life mistake, that unravels his life. Unravels it. Now, one of the main themes, and you know what, even though I just said I'm going to connect these things to the biblical literature, all three of these themes, putting his daughter in the place of God as his only hope, putting himself in the place of God as the only judge, and envying the inner ring. All three of these themes are major themes in all of literature, in all the cultures, and really even in all the religions. And one of the main themes is, if you love anything more than God, you will destroy it. If you love anything more than God, the weight of your love will destroy the thing you love most. And so, for example, now this is a secular scholar of opera who is writing an essay on the meaning of Rigoletto. And he says this, he says, Rigoletto's, quote, overprotective parental love, verging on the obsessive, in the end smothers the young Gilda, making her more curious about the outside world that she is not allowed to explore, and simultaneously more naive and vulnerable to it. As such, ironically, she becomes more easy prey for the predations of the lecherous duke. Verity shows us, in short, that you can love something so much, you end up smothering and killing it. Now, how does that work? Let me just say that, in some ways, a great tragedy like that is easy to miss the points. Because they're all, you might say, extreme or dramatic versions of what's happening in our lives in relatively more, less dramatic ways. But the fact of the matter is, there are lots of people, and I mean lots of people, who actually love their children more than anything else in the world. That doesn't sound so bad, now does it? I love my children more than anything else in the world, you hear somebody say. You don't turn and say, evil, get away from me. No, you don't. And yet, listen, what Verity is teaching us, what this particular narrative is teaching us, and actually what all kinds of other pieces of literature teach us, is that if you do love your children more than anything in the world, if your happiness is really based on their success, or if your happiness is based on them loving and respecting you, and there's nothing that matters more than that, you will destroy them. You'll destroy them. Now, this is, you'll destroy anything that you do that to. Anything. But let's just talk about the one that Rigoletto does, and just show you, this is actually, what I said is, this is a fairly invisible sin, because it sure looks like a virtue, does it not? Listen, if you build your life on your children's success, and your children's love and respect, when they're little, two things will happen. Either, two things might happen, either, you will under-discipline them because you're so afraid, you're almost, you get panicky when you see them mad at you. You get panicky when you see them upset. And so you under-discipline them, so you ruin them. They grow up totally self-indulgent and, you know, undisciplined, or without self-discipline. Or, on the other hand, because you want them to be so perfect, you over-discipline. You're on them all the time. You're riding them all the time, and you destroy them that way. Because either you succeed, and they become incredibly insecure, perfectionistic kids, always eaten up, always with ulcers, or else they want to get away from you as soon as they possibly can, as soon as they get old enough to do so. Sometimes before they get old enough to do so. And that's just one example. If you love anything more than God, you will destroy it. Or, in some cases, it will destroy you. That's pretty basic. It's pretty simple. But it's absolutely true. In fact, this commentator comes back and says, Jilda shows all the... says, Verdi shows us that he's a master of psychology and subtlety. Gilda is not entirely the innocent girl that we might expect in her character. She is headstrong and rebellious. Time and again, she goes against her father's wishes and meets with the Duke secretly. And even after she is abducted and raped, she continues to love and defend the Duke and in the end sacrifices her life to save his. But as she does so, we perceive much more naivete and gullibility than unselfishness. And so what that scholar is saying, and I think he's absolutely right, is he's saying that Rigoletto ruined his daughter by protecting her, by trying to keep her away from the big bad world, made her star-eyed in front of it, made her vulnerable to the lecherous Duke, made her even desire so desperately to have a relationship like this because she'd been so sheltered. He destroyed her by loving her too much, by loving her obsessively, by loving her more than anything else. And he says so at the end. He says, you're my treasure. I don't even want to live if you're gone. Anybody you say that to, anything you say that to, you will destroy unless it's God. That's the first point. Second point. So the first thing he does, the first tragic flaw, the first thing that creates that peripatea, that reversal that brings a good person down to the depths, destroys them and unravels his life, is putting his daughter in the place of God as the only hope. But secondly, the second thing he does is Rigoletto puts himself in the place of God as the only judge. When he decides to have a revenge on the Duke, when he decides he's going to have him killed, he puts himself in the place of God and sets himself up as judge. And the great irony, of course, is by putting his daughter in the place of God, he set her up to be vulnerable to somebody like the Duke. But in actually putting himself in the place of God, his vengeance actually in the end slays his daughter, finishes her off. So the one sin, the one mistake, sets her up and the second sin finishes her off. And now this theme, this idea that if you take revenge on others, if you stay bitter, if you hold grudges, and if you go after people to try to see, give them their comeuppance or harm them or pay them back, it will recoil on you and you'll do more evil to yourself in the end than you ever could do to the other person. This is something all through themes of all kinds of literature. Now, the classic ones are in the Bible. So for example, Proverbs 24, 29 says, don't say, as he did to me, I will do to him. I will repay him according to his deeds. Don't do that, it says. Here's the classic one, Proverbs 26, 27. I use the King James Bible because it seems so holy when you say it. Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that rolleth a stone, it will return upon him. Or you have Psalm 7, it goes like this. He who digs a hole and scoops it out falls into the pit he has made. The trouble he causes will recoil on him. His violence will come down upon his own head. Now, this, by the way, now this isn't just the Bible. I was just reading a Grimm's fairy tale the other day out of the Andrew Lang fairy books. It's called The Two Travelers, and it's about, it's a Grimm's fairy tale, which are pagan fairy tales. They're from ancient pre-Christian, you know, northern European culture. And it's about, it literally is about the same thing. It's about a shoemaker who really hates a tailor because the shoemaker is a grumpy person. The tailor is a happy person. Everybody likes the tailor. Everybody likes the shoemaker. And when they're off in the woods and they're going through the woods on a trip, the shoemaker took a lot more bread and food than the tailor. And when the tailor is beginning to starve to death and the shoemaker has food, the tailor says, look, could you give me some bread so I don't starve to death? And the shoemaker says, sure, if you don't mind me putting out one of your eyes. And so he says, okay, I'd rather have that than to die. So he gives him some bread and then he stabs him in the right eye. Two days later, same thing happens. He says, we're still not out of the woods. I still need, could you give me some bread? And the shoemaker says, sure, if you let me put out your second eye. He says, well, I guess it puts out the eye. Fairy tale. Fairy tale. But an ancient pre-Christian fairy tale. But in the end, what ends up happening is a shoemaker loses his sight and goes rushing off into the woods to die of starvation. And the tailor gets his sight back because someone weeps over him. It's, you know, they're supposedly pagan, but I mean, but you read that and you say, man, that's, hmm. I mean, there you have it in the Bible. There you have it in Confucianism. You have it in Buddhism. You have it in Hinduism. You have it in Christianity. When you seek, when you have a grudge and you have it in for somebody and you gloat over their, over bad things happening to them and they, uh, you, you seek their harm or even will their harm and you, you hold that grudge, that evil will recoil on you. It will just, it will harm you more than I can. wait a minute that doesn't always happen yeah rigoletto what happened yeah that strange grim fairy tales now you know why they call them grim fairy tales and uh uh yeah but that doesn't always happen in fact isn't psalm 37 psalm 73 aren't all these psalms about the fact that that very bad people all these evildoers and perpetrators are doing things and and they don't get their comeuppance they continue to have good lives the evil doesn't seem to recoil on them but derrick kidner my favorite bible scholar uh in his commentary on psalm 7 says this perfectly he says this verse says that evil always comes home to roost now this principle operates unevenly in the material realm but inescapably in the realm of the spirit in the terrible hardening and poisoning effect of a wrong attitude on the one that harbors it far more disaster comes to him or her than any suffering inflicted on others do you hear that in the terrible hardening and poisoning effect of a wrong attitude on the one who harbors it there will be far more disastrous effects on you the one harboring it than on anyone that you harbor it against now you say how could that be let me count the ways but i'm not going to do take too long listen i've seen men who are making all kinds of terrible choices about women because they really basically don't trust them at all and because they don't trust them all there's a whole lot of women that they should be trusting that they won't they're making all kinds of bad choices why because some woman hurt them and they never forgave that woman and as a result that's twisted them and they don't even know it because she he's because the guy's refusing to forgive the woman he doesn't realize that but he distrusts women and he's become a fool in certain key ways and i've certainly seen women do the same thing with men and i've certainly seen people be bitter against somebody of a certain social class or even a certain race and it just it it creates a caricature of everybody in that class or everybody in that race and as a result you don't trust those people but there's a lot of people you ought to be trusting and because you're not trusting those people you're making all kinds of bad mistakes and that's just the beginning of what bitterness will do to you bitterness holding on to a grudge sitting in the seat of god a certain certain what that person ought to be getting you know you're you're sitting in the judgment seat it will harden you it'll make you more self-pitying it'll make you a more difficult person and in all kinds of ways that you won't even see all kinds of other ways there'll be relationships that won't happen and good things that won't happen to you because you have made yourself into that an attitude like that if you listen if you try to put anybody else in the pit if you try to put anybody else in that sack eventually you'll find it's your treasure your heart and your soul that you've put in there and you've buried it and that's something that doesn't not just the bible says but all wise people who have know anything about life have said so the first thing that rigoletto does unravel his life is putting his daughter in the place of god secondly putting himself in the place of god is you know his judge but the last thing and in some ways maybe the most pervasive theme of the whole story is envy of the inner ring you remember what uh victor hugo said when he said rigoletto was deformed rigoletto was unhealthy and rigoletto is uh a court buffoon a threefold misery that makes him evil he hates the duke because he's king he hates the nobles just because they're nobles and he hates ordinary men because they don't have humps on their back now what he's actually i don't think victor hugo is exactly right here and here's why i don't think so don't believe he's actually right because he says because he's been excluded because he's deformed because he's a buffoon he's been excluded he's never been popular he's always been put on the outside of all the inner rings and because of that that's made him evil i don't believe that's true it's his response to the exclusion that's made him evil because he envies the inner rings he wishes he was in it and that's one of the reasons why he hates the nobles for being on the inner ring he hates the duke for being on the inner ring and what he is doing with his entire life is setting them against each other to prove to himself they're just puppets and i'm the puppeteer inner rings are everywhere and they're unavoidable but c.s lewis in 1944 uh gave a a speech as a talk uh i think a memorial oration to a group of oxford students and he wrote a classic text about uh the the desire and the envy of being on the inner ring and he said something very right he said inner rings are inevitable in any social organization in any community they're neutral they're unavoidable they're neutral but your attitude is not neutral and this is what he said which i think is extremely important especially under these circumstances he said he said he said be on the inner ring and the terror of being outside. Victorian fiction is full of characters who are riddled by the desire to get into what was called society. But it must be understood that that form of social snobbery is only one form of the longing to be in the inner ring. People who are free from the desire to enter the inner ring of society, in fact, people who read satires on such snobbery, may do so with a tranquil superiority and yet are devoured by the desire for the inner ring in another form. Maybe for you it's not a large lighted room and champagne that you want, but the sacred little studio apartment, the heads bent together, and the delicious knowledge that we, we four or five or six, are the only people who really know. The desire for the inner ring conceals itself. Virginity is not lost so much in obedience to Venus than in obedience to the caucus. That's exactly what happened to Gilda. The chaste are outsiders. They are ignorant of something that we know. They are the uninitiated. So this desire is one of the great permanent mainsprings of human action. I don't believe the economic motive and the erotic motive can account for all of this. Even if you add ambition and pride, the picture is incomplete. The lust, the longing to be inside takes so many forms. Do you believe that's true of you? The older I get, I read this essay many, many years ago, and the older I get, I mean, when I first read it, I said, not me. The older I get, the more I see it. In fact, by the way, on the break page of the New York Times this morning, of the back of the first section, it was a big ad for Bloomingdale's, okay? And the Bloomingdale's ad says in it, it's a female model, and it says, get the look now. And it says, this is it, what the girls in the know are wearing. Now, in the know is hyphenated. In the know is hyphenated. What does that mean? Get the look now. This is it, what the girls in the know are wearing. Right off the runways, one season ahead, be on the street in these clothes now. What the girls in the know will be wearing. What is that? And here's what Lewis, how he concludes. My purpose is to convince you that this desire is one of the great permanent mainsprings of human action. This fear of being outside, this desire to be on the inner ring, this creates the world as we know it, the pell-mell of struggle, of competition, confusion, and unless you take measures to prevent it, it is going to be one of the chief motives of your life. As long as you are governed by the desire to be on the inside, you will never be satisfied. Until you conquer the fear of being an outsider, an outsider you will remain. Now, everybody, as far as I know, in this whole play is like that. Jilda desperately wants to finally get out of her, you know, her cocoon, and she's just swept off her feet by this worldly duke. Rigoletto is angry because he's been put on the outside. And if you really look carefully, you'll see that every single person, Maddalena, everybody, is trying to prove themselves and trying to get power. And if you let that continue to run you, until you recognize the desire in yourself, it will actually, you'll be able to find, it will make you make all kinds of lousy choices. Now, let me just finish like this. How could Rigoletto, how could anybody overcome this fear, this hatred of being on the outside? Remember what Lewis said? He said, until you recognize, you see, until you conquer the fear of being an outsider, an outsider you will remain. This is real fast, but let me just suggest this. The opposite of a tragedy is what? The opposite of a catastrophe is what Tolkien called a eucatastrophe. J.R.R. Tolkien said, the opposite of a tragedy, which is a very, very good person overreaching, you see, and falling to the ground, that's a tragedy. But he says, a romance, what he calls a fairy tale, or a romance, which is just as ancient a piece of literature. In that situation, what you have is usually a weak person who in the end has another kind of reversal and is redeemed and is brought out of the, you know, a victory comes out of the jaws of defeat. And the ultimate fairy tale, this doesn't mean it's untrue, but the ultimate eucatastrophe, the ultimate anti-tragedy, all tragedies are a good person being brought low, a deformed person trying to be king and being brought low. But there was, according to the Bible, a king who was willing to become a deformed person. It actually talks about him this way. marred beyond that of a human likeness. Sounds like Rigoletto, doesn't it? We were appalled at him. He was despised. He was rejected of men. He was a man of sorrows, acquainted with grief. But the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed. The gospel story is the opposite of Rigoletto, actually. It's not the king. It's not a deformed person who's been pushed on the outside, who desperately wants to be on the inside. It's desperately trying to exert power, and as a result, falls. Instead, we have a king, the king of the universe, Jesus Christ, Son of God, who is willing to become deformed, who is willing to become a human being, who is willing to become a rejected human being, a person who was on the outside and who eventually was crucified outside the gate of Jerusalem, which was a sign of rejection. We have an insider who is willing to become an outsider, and the whole reason was to redeem us of our sins. But what would that mean? If you know that the ultimate insider became an outsider for you, and he did that for you, this is the Christian gospel. Do you know what that means? It means it takes you into the ultimate inner ring, the only inner ring that matters, the ring of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, who loves you and has reached out to you and said, we want you. We want to have fellowship with you. So Christianity actually answers, in many ways, every tragedy, but realistically, not with melodrama. Realistically. So there are some ideas about how not to live your life and how to live your life. Get into the ultimate inner ring and don't envy anyone else. Let God take vengeance. Let God be the judge. And love God more than anything else. You can love your children. You can love your children so bad it hurts. You can love your spouse. You can love your job. You can love anything. But love God more than them. And then you'll find that, you know, how do you say it? Put God first and you'll have everything second. Put anything second first and you'll end up with nothing. Thus spoke Rigoletto.
