TITLE: Royal Priesthood
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:9-12
TOPICS: Worship
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/royal-priesthood/

============================================================

We're going to look at, beginning tonight, we're going to return to our study of 1 Peter. Some of you remember that years and years ago, back in November of 93, for example, that we were, in the early part, in the fall, we started looking at the book of 1 Peter, and we're going to return to it where we left off, and from here on through the rest of the spring and into the early summer, we're going to try to finish it off. We're going to try to, not that we should be looking at it as an enemy that we have to kill here, but we're going to move through the rest of it in series, and I'm going to read to you from the passage that we are to look at next. It's 1 Peter chapter 2, verses 9 to 12. It's not printed in your bulletin. 1 Peter chapter 2, verses 9 to 12. And this is Peter talking to the church. But you are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people belonging to God, that you may declare the praises of him who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light. Once you were not a people, but now you are the people of God. Once you had not received mercy, but now you have received mercy. Dear friends, I urge you as aliens and strangers in the world to abstain from sinful desires which war against your soul. Live such good lives among the pagans, that though they accuse you of doing wrong, they may see your good deeds and glorify God on the day he visits us. This is God's word. Now what we're going to start doing here tonight, and we're going to do this for two or three weeks now, is we're going to look at this passage that I just read to you, which is one of the great passages in all of the Bible, in all the New Testament certainly, about the church and the nature of the church. Now for those of you who care, and for those of you who take notes on these things, the other great passages are John chapter 17, Ephesians chapter 2 and chapter 4, 1 Corinthians 12 and 14, Revelation chapter 2 and 3, and this one, 1 Peter chapter 2, right along with them. This is one of the great passages, and when I read it, I get all excited about what Redeemer could be, what it's possible for it to be. Now, this passage actually, about the church, stretches back, if any of you who have your Bibles open to it, it stretches all the way back to verse 4, and it really gives us three images, and we looked at one of those images right before Christmas. The first image is that the church is a temple, a spiritual house. The second one is right here, you are a royal priesthood, and there is a, in fact, up in chapter 2, verse 5, it says you are a holy priesthood offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. And then the third, so that's the second image, is that we're a priesthood, a royal priesthood. The third image is the one that you see here that I just read to you. You are a chosen people, you are a people belonging to God, you're strangers and aliens in the world. And the third image is that the church is a new nation, a counterculture. So those three images, spiritual temple and royal priesthood and a counterculture, are the three images that we're looking at. We've already looked at one, we're going to look at a royal priesthood tonight, and next week and the week after we'll talk about what it means that Christians are a counterculture. Not a subculture. A counterculture. Well, but let's not get into that. That's later. Now, all I want to do is talk to you tonight about what it means when the Bible says to Christians, to the church, you are a royal priesthood. What an amazing statement that is. Recently I've been writing a job description for a staff person, and in that job description, I noticed that most job descriptions always have three things. They have status. You have to talk about the job status, character, and duties. In other words, status means where the position is in the organization. Character is what the person must be in order to be qualified for the job, and then duties is what the person must do in order to carry out the responsibilities of the job. So you have status, character, and duties. Now, all three are mentioned in here, in chapter 2 of 1 Peter. All three are mentioned. But I'm going to, we'll get started on it. And I'd like to really we are given the job description of a priest, we're first of all told what the status of the priest is. A priest is someone who goes in, who gets access to the center. And then the, you might say, the character of the priest, we're also told in this passage, your qualifications for being a priest are holiness. And then thirdly, the duties of the priest are to offer up spiritual sacrifices, holy to the Lord. Now, I want to look at all three of those, but I'm just warning you ahead of time. I want to look at the first one the most, at the greatest length, because the other two we actually have discussed, I think, in recent weeks and months, but this one we haven't talked about in at least a year or two. All the truths of the scripture come up in different forms so that they, you know, they come up through the different writers and through the different metaphors and so on. And the one we're coming up to now, a priest has access to God's face and presence. In other words, look, as verse 4 says, come to him. A priest gets in. A priest comes onto the inside. This is the central wonder of the gospel. The central wonder of the gospel is that we have access to the central height of the universe. Or, another way to put it is, we have access as priests to downtown of the cosmos. What do I mean by downtown? Now, this isn't quite as true now as it used to be, but it used to be that if you lived in a small town or if you lived in the suburbs, you could dress down. But if you went into the big city where you were surrounded by all the great cultural events and all the great artists and all the great people that you might see, you dressed up. And to some degree, that's still true. If you're invited downtown, you know, if you're invited to the governor's mansion or Gracie mansion, if you're invited into the big interview, you dress up. Why? The reason you dress up is because you're going to the center. You're going to a place where you really want to make an impact. You're going to a place where you want access and you better look good. And this is true, of course, for the priests. The priests of the Old Testament did not go before the Lord in jeans and sneakers. The priests wore the most beautiful, the most gorgeous garments in the whole country. But they were symbolic, just like your tux is a symbol. You see, you dress up for the big interview. You dress up to go to the governor's mansion, just like the priests dressed up to go in to see God. Why? The clothing was really just a symbol. What you were actually out to do is you wanted to impress. And you want the person, the great person that you're going to see, or the great group that you want to see, you want them to let you in. You want to so impress them. You want to so impress them with your poise, or so impress them with how articulate you are, how knowledgeable you are, how bright you are, how competent you are, how attractive you are. You know, the clothes is just one part of it. You want to be looked at and to be accepted. You want to be looked at and to be respected. You want to be looked at and you want to impress and you want to get in. Now, what's behind all of this, or I should put it this way, this statement, all of this is behind this great statement that Christians are priests. In other words, the Bible says Christians get into the ultimate mansion. They get invited into the ultimate dinner party. They get access to the ultimate inner ring. They get in. They have access to the downtown. They have access to the central height, God's eyes, the sanctuary. Now, what's behind all that, you know, is there is a sense in all of us that dominates us psychologically, and I'm going to try to show you tonight, dominates us politically, and that is a sense that we all have, to one degree or another, that we're outsiders. We underestimate how much we have always been dominated by this idea that we're outsiders. We have this fundamental sense that we aren't in. We're being pushed out. We're not into the inner rings of life. We're not into the mansions of life. We're not into the real dinner parties. We don't know the right people. We're pushed out. Great example of how deep this is. You know, advertisers, without any theology, they just, they know all the things the Bible says about human nature. They find out what sells. Recently, I was listening to a radio advertisement. you heard this? Verbal Advantage. And this is, I don't have this word for word, but this is basically what it says. The announcer comes in and says, people judge you by how you speak. They judge you by your vocabulary. They know where you're from. They know your background by the words you use. Well, for just 30 minutes a day, you can increase your word power. Learn power words. Learn words that will enable you to get in control of an interview. Now, this is very effective because what it does is it gets at the fact that they know us. They know where we're from because of our words. They know where we're from because of our inflection. We drop our R's, you see. They know we're from Queens. They know where we're from. And we've got to hide from them. Get in control. Fool them. Learn this word. Learn this word. Get in control. Learn how to put those R's in. Learn how to talk like a network TV anchor so they don't know where you're from. Get back in control. And then you will get in. It's very, very powerful. The reason it's powerful is because instinctively the advertisers know that there is a deep sensation on our parts that we are outside. And that we have to hide in order to get in. We can't let them know where we're from. Oh, my gosh, you see. If that's how you say drawer, they'll know where you're from. They'll know your educational level. We don't want them to know that. We've got to get in control. And the only way to get into control is to hide. And the reason we get into control is to get inside. Now, where does this come from? It's very powerful. And I'd say every couple of years, I try to read this little quote, this quote from one of C.S. Lewis' sermons called The Inner Ring. If you've been around here long enough, you've probably heard me quote it before. Lewis talks about the fact that we are much more dominated by this sense of being on the outside than we might know. He says, for example, this desire to be in, this sense that we're on the outside, in one of its forms, has indeed had ample justice done to it in literature. I mean snobbery. Victorian fiction is full of characters who are hag-ridden by the desire to get inside that particular ring, which is or has been called society. But it must be clearly understood that society, in that sense of the word, is merely one of a hundred rings. And snobbery, therefore, only one form of the longing to be inside. People who believe themselves to be free, and indeed are free, of snobbery, and who read satires on snobbery with tranquil superiority, may be devoured by the desire to be in, in some other form. It may be the very intensity of their desire to enter some very different ring, which renders them immune from the allurements of high life. In fact, an invitation from a duchess would be a very cold comfort to a man smarting under the sense of exclusion from some socialistic or artistic inner circle. Poor man. It's not large lighted rooms or champagne or even scandals about peers and cabinet ministers that he wants. It's the sacred little attic or studio, with heads bent together, the fog of tobacco smoke, and the delicious knowledge that we, we four or five, all huddled beside this stove, are the only people who really know. Often the desire conceals itself so well that we hardly recognize the pleasures of fruition. Unless you take measures to prevent it, the desire, this desire, is going to be one of the chief motives of your life from the first day on which you enter your profession until the day when you're finally too old to care. And as long as you're governed by that desire, you will never, ever, ever get what you want. You're trying to peel an onion. If you succeed, there will be nothing left. Until you conquer the fear of being an outsider, an outsider, you will remain. Now, where is this from? Why is this so absolutely critical? Why is this so all-encompassing and so deep? The Bible says it's very simple. In spite of your intellectual beliefs about God, in spite of whether you're religious or not, the Bible says underneath it all, this sense that we're on the outside and we can't get in, comes from the shut door of the Garden of Eden. That at the deepest level, we know we're in trouble with our Creator God. We know we've been shut out of His room, out of His dinner party, out of His mansion. And because we know that, and because we know that what He sees in us, He doesn't like. We know that He sees our sin. We know that He sees our sin. We know that He sees our sin. So, that he sees our sin in our own bos 모 March so it's hard to get more de sait uns And because we know that, and because we know that what he sees in us, he doesn't like. We know that he sees our sin. I'm telling you, and I propose to you, and I challenge you that this is true of every single person, everybody in this room, everybody anywhere, regardless of what you believe, that's what's driving you. And that's the reason why you compensate by trying to get into other mansions and other inner rings and into other little circles. See, Freud went one step further and said, ah, the reason that we are so insecure and always feeling like we're on the out and the reason we never feel like we can be in, we always feel like we're outsiders, is because of our parents. Yes, you see, we could never please our parents, and therefore, you see, we're always trying to get in to compensate for the fact that our parents never let us in, and we never could satisfy our parents. Ah, but like all atheists, he doesn't go deep enough. He is right about one thing. He's right about transference. He's right about the fact that we transfer our sense of being on the outside of God and on the outside of the door of Eden, and we transfer it all around so that we're always trying to cover up and break into the inner rings around us. You see, the Gracie mansions and the, we feel like we're shut out from the ultimate eyes, and we're shut out from the ultimate dinner party, and the ultimate sanctuary, and the ultimate mansions, and we transfer that, and we try to compensate it by getting in. This dominates us not just psychologically. One more, one more, just a little more on this. It dominates us politically. Secondly, if you were born lower social classes, if you were born in America, for example, or you now are in America, you're a racial, you're a member of a racial or ethnic minority. If you were born a woman, there's a red herring ready to distract you from the ultimate reality of why you feel like an outsider. You see, here's what's so subtle about it. There are real injustices being done to you. There are real injustices, and there really are exclusions that are being done to you on the basis of your status as a member of those groups to keep you out of a lot of places where you could have more influence. Absolutely right, and yet you could be just as distracted. You could be running after a red herring, just like Freud makes you run after a red herring when he says, ah, the real reason we feel marginalized psychologically is because we couldn't please our parents, and the Bible says there's a deeper reason than that beneath why we couldn't even please our parents. And we're shut out by God, and we know that. And the same thing is true politically. If you trust the white males enough to ask their opinion, they'll tell you they feel like outsiders too. Ah, you say yes, but it's all relative. No, it's not. You can decide the only way to heal the sense of alienation is through changing social structures. Good, good, do it. Do it. It needs to be done, but you will find in the end that it doesn't go deep enough. You may just throw away, you see, the idea of throwing social structures, and you say, forget that. I'm going to be successful. I'm going to be so successful that I'm going to be the person that people come to me to try to get into. I'll be the new inner ring. I'll create my own. I'm going to be so successful I'm going to make so much money. You will find that that isn't enough either. Not eventually. Throw away liberalism. Throw away conservatism, you see. Throw away all this stuff. Throw away psychologism. Throw away psychoanalysis. They all have something good to say. But just like all alternatives to Christianity, they're superficial. They're one-dimensional. They're reductionistic. There's a problem. Underneath all the problems, we want to get in. We know that we're on the outside. And the problem, the sense of being outside goes back to Eden. It's not cured by social legislation. It's not cured by personal affluence. It's not cured by any of those things. What will cure it? This. The Bible says when we admit our needs, it says right here, it says we are a royal priesthood, or up in verse 5, it says we are a spiritual house, we are a holy priesthood, offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God. Jesus Christ is the ultimate priest. He gets in, and when we link up with him by faith, we become priests too. Or as it says in Colossians, once you were alienated from God because of your evil, but now he has reconciled you by his physical body through death to present you holy in his sight without blemish and free from accusation. In Zechariah chapter 3, there's an amazing vision. In Zechariah chapter 3, there's this amazing vision. Joshua the high priest, Zechariah has a vision, the prophet Zechariah, and Joshua the high priest is standing before God in filthy clothes covered with excrement, covered with feces, prophecies. Now, of course, you know the high priest had to be in the most beautiful and clean clothes to go before the Father, to go before God. And Zechariah says, next to him is Satan in the vision, accusing Joshua the high priest and saying, this one is guilty, this one is foul, this was unworthy. But Zechariah saw the angel of the Lord come and say about Joshua, take off his filthy clothes, put a clean turban on his head, see Joshua, I have taken away your sin and I will put rich garments on you. And then he turns to Satan, the angel of the Lord, and says, the Lord rebuke you, the Lord rebuke you, Satan, for this man is a burning stick snatched from the fire. And then the angel of the Lord came and put on Joshua perfect, beautiful, clean, righteous garments so that he was acceptable again. What Zechariah is trying to say is that that is a picture of every Christian, in a sense, everybody who unites with Jesus Christ. You know, Psalm 15, look, one of the things that people got so upset with Paul about, one of the things that many of the religious leaders of the day could not believe about the Christians. They tried to kill Paul because he would bring Gentiles into the temple. And you weren't allowed to bring the unclean into the temple. Prostitutes couldn't come in, foreigners couldn't come in, lepers couldn't come in, the physically blemished couldn't come in, nothing that was imperfect or unholy could come in to the presence of God. You couldn't get in. And when Paul started to bring the Gentiles in to the temple, they tried to kill him. You can read about that in Acts chapter 21. And they were right. Those leaders that wanted to kill Paul, they were right in thinking, you can't change the law. You can't change the law. The law says only the perfect can go in. You can't change the law. You're right. You can't change the law. But you can fulfill the law. You can fulfill it. Go back and read Psalm 15 sometime. You know, some of the Psalms, they say, who shall ascend into his holy hill. Who shall go into the sanctuary? And it says, only the one whose hands are pure, whose heart is utterly clean, who never takes a bribe, who never utters a falsehood. You can go see that. Who shall go in? Who shall ascend? Only the one whose hands are clean and has an utterly pure heart. Well, who in the world could do that? There is one like that. And only one like that. And he did go in. And his blood provided the cleansing. And anybody who unites with him by faith becomes a priest like him. And God looks at you the way he looks at the Lord. And he says, you are the apple of my eye. You can't change the law, but you can fulfill it. So this, you see, you know, when I was writing this a couple weeks ago, and I was thinking about this, when I got to this spot, I noticed this little, I made a note to myself. When I got to this spot, I just had to stop and worship. Because I realized how deeply, and every time I think about this, the priesthood, the idea that I'm a priest, that we're priests, that we're a royal priesthood, I begin to realize just how deeply my life has been shaped by the desire to get in. And what freedom there is to know that I am. There's this George Herbert poem. One place where George Herbert says, this is so wonderful. With one small smile you gave me the other day, I blasted all the joys about me, and scowling on them as they pined away, said, now come again and flout me. Listen. With one small smile, one small smile you gave me the other day, I blasted all the joys about me, and scowling on them as they pined away, said, now come again and flout me. Now, it's old English, but it's, there's a joy in it. He says, you gave me a smile. I got in yesterday. I speak, one of the things that happens, you see, when you exercise your priesthood, is you say, Lord, I know I have the right to get into your heart. I have the right to sense the same love that you have got for your son. I have the right to that. Now, you see, if you don't, you say, oh, I couldn't say that. You don't get it. You're a royal priesthood. You can come into the central height. What? And what George Herbert is saying that a Christian who understands that sometimes gets some of that, gets some of that approval, gets that smile of God. And he says, he says, with one small smile you gave me the other day, I blasted all the joys about me, and scowling on them as they pined away, said, now come again and flout me. What he's saying is all these things that were so important to me, the one smile, the one. other things about me that I consider joys and I say come if you want fine and if you don't want fine either I am free from you you see the one smile blasted them all away I didn't need them anymore and I said fine flout me if you want to you can't fool me and you can't scare me and you can't you can't control me anymore that's an amazing statement he says to all his joys go ahead flout me go ahead leave if you want there's this incredible sense when the smile of God hits you and you say have a right to that I want some of it please oh it doesn't mean like any priest that you don't have to watch what you're wearing you know like any priest and we'll get to this in just one second here obviously because priests are supposed to be holy but the whole point here is God has let us in we have a right to come in remember what Lewis said until you realize how much your life is controlled and dominated by this you'll never get free of it and until you're free of it you'll never get in remember what he said he says hey as long as you're afraid of being an outsider you always will be have you gotten in do you understand what it means to be clothed in the righteousness of Jesus Christ we sang about it this morning in fact if you want to meditate on this very subject all you have to do is get into your bulletin take it home tonight and just read and meditate and read and meditate on the last hymn in the morning service the last hymn we sang when we were passing out the cup Jesus thy blood and righteousness my beauty are my glorious dress in flaming worlds with these arrayed in joy will I lift up my head Jesus thy blood and righteousness my beauty are my glorious dress let everything else fall down let let let everything else be burning up let let all the worlds of the solar system be burning up I'll be safe see it's flaming worlds in these arrayed with joy will I lift up my head amazing you know that who wrote that count nicholas von zinzendorf who was converted one day when he was looking at a painting of the lord crucified and underneath was a little word some the artist was a christian had painted the lord crucified and underneath he wrote this phrase I have done this for thee what hast thou done for me and it just went to his heart and he wrote this hymn I'm in that's what he's done for me now the other two things which I'm really going to talk about in in less detail but it's important it also tells us priests were holy see it says up in verse 5 you're a spiritual house to be a holy priesthood offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God now I'm going to be brief on this for this reason holiness I still think remember we spent a lot of time on holiness back in October so there's no reason to you know spend even 10 minutes on this but there is a character there is a kind of character that flows from knowing you're in there's a kind of character there's a kind of moral character and being in style there's a kind of character quality that flows from knowing you're in and that's what I think is holiness you see we've said that the feeling of being on the outside is a major psychological and political truth it's a major political reality but when you realize you're a priest and when you start to say like George Herbert when you start to say like a real priest Lord God I have a right to your smile I need it I want it in Jesus that changes the way in which you behave it makes you holy and let me give you two characteristics just two of the a holy priest and they're they're they're sort of mere images of each other I would say first of all priest is someone who's characterized by a praising spirit not an irritable spirit and secondly by a repenting spirit not a defensive spirit which essentially means that you're really wonderful at affirming people and you're really great at receiving a lack of affirmation in other words the way in which you give to people you may criticize but you're not an irritable person you're affirming and praising and the way you receive criticism is not to be all devastated by it or to get angry by it but you have a non-defensive approach to it and you repent you have a repenting joyful spirit so a praising spirit not irritable a repenting spirit not defensive just you know briefly you see if you see how Jesus acted if you see how God acted you you see the most irritable people the most irritable you know, one of my favorite illustrations is here's Jesus Christ asking the apostles, please stay awake with me because I'm really in trouble. And of course, you know, he goes off to pray, he comes back and they're asleep. And what does he say? The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Now, there's a lack of irritability. Oh, look at it. What he's saying is, I know you meant well, I know you had the right motives, your spirit was willing, ah, but the flesh was weak. Unbelievable. He knew the truth, and that is that the apostles did not say, ha, ha, ha, our master's off, let's go to sleep. Now, if you come back, what is a typical person going to do? You're going to look at what, there's a mixture in people, don't you see? There's always a mixture. There's some good intentions in there, you see? There's some grace in there, and then there's some mess, there's some malice, there's some hostility, there's some laziness, and what do you usually do when you see that mixture, when the persons hurt you? What do you do? You jump on the part that's bad. You don't say anything about the part that's good. That's not the way Jesus reacts. A priest has been so freed of the fear of being criticized that he or she loses the critical spirit. Do you have a praising spirit? Do you have an affirming spirit? Or do you have an irritable spirit? See, a praising spirit is part of what it means to be a priest. But then, on the other hand, it goes hand in hand. You have a repenting spirit, not a defensive spirit. If you're the same reason, you've been so freed from the sense of being outside. You see, when someone criticized you before, before you became a priest, before you really understood what Christianity is all about, before you became a priest, when you're criticized, you see that as a door shutting on you. You're on the outside. You've been excluded. And, you know, there's a part of you that goes ballistic over that. Not for a priest. You're on the inside of the only dinner party that matters. You're on the inside of the only ring that matters. You're on the inside of the, you know, you don't have to hide how you talk. You don't have to take verbal advantage unless you want to. It's nice to do better in interviews, but you see, that's not the end of the world. And therefore, when somebody criticizes you, you don't go ballistic. Put it this way, whenever criticism comes, there are some criticisms that are absolutely false. And there are some criticisms that are absolutely true. But that's probably one or two percent each. Almost all criticisms are a mixture. They're partly right, you know, partly wrong. They're exaggerated, or they're, you know, half wrong, or they're two-thirds wrong, or whatever. But always, if you look at a criticism objectively, and you almost never do, only people who understand that they're royal priests can do this, and only to a certain degree, to the degree you understand these things, and to the degree you appropriate them. But you see, if you can look at it objectively, these criticisms come in, and they're 30 percent right and 70 percent wrong, or 60 percent wrong and 40 percent right, and so on. Now, if you're scared of being shut out, if you go ballistic, you hear the door shut, what do you always do? Hmm? What does the unholy heart do? You jump immediately on the part that's wrong, and you rub the critic's nose in it. Look, look, you see. You know, I mean, you can have extreme cases, real extreme cases. I mean, if you've asked your son to clean up his room 52 times, and once, back last October, he did clean up his room, and you ask him to clean up his room, and he doesn't, and you say, you never clean up your room when I tell you. He's going to take out the incident of October 16th, and he's going to rub your nose in it. What do you mean I never clean up my room? What about last October? I cleaned up my room. You told me about it. You even said how nice. Oh, yeah, I remember that. He'll just jump all over you. Oh, that's the way a 15 or 16-year-old operates, but that's the way we all operate. We go crazy over the part that's wrong. Christian who understands that they're holy priests, a Christian who's growing in holy character out of the knowledge you're in, has a repenting spirit, you see, able to take criticisms. It says, you know, you take the part that is true. Sometimes it's kind of a small part. It's like 10 percent, sometimes 15 percent, and you say, you know, you got a point here. I may be wrong here. I need to look at that. Of course, some of you do know, I hope, that a priest definitely knows the Balaam's ass principle. You remember the Balaam's ass principle? In the Old Testament, there's a place where God is trying to speak to Balaam, and he's absolutely, absolutely obtuse, and he won't listen. And finally, Balaam is riding to someplace on an ass. He's riding on a, you know, on a... to warn him and start to tell him the truth. And you see, very often, sometimes God's truth comes from an ass. Yes. Somebody who in every way is despicable, somebody in every way is crazy, but it might be true or my part of it might be true. And you see, most of us are so threatened and we're so insecure because we're not operating out of our priestly position. We can, we focus on anything wrong about the critic at all. Either the criticism might be partly wrong, so we focus on that, or the critic him or herself might not be a completely admirable person. So we say, who are you to say? And if you don't say that out loud, that's what you think inside. Oh yeah, sure. She's one to talk. And out it goes. Boy, there's an awful lot of things that God's trying to tell you that you will never, ever hear. A repenting spirit. You know, what is a priest? Holiness is affirming, rejoicing, humble, loving, confident. Don't you see that goes so far beyond just being moral? It's not less than, listen, being holy is not less than being moral, not less than being decent, but it's so much more. Are you growing in the holiness that comes out from knowing that you're in? Lastly, priests offer sacrifices. And if you ever want to know what these spiritual sacrifices are, you know, the Old Testament priests brought bulls and goats and sacrificed on the altar and so on. In the New Testament, the fact that we are spiritual priests, wearing spiritual garments and so on, is, it's described in Hebrews chapter 13, where the author there says in verse 15 and 16 of Hebrews 13, through Jesus, let us continually offer to God a sacrifice of praise, the fruit of the lips that confess his name. And then do good and share your possessions for with such sacrifices as God's, God pleased. Let me just quickly say how wonderful that is. See, the priests of the Old Testament really had two jobs. Because they were priests, they were advocates. They came to God on behalf of people. So the two things they did was they led in worship. They were always praising. They were always singing. They were always praying, you know. And they took care of the poor. They took the weakest people. It was their job in the Old Testament. Now, I don't have time to go in to show you, but it was their job in the Old Testament to take care of the weak and the needy. And so whenever you see the Bible talking about how Christians are priests, we're supposed to be, you know, bringing the spiritual priesthood from the Old Testament now into modern times, what it says is we should be just like the priests. We should be really spending a lot of time in worship and prayer, and we should really be taking care of people with needs. One of the ironic things in a place like New York City is the people who tend to be the most interested in the poor couldn't care less about worshiping God, couldn't care less about spiritual things. And many of the people who are spending the most time in prayer and going to services are the most detached from people with need. That's not how the priesthood works. The priesthood does both. In fact, the one fuels the other. You see, there's a complete coherence. And if we're going to be spiritual priests, we're going to be a group of people who spends as much time praising God and, you see, getting strength from God by access, by getting his smile, that it gives us the ability to put ourselves out for people in need because we have resources. We have ego strength. I hate that term, but that's the closest thing I've got. We've got a strength that nobody else could have. We've got resources to put ourselves out for people because we're priests because we get in. Therefore, we can go out. Conclusion. Have you had your alienation healed? The sense of being outside really healed? If you haven't, come on in. Or I know that one sermon is never enough. You know, one time through, if you're new to this whole idea, I know you're not going to be able to figure it all out from this, we've got, talk to people. Go downstairs and get a book. The Christian friend or the person that brought you, talk to that person. Come back and come to our classes. Look in the bulletin and say, we've got classes all the time to try to go over what it means to be a priest, what it means to know Christ, and so on. But don't stop until you find the solution for the sense that's dominating you, maybe politically and psychologically, but this is the only way to heal. And Christian friends, don't forget this. If you're a priest, there's great responsibility that comes with that. Great responsibility. To get access, to get these wonderful privileges, and then to abuse them. God was pretty severe with people. Go back and, I won't even tell you because, I hate to, it. on a downer, but go back and see how God dealt with Eli and with his sons, Hophni and Phinehas, because to the one who has given much, much is to be expected. To the resources and the privileges that you have been made privy to, a great deal is expected. It'll be nothing but a joy to give him what he asks for, to draw out the resources that you have. But I'll tell you something, you see, if you are not giving to people, if you're not laying yourself out, if you're not useful to people, it's simply because you are not getting the smiles. You're not going in to the central height. God, your priests, come in, he says. Come to him. You can do it through Jesus, the great high priest. Let's pray. Father, help us know what it means to come in. I pray that everybody in this room will experience the access that you have promised to us and that everybody in this room will someday be completely aware of what it means to be part of your royal priesthood. We thank you that that's possible, and we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
