TITLE: Ruth
SCRIPTURE: Ruth 1:8-17; 4:13-17
TOPICS: The Bible
SERIES: The Mothers of Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/ruth/

============================================================

Let's read the passage that's printed in the bulletin on which our teaching is based today. It's the beginning passages or verses from the beginning and the end of the book of Ruth. You're reading Ruth chapter 1 verses 8 to 17 and then Ruth 4 verses 13 to 17. Then Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, Go back, each of you, to your mother's home. May the Lord show kindness to you as you have shown to your dead and to me. May the Lord grant that each of you will find rest in the home of another husband. Then she kissed them and they wept aloud and said to her, We will go back with you and your people. But Naomi said, Return home, my daughters. Why would you come with me? Am I going to have any more sons? Who could become your husbands? Return home, my daughters. I am too old to have another husband, even if I thought there was still hope for me, even if I had a husband tonight and then gave birth to sons. Would you wait until they grew up? Would you remain unmarried for them? No, my daughters. It is more bitter for me than for you, because the Lord's hand has gone out against me. At this they wept again. Then Orpah kissed her mother-in-law goodbye, but Ruth clung to her. Look, said Naomi, your sister-in-law is going back to her people and her gods. Go back with her. But Ruth replied, Don't urge me to leave you or to turn back from you. Where you go, I will go. Where you stay, I will stay. Your people will be my people, and your God my God. Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if anything but death separates you and me. So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife. And then he went to her, and the Lord enabled her to conceive, and she gave birth to a son. The woman said to Naomi, Praise be to the Lord, who this day has not left you without a kinsman redeemer. May he become famous throughout Israel. He will renew your life and sustain you in your old age. For your daughter-in-law, who loves you and who is better to you than seven sons, has given him birth. Then Naomi took the child, laid him in her lap, and cared for him. The women living there said, Naomi has a son. And they named him Obed. He was the father of Jesse, the father of David. And this is God's Word. Now, in these weeks before Christmas, we're looking at several women whose stories and lives are given to us in the Bible. And the question is, why? And the answer goes like this. In the book of Matthew, Matthew being one of the gospel writers, one of the writers who tries to give us the life of Jesus in the New Testament, Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, before he gives us the birth narratives, before he gives us his account of the birth of Christ, the Christmas story, he gives us a genealogy of Jesus. Now, in those days, genealogies were much more important than they are today, because today, the way you tell somebody who you are is you give them your resume. You give them an account of your individual accomplishments and performances. So, you worked for this company, and you went to this school, and so forth. But in those days where it wasn't your – we'll get back to this in a second – it wasn't your individual accomplishments, but your family's accomplishments that really mattered. Your genealogy was your resume. It was the way in which you could show somebody who you were. And what Matthew is doing is he's saying you cannot understand the birth of Christ. You can't just come right to the Christmas story. It'll seem very sentimental and sweet and kind of wonderful. But you can't understand what it means unless you look at the family tree of Jesus, in particular at the four mothers and four fathers of Jesus, at their stories, at their lives, because their lives repeatedly point to who he is and what he's about. So, you just can't come in at Matthew. You have to look at Jesus' family tree. And one thing that's most interesting, especially to us modern people, is that if you look at ancient family trees and genealogies, there were almost never any women in them. There's always the father-to-son thing. See, that's the patriarchy of the old societies. But interestingly enough, and we'll look at this passage next week. We're actually going to go at and look at Matthew 1 next week. Jesus' genealogy has women in it, quite a few women, actually. Why does Matthew break out particular women, particular mothers of Jesus for us, except to show us something about what his coming and his birth and what Christmas means? looking at another one of Jesus' mothers, Ruth. And the challenge we have is that because the book of Ruth is a book, not just a passage, and we have to look at it here this week, I have to give you kind of a bird's-eye view of the story, though in a way I give you the bookends and a lot of the features of the story in the passage we read. And here's how the story goes, and then we'll take three important teachings out of the story. But the story goes like this. These are the stages. The first stage of the story is we see the emptiness of Naomi. Naomi and her husband had gone from Israel, they were Israelites, and they left and went to Moab, a neighboring country, during a famine. And they raised two sons, and those two sons married two Moabite women. But then disaster struck, and Naomi lost her husband who died, her sons who died. We don't know why, but they all died. And as we looked at last week, there were a lot of reasons why widows were the most socially and economically vulnerable members of those societies. And to some degree, it was because, whereas in our society, you might say the source, one of the great sources of capital in our society and status and power, economic and social power, is your education or your marketable skills or maybe your money. In those days, it was your family. You had to have…what you needed was not the education or even the money. You needed a spouse and children. And Naomi, though, is in a situation where she's almost the worst kind of widow because, as she points out here, she's older. And that means, first of all, she does not have parents that she can go back to. She doesn't have a family that she can go back into. Secondly, she doesn't have prospects of building a new family. And thirdly, of course, now she doesn't have adult children with families who can support her. And just to get an idea of the devastation of Naomi Naomi and the emptiness of Naomi, you know, she talks about, I mean, how empty she is. It's a little hard for us to get out of our culture. You know, every culture tells you whether you're a nobody. And it's very easy to look at other cultures and just sniff. They say, yes, back then, you know, if women didn't have a husband and a child, they thought they were nobody. How strange, how stupid. We're beyond all that, all right? Okay? Yeah, she feels like a nobody. A lot of you, like, feel like a nobody because you're overweight. Didn't bother Naomi. Why are you so bothered by your weight? Why are you so bothered by your appearance in a way that didn't bother her? It's your culture. Everybody's got a culture. And everybody gets their self-esteem, basically, out of what the culture tells them. If the culture tells you you're a nobody if you don't have this and this and this, you feel like a nobody if you have this and this and this. And so, instead of feeling superior, not that… And I think, well, why am I accusing you of this? Because I do it, too. You look at these stories and you say, oh, you know, they're so upset about that, but, you know, what's the big deal? There's always a big deal. She has no name. Her family line is about to die out. She lived in a time in which if I didn't have a family name… See, we live in a time where our family is… We have a nice, prominent family, but our individual accomplishments are no good. We feel like a nobody. But that was the reverse. Your individual accomplishments didn't matter. Do I have a family? Do they have a name? Do I have a name that's living on? Do I have children, grandchildren? Do I have a line? So, she has been… She has had everything taken away from her by life. Everything. Economic, social, psychologically. She's devastated. And she's about to go back to Israel because she has nowhere else to go. And she's going to go back to live an absolute dead-end life, socially marginalized life, economically marginalized life, and that's where she is. And at one point, she takes… She plays… Well, you can see… She does a very, very sad play on her own name. When she comes back in verse 20 and 21, it's not printed for you there, and some of the… She gets back to Bethlehem, and some of the people remember her from years before, and they say, is this Naomi? Can this be Naomi? And she says, don't call me Naomi. Call me Mara, for the Almighty has made my life very bitter. I went away full, but the Lord brought me back empty. See, her name Naomi in Hebrew means sweet. So, she's taking it… She's making a terrible, terribly sad play on her own name. She says, don't call me sweet. Call me bitter. I went away full. I've come back empty. So, there's the emptiness of Naomi. But then secondly, we see the courage of Ruth. Now, when Naomi looks at her daughter's-in-law, Orpah and Ruth, she says, go back to your own families. Er, yeah, thanks so much. Thank you. Now, when Naomi looks at her daughters-in-law, Orpah and Ruth, she says, go back to your own families. Now, why? Well, because they are, at least, they're young widows. And if they go back to their families, they have parents who are still there who can take care of them. But not only that, they have a good prospect that they stay in their own country, in their own culture, in their own, amongst their own race, they'll have no trouble finding perhaps another, building another family. But when she says, don't come with me, she's thinking not just about the fact that, well, I don't want to take you away from your families. She knows, if they follow her, what kind of life they're going to have. In some ways, it's going to be worse than the life she's about to lead. There's a couple of very chilling, in the middle of the book, there's a couple of very chilling references, and I read the book for many years before it dawned on me what they were. Now, there's one place where, when Ruth is in the fields of Boaz, we'll get to him in a second, Boaz looks at her, and she's gleaning in the fields, and he says this to her. He says, stay with my girls, my daughter, for in someone else's field you may be harmed, and I've ordered my men not to touch you. And later on in the chapter, Naomi says, good, I'm glad you're going there. You need to stay with his servants, for in someone else's field you may be harmed. What is that? This is what it is. Naomi knows if Ruth and Orpah come back, they will not just be widows. They will not just be foreigners, socially ostracized. It's worse than that. There was enormous racial animus between Moab and Israel, and if Moabite women would come back with Naomi, she knows, Boaz says, she says almost casually, every single day, there was great likelihood that they would be subjects or the objects of violence. I mean, Boaz says, you know what? I'll have to order my hired men not to touch you, not to hurt you, not to beat you, or maybe worse, because she's going to come in. If they come with Naomi, they would come in as racially marginalized people, racial outsiders, members of a hated race, and they would be subject to at least violence and maybe murder. So she says, go back. And when you realize that, the statement of Ruth is all the more astonishing, because what does Ruth say in this very, very famous statement when she says, where you go, I will go. Where you lodge, where you stay, I will stay. Your people will be my people, and your God, my God. Where you die, I will die, and there I will be buried. May the Lord deal with me, be so ever severely, if anything but death separates you and me. Here's what she's saying. She says, I today bind myself to you in such a way, whatever happens to you happens to me, come anything but death. So help me God. You know, every act of immigration is drastic. An immigrant is somebody who leaves the familiar behind and plunges into the unknown, right? Some of you are immigrants. A lot of you are the children of immigrants. Every act of immigration is drastic. But have you ever seen an immigrant, I mean, the immigrants who do that, who take that incredible risk, always do so in the hope of a better life. Here's someone who is willing to leave everything behind, everything familiar, and plunge in knowing she's going to have a worse life. This is one of the most amazing speeches in the whole Bible. Now, the third part of the story, she and Naomi come back, and Ruth becomes the breadwinner and supports them, they're in destitute poverty, by gleaning in the fields. And she goes out of the fields and gleans, which is what the poor were allowed to do. And as chapter 2, verse 3 says, she happened onto the field of Boaz. And Boaz was a man, when he heard who she was, that she had come back with Naomi from Moab to support her mother-in-law, he speaks to her. He's amazed. He's amazed that she would be willing to take a dead-end life for the love of her mother-in-law. And she's amazed that any Israelite man, and she says so, would be kind to a racially marginalized woman, a racial other. And when she goes home, Naomi says, oh my word, do you realize what's happened? You just happened in the field of Boaz, who is one of the few people left alive who could be my kinsman redeemer. And the rest of the story turns on that. Well, what's a kinsman redeemer? You see it mentioned in the very end. Well, in Israelite law, here's what was interesting. A kinsman redeemer was someone who had any family that had lost it. See, when Israel first came into the land, every family got land. So, every family had a sort of ancestral original set of land. And when they lost it, they could sell it, they lost it, they had lost it. Naomi had lost their land. They had sold it when they went to Moab. Now, everything was gone. But a kinsman redeemer was someone who, if that person was willing to be generous with his own money, a kinsman redeemer had the right to buy that ancestral land back for the family, and the person who owned it had to sell it, whether they wanted to or not. But the problem in this situation is anybody who would be Naomi's kinsman redeemer in order to get the land back and to reestablish the family and to reestablish the family line wouldn't just have to buy back the land, which would be generous enough. He'd have to marry Ruth. He'd have to marry a woman of a despised race. He'd have to marry the only daughter-in-law, the wife of Naomi's son. It would be the only way to reestablish the line. And Naomi said, you know, he's the only, he's one of the few people in the world left that could do that, but have the right to do it. But why would he? Why would he spend that kind of money? Why would he do an interracial marriage? Why would he marry someone like you? But Ruth, in an enormously bold act, goes to Boaz in the middle of the night, sits at his feet. When he wakes up, she proposes marriage. When he wakes up, she says, I want you to be a kinsman redeemer of Naomi and myself, I want you to marry me. Now, listen, do you have any sense of history here? Have you got any sense of how bold and strange and non-traditional that kind of behavior is? You say, well, I was here last week and you told me about Tamar, and that was the same…are you starting to see a pattern? I want you to know that if you are a modern person with a modern idea of womanhood, or if you were a traditional person with a traditional person of womanhood, I dare you to fit Tamar, or Ruth, or Abigail, or the Shunammite woman in 2 Kings 4. You say, who is that? Well, sorry, it's been a while since we talked about it. You will find the most womanly and yet the most assertive behavior that does not fit into any category on the part of these women. And the great dramatic point is that Boaz takes the challenge up. And so, at the very end, he does marry her. He does act as the kinsman redeemer. And at the very end, you see that not only is Naomi's line restored, but through the love of Ruth, the courageous love and sacrificial love of Ruth, which changes Boaz's heart and wins him, so that he now uses his social power in a gracious way. See, the sacrificial courage and love of Ruth, so it changes Boaz, so now he uses his social power in a gracious way. Now because of Ruth, Boaz and Naomi are spliced into the line of the Messiah, into the line of the family of David, and therefore into the line of Jesus. And you see, Ruth has not just brought Naomi's name back in a kind of general way, but now she has the name above all names. She's been spliced into the name. What are we doing here? Let me ask you a question. Let me put it to, let me, this would be the starkest way to put it. Do you think anybody, no matter who you are, and some of you might be pretty famous, you know, behind those dark glasses, this is New York City, I don't care who you are. I doubt that 2,500 years from now, anybody's going to be studying your life. Little Ruth, racial outsider, poor, little Ruth, and yet look what she's done. Look what's happened. Look what God has done to Naomi and to Boaz through her. Look at the fullness of Naomi at the very end. Now that's the story. What are you supposed to learn from a story like that, huh? Isn't that nice? It's a nice story. It's more than nice. There's three very important things that we can learn practically, and they also point us to what Christmas is about. First lesson, number one. This tells us about the absolute life-changing power of friendship. The friendship basically, I'll tell you something, friendship is the most powerful thing on earth. In fact, even I had to tell you this, that as great as marriage is, the essence of what makes marriage unbelievably good, the essence of what makes sex in marriage unbelievably good is friendship. One of the most politically incorrect things happens in the beginning of this story. I read a newspaper article in the New York Times sometime this week, and it was talking about Southern Baptists who were up in New York City, and they were doing various sorts of disaster research. homes, you know, in the downtown area. Homes and offices have been, you know, harmed by the World Trade Center disaster. And what was interesting was the reporter very approvingly, very approvingly reported that it was the policy of these Southern Baptists volunteer disaster teams not to proselyze, not to try to convert anybody. Because you see, that is, I mean, that is the cultural, in our culture right now, that is considered something that all intelligent people know, and that is, you must not say that your God is truer than somebody else's God, and you must not urge anyone to leave their God and take up your God. God. You must not do that. And yet, right here in the beginning of the story, Ruth does a very incorrect thing. She says, I had, you know, see, Naomi tries to send her back to her gods. See, verse 15, Orpah has gone back to her family and her gods. Why don't you go back to your gods? And what does Ruth say? I don't want my gods anymore. I want your God. And when she doesn't just use the word God, notice, she says, your God will be my God. But look, she says, may the Lord deal with me, be it ever so severely, if anything but death separates you and me. She is at that point taking, that's a Hebrew word, Yahweh, that is the covenant name. She's taking the covenant name on herself. And that is a conversion you're looking at, ladies and gentlemen. There's no way if she had taken the name of God under herself and put herself into a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, there's no way that Naomi would have been trying to send her back. So, the fact that she says that at this point proves that at that spot, she says, at this moment, I convert. I convert. I don't want my gods anymore, I want your God. So did Naomi proselyze? I want you to look pretty carefully at something. Here's an interesting balance we learned. On the one hand, Naomi is not what we call a pluralist in her religion. Oh, no, no, what do I mean by that? Look carefully at verse eight and nine. She's sending them back to their gods, they're Moabites, they worship the Moabite gods, and she's sending them back to her family and to their gods, but notice she doesn't say, may your gods bless you. She doesn't say, you know, I hope that you'll find satisfaction in your religion like I find satisfaction in mine. You know, Yahweh blesses me and, you know, Chemosh will bless you, and that's great because, you know, everyone's religion is, you know, equally satisfying for them and they're all equally valid. She doesn't do that. She says, if you're going to live a blessed life, the Lord's going to have to bless you, my God. So it's clear, I mean, and of course this isn't controversial, I mean, I'm not reading too much in. Everyone knows that whereas the gods of the nations were polytheistic in Moab and Edom and, you know, back then all countries had their own gods and they didn't expect that you would worship my God and I would worship your God, but we all have our own gods. But the God of Israel was different. And the God of Israel said, no, I'm the God of all cultures and all peoples and you must worship me exclusively. And certainly Naomi knew that. So Naomi's not a pluralist, but what, quote unquote, converts Ruth? What converts Ruth? Does Naomi buttonhole her? See, that's one of the reasons why people don't like proselytizing, it's because a lot of religious people are just so mean, rude, you see, think that they can argue. What converts Ruth? Naomi's trying to send them back. Why would she do that? And here's the answer. She wouldn't be sending them back because she thinks their gods are fine. Oh no, we already see that. And secondly, she wants them with her. She's lonely. She's got nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing. She's absolutely destitute. She's absolutely empty. She's got nothing. Of course she wants them with her. Well, why would she be sending them back? She would only be sending them back because she loves them. And at that moment, she's giving this sacrificial love. She's putting their needs way ahead of her needs, even though they do not believe what she believes at all. And that's the moment in which Ruth says, I want your God. You see what's happening? Let me put it to you in a nutshell. It's when Naomi loves Ruth even though she doesn't believe that she believes. It's when Naomi sacrificially loves somebody who doesn't believe in her God at all, that her God begins to look credible. Put it another way, Ruth says, the reason I want to believe in a God with all these exclusive claims is because of the... heart. I've never seen anybody love me like you love me. I've never seen anybody, I know your God is the most exclusive God in His claims I know in the world, says Ruth. And yet, our religion doesn't produce this kind of non-exclusive love. Look at how you're loving me. Look at how you're willing to send me back. Look at how you're willing to put my needs way ahead of your needs, even though you desperately want me to be with you. Look at what kind of non-exclusive love your God creates in your heart. I want that God. If you love people in deep friendship, regardless of what they believe, what you believe is going to look pretty credible. If you love people only if they believe what you believe, or only if it looks like they're on their way to believing what you believe, why should they believe what you believe? There is absolutely nothing wrong on the one hand with saying, my view of God is truer than your view of God. If you say, what? Yes. It's unavoidable. Do you know that? If you say, for example, I don't think anyone should convert other people. Stop trying to convert people. What are you saying? You're saying, my view of God is better than your view. Your view is narrow. You're doing the very thing. At that moment, you're forbidding that person to do. You're saying, don't say that your view of God is better than someone else's. But when you use the word don't, when you say, don't convert, don't claim that you have superior truth and all that, you're actually refusing to do the very thing that you're making other people do. You're saying, I've got a view of spiritual reality that's better than your view of spiritual reality. Why don't you admit that's what you're doing? You can't avoid it. Nobody can avoid it. There's always a certain exclusivity in your beliefs about God. And everybody has beliefs about God, even if you're agnostic. You're betting your whole life on your belief that there isn't one or that you don't need to know one. Everybody's got a view of God. Everybody is basing their life and their eternity on that view of God, and everybody thinks their take on spiritual reality is better than other people's, and you think the world would be better off if more people believed like you do. There's nothing wrong with that. Here's what's wrong. How do you treat people who differ from you? If you hate bigots, don't you feel superior to them? Then you're a bigot. On the other hand, if you're deeply religious and you only love people who love just like you or who believe just like you or who are moving in that direction, the most transforming, the thing that facilitates encounter with God is unconditional love in a powerful friendship. And if you want to see, that's what changes Ruth's life. Ruth makes this enormous commitment of courage and love to Naomi and God because she was just the subject of a courageous act of sacrificial love and courage. Do you see that? What she's doing is not out of the blue. You say, why did she do that? Why did she make this incredible commitment to God and Naomi because she just saw a sacrificial commitment to her? She was changed by a vision of Naomi's sacrificial love, non-exclusive love, love to her even though she didn't believe, and that's what made her want to believe. And that is basically how everybody that I, just about everybody I know, ever finds God. It's not through sermons. It's not through programs. I mean, that's the artillery. You know, that can bring you past, you know, over the lip of a problem you're having, answer a question. No, no, no. What everybody in this world needs, everybody, if you want to have an encounter with the divine, is you've got to have a powerful friendship in which you experience non-exclusive, unconditional love. And that's what you got. And by the way, if you want to know what the, how do you build a friendship, there's two components, and you can see it actually in Ruth's commitment. I mean, in Ruth's statement. The two things she says, if you want to have a good friendship, you have to make time. Where you go, I will go. Where you say, I will stay. And you also have to have a commitment. See, nothing part us but death. If you give time to a relationship but not commitment through thick and thin, or if you say, in principle, you're committed to a person but you don't spend time with them, you don't have a friendship. But time plus commitment plus unconditional love, non-exclusive love, will enable people to find God, even a God who makes the most exclusive claims possible. So the first thing we see is the powerful, the transforming power of friendship. The second thing we learn here is the signs of hope in every single life, even the most hard and mundane. There's signs of hope because God works under the surface. That's what Book of Ruth teaches you. You must never lose hope. No matter what's going on in your life, God… for your good, even when He appears to be absent, even when He appears not to be listening. That's the second big lesson. There are signs of hope in every life. One of the great things about Ruth, put it up next to Jonah, put it up next to Genesis, put it up next to almost any other book, and you'll see something immediately if you know how to read. There's nothing in the book of Ruth that's miraculous. There's no miracles. There's no dreams. There's no visions. There's no words from God in her head. And this is a book for people who look around their life and they see absolutely no dramatic answers to prayer, no dramatic events of any sort. They see nothing but mundane times and hard times. And the book of Ruth is trying to say that in the mundane and in the hard times, God is still at work. He's still there. He's still at work, working in 10,000 ways for His glory and your good, even though you don't see it. And you must learn to see the signs of hope that He's working hidden under the surface. When Naomi comes back, she says, I'm empty. Now, right next to her, as she walks back into Bethlehem with who? With Ruth. This incredible treasure that God's put into her life. This woman whose love and courage is incredible, who's going to bring her and Boaz, is going to change her life and Boaz's life and bring him into the line of the Messiah. She's just walked back into the village with this incredible treasure. And what does she say to her friends? I've come back empty. I mean, even her friends have to be saying, okay, but who's that if you're empty? And maybe Ruth is sitting there saying, well, I guess she's not sitting there saying, but she certainly had a right to sit there and say, what am I, chopped liver? What do you mean you came back empty? And you see, you know what the lesson here is? Because Naomi has an agenda for what she thinks God should be doing in her life, and because God's agenda is not her agenda, she can't see the signs of hope that God's put in her life. She hasn't seen the great things that God has put there. Some of you are in this very same place right now, absolutely in the same place. You have an agenda, and things aren't going your way. And you either are blind to the things that God has put, the incredible things God has put into your life, or maybe has kept in your life, and you just don't see it. You won't see it. You have no hope. This book is teaching that it's in the mundane things. Ruth just happened onto the field of Boaz. Just happened that she found the one guy that she had to marry in order for the Messiah to be born in the world. Just happened. See, the whole idea is God loves to work in the mundane where you can't see it. God loves to work in the hard times where you can't see it. Anthony Lane wrote an interesting review article of Lord of the Rings, the book, not the movie that's coming up, but the book. And he says one of the messages of Lord of the Rings is the guy in the back of the pub, the quiet, scruffy guy in the back of the pub you just pick up a casual conversation with, is the future king of the world, descended through 51 generations of absolute royalty. So, be nice to everybody. You never know. That is a message of Christmas, don't you see? Look, how many thrones are there in the world? Only so many, not that many. How many mangers are there in the world? Lots. God comes through mangers, not through thrones. See, the second message here is, don't you look out on your life and say, I don't see any answers to prayer. I don't know what God's doing. Here's the mundane things. Here's the hard things. God has abandoned me. God has given up on me. Here's Naomi saying, God has abandoned me. Here's Ruth clinging to her. Yeah, well, there's this sweet, well-meaning Moabite girl, but God has abandoned me. But when Ruth was clinging to her, God was clinging to her. God was clinging to her. She didn't see it. And God's clinging to you. If you believe in him, God is clinging to you. God never lets you go. Do you see that? Do you understand that? Can you see the hope? But here's the other thing. Some of you are saying, I'm having a lot of trouble. I'm having a lot of trouble. I know what you're saying intellectually, but I'm having a lot of trouble getting hope. Well, then you need a Ruth. One of the things that's interesting about this is Naomi is the spiritual mother, right, of Ruth. But Ruth, at this stage of her life, has all kinds of hope and says, behind the frowning providence, God's got a smiling face. Why is she so fooled with that? You see, for example, Naomi says, my God has dealt bitterly with me. My God God has harmed me. My God has smitten me. almost the next verse, what does Ruth say? I want my God to be your God. I want your God to be my God. That's the God I want. My God has smitten me. My God has devastated me. That's the God I want, says Ruth. What's the matter with you, Ruth? And the answer is this. She has just seen a sacrificial, non-exclusive love come out of Naomi into Ruth's life. And here's what Ruth has got to be thinking. If your God can make you love like that, I've never experienced love like that. If your God can give you that kind of love, he must be incredibly loving himself, so there must be love behind all this. So Ruth is at the stage where she can give Naomi hope. Maybe sometime in the future it'll be the other way around. Nobody can hold on to that hope all the time. I mean, sometimes you go into a stage in which you intellectually know it and you just don't have the hope existentially. So sometimes you're the Naomi and you need a Ruth around you. Sometimes, at some point in the future, maybe you can be the Ruth and you'll have to give it to a Naomi, but the point is you can never handle these sorts of things without community. You'll never live a life of hope in the midst of all kinds of troubles in your life without community. Never. But even when God seems absent, he's working. He's just there. You don't see him. You're blind. That's the reason why William Cooper, who was, by the way, prone to tremendous depression, put it this way. He says, Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, but trust him for his grace. Behind a frowning providence, he hides a smiling face. His purposes will ripen fast, unfolding every hour. The bud may have a bitter taste, but sweet will be the flower. You fearful saints, fresh courage take. The clouds you so much dread are big with mercy and shall break with blessings on your head. Now, the third thing we learn is not just about the transforming power of friendship. That's the thing that will change your life. That's the thing that will get you in touch with God. Secondly, we also learn about there's hope in every life, no matter how mundane or hard. There's signs of hope God's left. There's vehicles of hope that God's put there, if only you're willing to live on the basis of that promise. But thirdly, the third thing we learn from Ruth is the gospel of grace just destroys, it should destroy, snobbery and prejudice. It should. There's a lot of people that say, whenever they hear us, anybody get up and preach from the Bible, they think they're just being called back to what sometimes is called traditional moral values. Well, by the way, I'm all for moral values, but tradition, let me suggest this to you. Notice something. It's easy to read Ruth as a traditional tale. Girl gets guy, has babies, everything's okay. See, that's traditional society. And yet, if you read more carefully, you'll see that at almost every point, this tale, this story, this narrative, this history, subverts traditional society. For example, traditional society says what? Blood is thicker than water. The important thing is family. Naomi tried to send Ruth back to her family and say, go back to your family, the people that you share blood with. She says, I don't want that. I want a relationship with somebody who has the same relationship with God that I do. I don't want blood. I want grace to be the basis of a relationship. And so, Ruth and Naomi, on the basis of the grace of God, create a non-traditional family of two women with Ruth, the breadwinner. And that's the family that actually saves Naomi's skin. Secondly, traditional society doesn't just say blood, thicker than water. Traditional society always says interracial marriage is a no-no. But the salvation of the whole world comes to us through an interracial marriage. And that's what the whole story is about. Just like the salvation of the whole world comes through children of incest last week in Tamar, now it comes through an interracial marriage. It's almost as a way of saying, I don't care what the world's standards are, God says, I love to stand them on their head. Or number three, traditional society always says men are better than women. And yet what's the most astounding thing is the climax of this book. This book written 2,500 years ago, how in the world, this proves its revelation, how in the world out of any ancient culture did this final line come, where the women say, Naomi, Ruth is better to you than seven sons. Your daughter-in-law, Ruth, who is better to you than seven sons. You know, seven is the perfect number. What he's saying is, Ruth was better to you than an infinite number of sons. Every society at that point said, sons is what you need. Sons is what you've got to have. And what's the moral of the story? The moral of the story is what the world's standards are stupid. And that God everywhere possible in the Bible says, I work through the second son, not the first son, through the unattractive woman, not the attractive woman, through the poor, not the rich. How many times does he have to say it? If you believe in the sprechen who's better at that time, whether you want one Gemini to could look at somebody else, you know, who didn't have your beliefs, and you'd say, I'm a better man or a better woman than they. But if you're saved by grace, by sheer grace, which is what the gospel says, not through what I have done, but by what he has done, by sheer grace, then I look at any other person, and I realize that they're just as likely to be a better person than me. Why? Because my relationship with God is not based on me being better. My relationship with God is not based on me being better. And that should be the death of snobbishness. It should be the death of prejudice. I mean, over and over and over and over and over again, this book is trying to say that. So there's your three lessons. Do you want to be like Ruth? Transforming power of friendship? Seeing the signs and vehicles of hope even in the hardest and most mundane life? End of snobbishness. End of prejudice. There it is. Let us pray. Well, now some of you are going to say, well, that's hard. Did you really think I was going to end like that? That's amazing. Okay, those of you who, well, you know, okay, so I'm a good actor. But the point is, is you can't end a sermon like that, because if you end a sermon like that, you might feel okay for a minute. But by the time you, halfway through the last time, you'll say, I can never do that. I can't do that. And you're right, you can't. But see, why is Ruth in the genealogy? Ruth is not just a wonderful story saying, be like Ruth. Ruth is in the genealogy of Jesus. And what does that mean? Ruth points us to the one who comes out of her, the one who is their descendant. Don't you realize when Ruth looked at Naomi, she says to herself, if I keep my life, Naomi loses hers. So I'm going to give my life away so Naomi can get one. I will take her poverty on myself. I will take her marginality on myself. I will become poor so that through my poverty, she might become rich. And that's what happened. Ruth left her father's house. Ruth left her own country. She came down. She became an outsider. She became a suffering servant. She became someone who suffered. She became someone who was rejected. She became someone who was despised. Does she remind you of anybody? And let me tell you what really made Ruth as great as that. What made Ruth so great? Did Ruth become great because she said, you know, I've always wanted to be a sacrificial person, a loving person, a non-prejudiced person, a person who has hope. I've always wanted to do that. So now that's my resolution this year, my New Year's resolution. I'm going to be a person of hope. No. She saw an act of sacrificial love she couldn't account for. When she saw Naomi willing to throw her life away, what little she had left for her, that changed her. But if the sight of Naomi's sacrificial love made Ruth, Ruth, how much more should it make you like Ruth to see the one to whom Ruth points, what he did? He left his father's throne above, so free, so infinite his grace, emptied himself, you see, died for us, left the ultimate riches to take on the ultimate poverty. And when you see that and that thrills you and that fills you up and that changes you, it's not just an intellectual idea but it's something that just fills your heart and fills your throat, then you can start living like Ruth. And not till then. You see, this is what Christmas is all about, really. The incarnation shows that God wants friendship with us. He's not just saying, oh, obey me. He says, I'm coming close. I'm going to spend time with you. I'm going to die on the cross and I'm going to show commitment to you. I want your friendship. Christmas shows God's friendship. Christmas shows all the things we've been talking about. You'll never be like Ruth until you become like the one to whom Ruth points. So look at him. Now let us pray. Let us pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have given us… we thank you have given us a Savior, and this Savior is one who gave up everything, left his father's home, left is the familiar, left a place where he had status and took a place of no status, took a place of outside, outsiderness, was despised, was rejected. Father Ruth came at the risk of being beaten and killed, but your son came with the expectation of being beaten and killed. Ruth was changed and gave her life to you utterly. Until next week. Timothy Tu sacrificial love for her by Naomi, but how much more should we be changed and give our lives utterly to you as we look at the act of sacrificial love that you did for us in your Son, Jesus Christ? We pray that you change us and make us like him. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
