TITLE: Salvation
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 1:3-10
TOPICS: 
SERIES: What We Believe: Foundations
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/salvation/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture is from Ephesians chapter 1, verses 3 through 10. Praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing in Christ. For he chose us in him before the creation of the world to be holy and blameless in his sight. In love, he predestined us for adoption to sonship through Jesus Christ in accordance with his pleasure and will to the praise of his glorious grace, which he has freely given us in the one he loves. In him, we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins in accordance with the riches of God's grace that he lavished on us. With all wisdom and understanding, he made known to us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in Christ, to be put into effect when the times reach their fulfillment, to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Christ. The word of the Lord. So these weeks, in the past, also the weeks coming forward, we've been looking at the basic beliefs of the Christian faith. And we've been using the outline of the Apostles' Creed, the oldest summary of biblical doctrine, to do it. Now, when you get to our subject, our topic for today, salvation. You know, it says, I believe in the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, the life everlasting. That's salvation. Where do you go in the Bible to talk about salvation? Where do you go? It seems like the Bible is all about salvation. And so what I've decided to do is take this text, which, by the way, in the original Greek, was one sentence. This is one long sentence. When Paul got rolling, he got rolling. And it's actually, I think, the single greatest, most panoramic view of all that Christian salvation entails in one place. It's kind of a nosebleed sort of text. You know, if you fly in to New York and see it from the, you know, the breathtaking view, especially at night of New York when you're flying in. Or if you're in a city near a mountain and you go to the top of the mountain and look down on the city, a panoramic view of the city is not necessarily, well, certainly it's not the only way to get to know the city. And, frankly, I'd say it's not the best way to get to know a city, but the arrow view is an irreplaceable way to see a city. It's a perspective you get no other way. And, therefore, what I'm going to do here is do a survey of all that the Bible says about salvation in Jesus Christ, which is right here in this text. It doesn't go into any detail at all, and, therefore, I won't go into much detail. It will simply, in a sense, give you the panoramic view. In some ways, it can even be a little briefer than usual. But you say, well, it doesn't say the word salvation anywhere. What makes you say this is about salvation? Well, it says, praise be to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us in the heavenly realms with every spiritual blessing. Every spiritual blessing. See, and then Paul goes on to talk about every spiritual blessing. That's salvation. Salvation is multidimensional. Christian salvation is all sorts of blessings in there. And one of the most astounding things is the very, very first sentence. I just read it. It probably went by pretty quickly. It says, he has blessed us. Who's us? Christians. He has blessed us. That's past tense. Every spiritual blessing you've already got when you become a Christian. What about resurrection of the body and life everlasting? It's, the salvation of Christ is so profound and so powerful that when you receive it, you have at least in seed form, in nascent form, absolutely everything is in there. So, let's take a look at every spiritual blessing. Let's take a look at this powerful salvation. And the way to do it, like I said, is to survey. We're going to learn here how we get every spiritual blessing, what those spiritual blessings are, why we can have those spiritual blessings, and how to know whether you have them. See? How we get them, what they are, why we can get them, and how to know if you have them. First, how do we get them? How does every spiritual blessing come? And the answer is said so often in this text, some people would say, it's the main theme of this passage. It comes... verse 3, it says we get every spiritual blessing in Christ. Then in verse 4, he chose us in him. Then down in verse 6, in verse 7, it says in him we have redemption. In him we have redemption. Verse 6, by the way, it says the praise of his grace which he has given to us in the one. So we get grace in him. We get redemption in him. We get every spiritual blessing in him. If you have Jesus, you have every spiritual blessing. If you don't have Jesus, you don't have anything. It comes in him. In other words, to become a Christian is to be united to Jesus Christ. You're united to him. And all the blessings come with him. All of them. Once you have him, you have everything. Now, the best example of this, when people say, well, what in the world is a, what does it mean to be united with Christ? Well, the theologians say we're united legally and vitally. And the best illustration we've got of this is marriage. First of all, legally. Now, by the way, I want you to know not only am I, I don't have anybody in mind here, but I don't have anybody in this room in mind either. But okay, here's how the illustration goes. Here's two people. They're not married, but they're thinking about it. And one of them is poor. One of them's had a pretty messed up life. One of them has nothing. And the other one has done everything right, made every right move, has worked really, really credibly hard, and is rich. So you get one person who's rich and one person who's poor. And if they get married, and this has been the case for for centuries and centuries across all the various cultures, if they get married, a rich person marries a poor person, they share the wealth. The poor person may not have deserved any of it. The rich person has worked hard to earn it all. But when they get married, they share that wealth. So the poor spouse receives with the rich spouse the riches of the spouse. And the Bible simply says this, everything that Jesus Christ has, when you're united with him by faith, when you believe in him, when you give yourself to him, when you are united with him by faith, everything he has comes to you. You're united with him legally. Now, you know, you can break this down a little bit. To be united with him legally. Romans 6 says we're united with him in his death and in his resurrection. What does that mean? To be united with him in his death and in his resurrection? Well, on the one hand, why did he die on the cross? He died on the cross for sin. He died to pay the penalty for sin. You know what this means? This means, well, here, I would say it this way. If in your town, wherever it is, or in New York, or what, I don't know what the rules are, but if there's a stop sign law, you got to stop at the stop sign, and you go through the stop sign, and now you're guilty, you got to pay the fine. And if the fine, whatever that fine is, when you pay the fine, the law has no more claim over you. None, right? To be united with Jesus Christ in his death means that you are as free from guilt and condemnation as if you died for the sin. If you've done something wrong, if you've done something really wrong, but you're united with Christ, you are as free from condemnation as if you died for that. It's all been paid. And then it says we're reunited with him in his resurrection. Well, what is his resurrection? How can we be united with him in his resurrection? We're still mortal here? Well, see, what that means is Jesus' resurrection was his reward. It was reward for his service. It was reward for all that he did. It was his vindication. It was his triumph. And what this means is that all the things that Jesus Christ deserves for everything that he's done, all his honors, when you're united with him, they're yours. God treats you as if you deserve all the things that he has achieved. You know, one of my favorite illustrations of this is that it was a, it was an episode in a, in a, a cop show some years ago I watched. It was just a TV episode, but it was about a, it was a fiction by the way. This is a fiction. Uh, but there was an old 80 year old man kind of broken down and he was wanted for a crime. He was wanted and he was being hunted by a Navy military police because it had to do with, he'd been in the Navy and he's being hunted by Navy police, you know, MPs and they find him. Well, it turns out that this 80 year old man had been in World War II and in World War II, he had done something very heroic and he'd been given the Congressional Medal of Honor. And when those, those snarling MPs go at, go for him, somebody next to him pulls aside his tie and there underneath it is the Congressional Medal of Honor. And when those MPs see that Congressional Medal of Honor, spite of the fact that they're after him, when they see that, they snap to attention and salute. They're saluting the medal. They're saluting what it refers to, what it stands for. When you become a Christian, no matter who you are or what you are in yourself, no matter what your record is, all of Jesus' awards are pinned to your chest and the whole world salutes. And the Father loves you and accepts you and honors you. And see, that's just what it means to be united with him legally. What does it mean to be united with him vitally? What that means, of course, is the very Spirit of God comes into your life. The very Spirit of the Father and the Son. The Father and the Son come, actually, next week. If you're here, there'll be a sermon on John chapter 14, where it talks about how the Father and the Son come and reside in you through the presence of the Holy Spirit. Second Peter, chapter 1, verses 3 and 4, have one of the most amazing statements in the entire Bible. It says that we have everything we need for life and godliness because we've been made partakers of the divine nature. Partakers of the divine nature. It means that when you become a Christian, you're united with Christ, you're united to him not just legally, but his Spirit comes into you. And that means the very, as it were, the genetic material, spiritually speaking, if you can, of God comes into you. And all the rest of your life, just like your physical life, is basically just the outworking of the physical DNA, the biological DNA that's put into you at the beginning. So the rest of your spiritual life is the outworking of this new genetic material that's been put into you, the very lifeblood of God, as it were. The divine nature. To say that when you become a Christian, you're united to not only him legally, but united to him vitally, and you have his Spirit, and you have divine nature in you, that's the most, I don't know, convicting and comforting possible statement. It's the most convicting because you've got no excuse. You've got everything you need to live like you should. But here's how comforting it is. God's very Spirit in you, his nature in you, there is no wound in you that can't be healed. There is no brokenness that can't be repaired, and there's not a single binding habit from which you cannot be liberated. In other words, when you're united with Christ, all spiritual blessings are yours, either in embryonic nascent form or in full-blown form. It's all yours. And this is the reason why Dr. David Martin Lloyd-Jones, you know, one of my heroes when it comes to being a preacher and a pastor, he had a diagnostic question. He would, if he was meeting somebody one-on-one pastorally, he would ask them a diagnostic question. Very simple. He'd say, are you a Christian? Okay. But he found the answers were extremely enlightening because one of the answers he usually got was, well, I'm trying. Or I hope so. I'm trying. And when he heard that, he would say, well, I'm not sure you understand what a Christian is. Because you see, you either have every spiritual blessing because you're united to Christ, or you don't have any spiritual blessing because you're not. And when someone says, I'm trying to be a Christian, what they seem to think, what they seem to me, is that spiritual blessings come over your life as you work hard to accrue them. But no, not if you understand. You're saved by grace. You're saved by Christ. You're not saved by what you do. You don't work hard and try to be a Christian, and some of those blessings come if you earn them. No, no, they all come by faith because you're saved by grace. Now, you may not, look, it takes, there can be a process by which you cross that line. And you may not even be sure when you cross that line. C. Everett Koop, who was the Attorney General of the United States for a while, Surgeon General, excuse me. I thought I said Attorney, Surgeon General of the United States. He was a great surgeon at Children's Hospital in Philadelphia. And he tells how he became a Christian. His wife used to drag him to the evening services at 10th Presbyterian Church in downtown Philadelphia to listen to Donald Gray Vinehouse preach. And he remembers that over about an 18-month period, when he first went there, he thought 90% of what this guy said was stupid. And about halfway through the 18 months, he decided that about half of what the guy said was stupid. And about 18 months into his regular attendance, he realized he believed it. He believed it. But he wasn't quite sure where he crossed that line. But there's a line. See, just because it's not dramatic, just because you're not sure where you crossed the line, you're either united to Christ or you're not. You either have given your life to him or you haven't. And therefore, you either have all the spiritual blessings or you don't. And let me just tell you this. Oh. because of this. You say, what do you mean his past? He killed people. He was a murderer. He probably spent the rest of his life sitting in Christian assemblies with people whose relatives, maybe family members, certainly friends, he had put to death when he was a fire-breathing, fanatical church and Christianity hater. How do you live with yourself? I mean, 2002, a movie called Heaven, starring Cate Blanchett. Not a very well-known movie, but like most things she does, great. She's a great actress. But the point is, she plays a schoolteacher in a poor kind of urban neighborhood. And she sees this drug dealer hurting her children, her kids. And she decides to do a very radical thing, a very breathtaking thing. She decides she's going to kill the drug dealer by creating a bomb and putting it into his office and killing him. But it goes wrong. It goes off in the wrong place. And a lot of innocent people are killed. And the whole story is basically about her psychological and spiritual collapse after that. Her absolute shame, her guilt, her regret. And she cannot get over it. And it just literally eats her up and destroys her. Why isn't Paul like that? I'll tell you why. Because Paul says, in myself, I'm nothing. In him, I'm everything. In myself, I'm a sinner. In him, I'm righteous. In myself, I'm ugly. In him, I'm beautiful. In him. In him. So that's how they come. And in some ways, it's the most important thing I wanted to get across. But here's the other things we learned. What are some of those blessings? Well, here we go. Panorama, aerial. But he mentions three of them. Let's just talk about what those three of them are. There's certainly more. Every spiritual blessing. There are many aspects to salvation. But here's three. One of them is up here in verse five, adoption. One of them is down in verse seven, redemption. And one of them is at the very end, verse 10, consummation. Let me explain. First of all, number five, adoption. What does that mean? Well, in ancient times, when Paul was writing, people generally didn't adopt little children to raise them the way we do today. When you hear adoption, you're thinking of something probably a little different than what Paul was talking about when he used the term adoption. Generally, people adopted children because, not because they wanted to raise children, but because they wanted an heir. See, a man who was a lord of an estate did not have an heir. And his estate, he was no one to inherit it. So he would adopt someone, maybe a child, but more often an adult, actually. And that person would be now the heir. What's so radical about what Paul is saying? He's looking at Christians and he's saying, we, us, who's that? Men and women. See, back in those days, women were never adopted. They weren't chosen to be heirs. Only men were chosen to be heirs. And yet, here's what Paul is saying. In Christ, in Christ, you see, in Christ, men and women, slave and free, Jew and Gentile, are all equal heirs of every spiritual blessing. And of course, to be adopted means now the person who adopts you is no longer your boss, but your father, which is access, intimacy, and it's security. You don't get fired by your father. So there's security and there's access and there's inheritance and all that. And also, a name, identity. When you're adopted, you get a new name. That's who you are. You might have thought you were this, you were that. It doesn't matter. This is your name now. You might have had a dishonorable name. Now you have an honorable name. So that's adoption. And then next, redemption. Now, what do you think redemption means? Obviously, you see, we're flying here. We're flying. I'll just tell you what the root meaning of the word redemption in the Bible, what it means. But I can give it to you through an illustration that some years ago, when this Westside congregation was meeting in the morning at Ethical Culture Society down on 65th, you know, in Central Park West, a good number of years ago, I drove my car over to the Westside, parked it nearby, and preached the sermon in the morning service. And I came out after preaching the sermon, and my car had been towed. And you want to say, I was preaching a sermon. There's nothing sacred anymore. a New Yorker, I've lived here a long time, I know where to go to get the car after it had been towed. You go to that place on the West Side Highway. So I went there, but that day I was particularly struck, because when I went there, I walked in the door to sit there, you know, the place where you have to get your car out. And I hadn't seen it before, maybe it was new, but the name of the place was the Redemption Center. And when I paid my three or four hundred ridiculous dollars in order to get my car, they stamped the bill, redeemed. And they're being absolutely aligned with the biblical definition, because redemption in the Bible means to be bought out of captivity. I was buying my car out of its captivity. But what does that mean? See, adoption is one thing, redemption is another thing. And redemption means that we're all slaves. How are we all slaves? Well, look, you have to live for something, don't you? You have to live for something. Say, I don't know if I believe in God. Well, you're living for something. There's something that makes your life meaningful. I'm living for my children. I'm living for my career. I'm living to make a difference. It's fine, but I want you to realize that whatever you're living for is your master. And the only master that doesn't enslave you, according to the Bible, is God. You see, the Lord, the Lord, is the only master that dies for your sins. Your career will not die for your sins, and your children won't die for your sins. You better not make them. You see, anything else that you live for is going to drive you. It's going to enslave you. And you've got to be careful. Like, I'm a minister, okay? So, I'm doing ministry. I'm preaching. Ha, you notice I'm preaching. Why am I preaching? Well, I'm preaching to serve God and to help you, right? Or, I could be preaching so I can feel that I'm a worthwhile person, so I can feel successful, so I can say, look at all the people that I'm helping. In that case, my preaching becomes a master, and I'm serving the preaching. And the preaching is not serving you. And that means anything, even stuff like preaching, anything can become a master. And if God's not the absolute center of your life, and if he's not the root of your salvation, or put it another way, if you have any identity other than that you're his child, see, until you're adopted, you're enslaved. Because your name, your identity is coming from something. And whatever that is is going to drive you, it's going to enslave you. But when I'm adopted, and my name is, I'm the child of the king. Not a successful this. Not a parent with great children. See, whatever your name is, you say, the reason I feel good about myself, my children are all fine. What happens when they go wrong? When they go off the rails? I'm successful. What happens if you lose your money? You see, all those other names are, it's a ball and chain. Unless you are redeemed. And so, adoption, and because of adoption, redemption, and finally, resurrection. Or, look at the end. Or you could also call it consummation. In fact, it's more than resurrection. To be put into effect, verse 10, when the times have reached their fulfillment, to bring unity to all things in heaven and on earth under Jesus Christ. The promise is that eventually God's going to put an end to all suffering and evil. He's going to make the world new, and he's going to get rid of death. When it says, to bring unity, what he means is everything's falling apart. Things fall apart. The center cannot hold. Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world. That's true at every level. Law of thermodynamics, things are falling apart. What is death? Your body, things that we're cohering, fall apart. What is war? What is racism? What is poverty? Things that should be together are being split apart. And yet God is going to end all of that because he's going to end death itself. And you know, you say, well, we haven't received that yet. We're going to die, and I'm going to be raised from the dead, I guess, if you're a Christian. But, I mean, I'm going to die. Well, put it this way. If you've got every spiritual blessing, here's a wonderful thought. The minute that the Holy Spirit comes into your life and you sense the love of God in your life through Jesus Christ, that will never end. Never, ever end. The worst thing that can happen to you, if you die, is it will flood you with more love, more glory. Jesus Christ says, my sheep know me, and they come to me, and nothing can pluck them out of my hand. You will go from life to life to life. You will go from love to love to love. So those are the blessings. And how do we receive them? In Christ. What are the blessings? There are a few. Why do we have them? Why do we have them? to be spending so much time on this, especially after Christmas. But it tells you in verse 7, we have redemption what? In his blood. Here's why we can have the spiritual blessings. When Jesus Christ went to the cross, he died in our place. What does that mean? You know, every time Jesus Christ ever addressed God, he called him Father. Except he was on the cross. He said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? It's almost like Jesus Christ lost his sonship so you and I could be adopted and brought in. Jesus Christ was bound and nailed so that we could be redeemed and liberated. Jesus Christ was put to death so we could have life everlasting. Through the substitutionary death of Jesus Christ, all of these things can be yours. So how? Union with Christ. What? We just had a few. Adoption, redemption, consummation, resurrection. We didn't even talk about justification, sanctification, glorification. We didn't even talk about all those things. But then how? I mean, why it can come to you? Because of the death of Jesus Christ on the cross for your sins. So that when you accept what he has done and rest in what he has done and ask God, the Father, to accept you because of what he has done, you're united and they all come. Now, let's just end this way. How do you know you have received these? How do you know you've had every spiritual blessing? I think the answer is that grace becomes glorious to you. Do you notice verse 6? All of this is to the praise of his glorious grace. Is that the theme of your life? Come on, be honest. Is that the ground note of your daily life? Come on, be honest. Do you find grace glorious? What do I mean by grace glorious? Well, first of all, grace. Dr. Lloyd-Jones used to say that when he asked his diagnostic question, are you Christian? One answer was, well, I'm trying. And then, of course, he would explain, no, no, being a Christian means to be in Christ. You're either a Christian or you're not. But he said there was another, sometimes it would be another answer. And if you say, are you a Christian? They might say, well, I'm trying. But sometimes he would say, are you a Christian? And he would say, of course I'm a Christian. And the doctor used to say, that was a very bad sign. Because you see, if you believe you're saved by grace, grace becomes the most wonderful thing. And it just, the sense that you're saved by grace permeates everything. And it gets rid of any sense of, of course. See, when you say, of course I'm a Christian. So I'm a good person. I go to church. Why would you even ask such a thing? No, no, no. If grace was glorious to you, you'd be saying, yeah, I'm a Christian. What a joke. Me. It's amazing. It's astounding. It makes me laugh. But it's true. You see? Grace. It's all grace. Not, of course I'm a, what do you mean, of course? It's a miracle. It's especially a miracle that you're a Christian. You know, I don't know about all these other people. These people look like, you know, but me, a Christian. If you don't think it's an absolute miracle, if there's any like, well, of course I'm a Christian. Grace isn't glorious to you. It's not a good sign. Do you understand grace? But also, glorious means beautiful. Beautiful. It means, you know, if you find something beautiful, you just can't get enough of it. If you find a certain kind of music glorious, you play it over and over and over again until your family's sick of it. But it touches your aesthetic center. And so you listen to it. Or it could be a painting, or it could be a book, or it could be a passage of something. But here's the thing. Once you realize Jesus Christ died for you, he gave his life for you to save you. In my favorite Harry Potter book is the first one. And I know some of you are going to say, of course, it's the shortest. But no, because I love the fact that at the very end, when the nasty guy who's in, you know, when the nasty guy tries to kill him, tries to grab him, and it burns. He can't touch him. And then afterwards, Harry Potter says to his mentor, he says, um, why couldn't the evil man touch me? And his mentor says, because your mother died for you. Your mother gave her life to save you. And when someone experiences love like that, it puts a power on you that no evil can deal with. And you read that and you go, listen, if Jesus Christ, if grace is glorious to you, it lifts you up. It touches your aesthetic center. Because everywhere you see substitutionary atonement, it's the most beautiful thought in the world. Is it to you? Is this the ground note of your life? The glory of grace? It doesn't give you this time. can never take yourself that seriously again? Because you know you're saved by grace. There's no, of course, about you anymore. That's a sign that you have every spiritual blessing given to you in Jesus Christ. Let's pray. Our Father, thank you for showing us how multifarious, rich, astonishing our salvation is. Every spiritual blessing. How we ask that you would give us that sense of richness, that sense of joy, and even a sense of humor, not taking ourselves very seriously ever again, that should all come from understanding our salvation. Please, Lord, please, let us live into our redemption so we're not bound by anxieties and fears. Let us live into your grace so that we find our lives sweetened by the knowledge of that. Let us live into our adoption. Let us live into these things. Let us live in the hope of the resurrection so we don't fear death anymore. So, Father, we pray that you would help us to appropriate the greatness of life that should come from knowing our salvation as it is in Jesus Christ. It's in Jesus' name we ask it. Amen. Amen. Amen.
