TITLE: Saul’s Rejection
SCRIPTURE: 1 Samuel 15:10-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: David: The Man of Prayer
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sauls-rejection/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from the book of 1st Samuel, chapter 15, verses 10 through 26. Then the word of the Lord came to Samuel. I regret that I have made Saul king, because he has turned away from me and has not carried out my instructions. Samuel was angry, and he cried out to the Lord all that night. Early in the morning, Samuel got up and went to meet Saul, but he was told, Saul has gone to Carmel. There, he has set up a monument in his own honor and has turned and gone on down to Gilgal. When Samuel reached him, Saul said, The Lord bless you. I have carried out the Lord's instruction. But Samuel said, What then is this bleeding of sheep in my ears? What is this lowing of cattle that I hear? Saul answered, The soldiers brought them from the Amalekites. They spread the best of the sheep and cattle to sacrifice to the Lord your God, but we totally destroyed the rest. Enough, Samuel said to Saul. Let me tell you what the Lord said to me last night. Tell me, Saul replied. Samuel said, Although you were once small in your own eyes, did you not become the head of the tribes of Israel? The Lord anointed you king over Israel, and he sent you on a mission saying, Go and completely destroy those wicked people, the Amalekites. Wage war against them until you have wiped them out. Why did you not obey the Lord? Why did you pounce on the plunder and do evil in the eyes of the Lord? But I did obey the Lord, Saul said. I went on the mission the Lord assigned me. I completely destroyed the Amalekites and brought back Agog, their king. The soldiers took sheep and cattle from the plunder. The best was devoted to God in order to sacrifice them to the Lord your God at Gilgal. But Samuel replied, Does the Lord delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as much as in obeying the Lord? To obey is better than sacrifice, and to heed is better than the fat of rams. For rebellion is like the sin of divination, and arrogance like the evil of idolatry. Because you have rejected the word of the Lord, he has rejected you as king. Then Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned. I have violated the Lord's command and your instructions. I was afraid of the men, and so I gave in to them. Now I beg you, forgive my sin and come back with me so that I may worship the Lord. But Samuel said to him, I will not go back with you. You have rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected you as king over Israel. Word of the Lord. A rather sobering passage. We're in looking at the life of David, and today we get to a text that actually gets us to address one of the most urgent and important questions you could ask. What's wrong with the human race? What's wrong? A few years ago, a philosopher at San Francisco State University, Jacob Needleman, wrote a book called, Why Can't We Be Good? And it kind of sank without a trace, because when people interviewed, here's what he said. He says, you know, social theorists are writing books about how we should live, and therapists are writing books about how we should live, and politicians are making speeches about how we should live, and setting up laws for how we should live. He says, the real problem, though, of the human race is not that we don't know how we should live. We kind of do know how we should live. The problem is that we know how we should live, and we aren't able to do it. That's the big problem of the human race. We know what we should do, and we can't do it. There's every single civilization has a moral code and a criminal justice system to go along with it, and every single civilization has widespread violations of the moral code that everybody basically knows is good. And so the point of the book was that we've got a problem. We don't need more lectures. We don't need more education. Very often, as he points out, many people in a secular world, we tend to think, well, if you do bad things, it's because you've been socially deprived, you've been oppressed, you're the victim of poverty. There's an article today in the New York Times, what is it that gets young men and young women to leave fairly good lives in the West and go to the Middle East as jihadists? At one point, the person writing the article asks a couple of experts and says, well, is it because these are people who have been oppressed and they're socially alienated, so they go there to strike out? And the answer is no, no, that's not true. The idea of social oppression being a profile for a jihadist is just not true. We don't really know why, though there's actually an insight in the article that I'll get back to later. This is our problem. Why do we do? we should live? One answer is in this text. It's not the only answer, but it's an extremely important one. It's a small but important subject that I want to bring to your attention. To get at it, let's look at the story itself and let's ask these questions. How did Saul fail? Why did Saul fail? And then how can we escape the thing that destroyed him? So how did Saul fail? Why did Saul fail? And how can we escape the thing that destroyed him? Now, how Saul failed is actually, it's important to grasp everything else is to at least briefly look at what's actually going on here. Saul, the first king of Israel, had been given a command by the Lord. Samuel mentions it in verse 13, and he actually, or he mentions it, excuse me. In verse 13, when Samuel reached him, Saul said, the Lord bless you, I have carried out the Lord's instructions. So that's a reference to it. And then down in verse 18, Samuel gives him a, gives a little synopsis of it. It says, the Lord sent you on a mission saying, go and completely destroy those wicked people, the Amalekites. Wage war against them until you've wiped them out. Now, when we first see that, we think, oh my goodness, that's terrible. God is telling him to go wipe out a group of people. But let's not read this superficially. The Amalekites were a violent people. They committed atrocities. They committed genocide. They were marauders. If you want to know a little bit about the kind of, uh, the, the violence of those nations that lived around Israel, go to the book of Amos, look at chapter one and two and see how they waged war. They did atrocities. They did genocide. They were violent. How do you then stop a group like the Amalekites? Otherwise, how do you keep them from continuing to destroy other people? What do you do? How do you stop them? And the answer is with force. But when God says to Saul and Israel, I want you to go and, and, uh, I want you to attack the Amalekites with force, of course. Then he says, however, I will not let you use force on them the way they use force on other nations. Because all nations, when they attack another nation, do so to enrich themselves. They don't just do it to kill. They do it to get slave labor. They do it to get farmland. They do it to get timber. They do it to get capital. They do it to enrich themselves. And what, what God actually says, and you can actually see this better, maybe if you read the first nine verses of the chapter, which we didn't print here. What he's basically saying is, I want you to smite the Amalekites, but as an instrument of divine justice. This necessary but terrible thing you have to do is an act of justice, not of imperialism. And therefore you may not profit one cent from this military action, not one cent. You can't take slave labor. You can't take, uh, the livestock and the cattle, which of course is the, their wealth. You can't, you, this is not an act of imperialism. This is an act of justice. And you mustn't profit one cent. That's what he said to Saul. Now I think this is, by the way, extraordinarily realistic of God. Because we know this, all nations always say when they go to war, they're going to war for truth and justice. But actually they're going at least also to enrich themselves. And so God knows that. And he says to Saul, this is to be an act of justice. This is supposed to be an act of truth and justice. It, you must not profit a cent. But of course what Saul does is he actually adopts the very values of the nation that he was sent to smite. And he takes, we'll get it back to this. He takes Agag, one of the, the, the king as prisoner. We'll get back to the reason why he does that. And he brings all the, it actually says in verse nine, which is not, we didn't read verse nine. In verse nine it says, but Saul and the army spared Agag the king and the best of the sheep and cattle, the fat calves and lambs, everything that was valuable. They took everything that was valuable. So he's adopted the imperialistic violent ways of the nations around him. And as a result, he has completely failed to be the king of Israel, to make Israel different, to make Israel a light to the nations. And as a result, God sends Samuel to tell Saul, he's been rejected. That's how Saul failed. But why did Saul fail? And see, that's where we have to really look because it would be very easy. Listen, there's be nothing wrong with us doing a little reflection. It's interesting that this text says that basically says that nation, truth, but they actually go to war in order to enrich themselves at the expense of other nations through violence. And you know, would that bear interesting reflection? Sure. That's something we could say, well, that's interesting. What do we learn about foreign policy from that? It's worth reflecting on. But the purpose of this text in the Bible is not to get you to think about U.S. foreign policy. The purpose of this text is to get you to think about yourself. It always is. And the question is, what was it that brought Saul to this point? Saul started out as a modest man. Saul started out as a humble man. Go back to 1 Samuel 10. You know, 1 Samuel 9, 8, 9, and 10, Samuel is sent to tell Saul that God is going to anoint him to be the very first king of Israel. And then in 1 Samuel 10, Samuel gets all the people together, and he's going to try to anoint Saul in the presence of the people. And Saul's so modest and shy and scared, he hides amongst the luggage. And they have to send people to go pull this tall, gangly kid out and anoint him king. How did he get to this? How did that shy, modest, humble man get to the place where he actually is essentially doing atrocities because he's doing it to enrich himself? How did that happen? And here's the answer. The answer is the almost infinite capacity of human beings for self-deception. That's what this passage is about. Self-deception. The almost infinite capacity of human heart for self-deception. So, for example, you see it many ways. In verse 19, Samuel says, basically, he says, why did you not, literally in the Hebrew, he says, why did you not listen to the voice of the Lord? I know it's translated, why didn't you obey the Lord? Literally, he says, why didn't you listen to the voice of the Lord? Verse 20, Saul says, but I did listen to the voice of the Lord. But then down in verse 22, which is over on the other side, he says, but to heed is better than the fat of rams. And what, what basically, here's what Saul say. Samuel says, you didn't listen. Saul says, but I did listen. And Samuel's saying, well, you listened, but you didn't really listen. You listened, but you didn't really take heed. Now, by the way, all, all parents of teenagers know exactly what I'm talking about. Because self-deception is our ability to know something at one level and then keep ourselves from knowing it at another level because we don't want to know it. Self-deception is the ability to know something at one level, but not know it at another level because we don't want to know it because it's too threatening. Self-deception is not the worst thing we do, but it's the reason why we do the worst things. So how does it work? Well, you know, some ideas. Let me give you four examples, most of which I'll get back to. So for example, when I was, when my wife and I were first married, we used to take long trips in the car, especially on vacation. And when we were in the car on long trips, my wife would fairly regularly say, honey, you hear that noise? Should the car be making that noise? Isn't there something wrong with the car? Let's pull over on a side and put up the hood and see it. Is there something wrong with the, with the, with the car? And I would always say, no, there's nothing wrong with the car. And then turn up the radio. Cars make that sound. You just don't, you just don't pay attention. I didn't want there to be anything wrong. I desperately didn't want there to be anything wrong with the car. Why not? I'll get back to that. I knew there was something wrong with the car, but at another level, I didn't want to know there was something wrong with the car. So I didn't know there was anything wrong with the car until it broke down in some remote place. Air Florida Flight 90, 1982, taking off out of Washington, DC. And as you, many of you might remember, it went down the Potomac River. It was icy. It was winter. It, it hit one of the bridges in the Potomac. Many, many people were killed. Why? Self-deception on the part of the, of the pilot. You know, we've got the recorder and we know that the co-pilot, the pilot was talking about, oh yeah, these bureaucrats, they always want to de-ice the plane. It's really not a big problem. 49 minutes after de-icing, they hadn't de-iced in 49 minutes. They're starting to get ready to take off. And the co-pilot says, well, I've got some readings here that I'm not sure are very good. And the pilot was saying, look, I know what I'm doing. You know, the bureaucrats that, you know, they have all these rules. It makes them feel better, but I'm a good pilot. I know what I'm doing. His overconfidence, his self-deception. we do, but it's the reason why we do horrible things. Lots of people died. There's an article I read at some point about the difficulty parents have at recognizing their own children's flaws. We get back to this too, but the point is that it's very difficult for parents to look at their children and admit what's wrong. And so we defend them very often, and we talk to other people about them, and we defend them to the school or to other parents. Everything's fine. You shouldn't pick on this child. And yet we know, but we don't know, that there is something wrong until very often it's too late. You can ruin your child. See, self-deception, of course parents want to think the best about their children. See, self-deception isn't the worst thing we do, but it's the reason why we do such terrible things. You can ruin your child's life. You can kill a lot of people in an airplane. There was, in the middle of Germany, there's a town called Ordruf, and Ordruf was the site of one of the worst death camps. When Eisenhower, at the end of World War II, liberated it, he couldn't believe what he saw. I was reading it up a little bit. When George Patton came to town, if you know anything about George Patton, you know, what a tough guy George Patton was, the general. And George Patton looked at it from, George Patton wouldn't go in. When he saw it, even from the outside, he says, I don't, I think I'm going to throw up. George Patton. It was a horrible place. And Eisenhower went into town, talked to the civic leaders, including the mayor and his wife and others, and said, you knew what was going on there. No, we didn't know. No, we didn't know. That, of course, they brought them out. They saw it. And not long after that, the mayor and his wife hung themselves. And according, you can read about it on the internet, their last words were, we didn't know, but we knew. We didn't know, but we knew. We knew, but we didn't know. One of the main messages of the Bible is Romans 1. We know, and yet we hold down the truth and unrighteousness. We know many things about how we ought to live. We know many things about God, but we don't know. We know, but we don't know. The Bible basically says exactly what Jack Nicholson said to Tom Cruise. You can't handle the truth. Why? What's going on here? Why? Look, listen, the self-deception, we don't really have time to look at it all, but I mean, you can see many aspects of it, how it works. It works out in many, many different ways. In verse 15, when he's first confronted, you know, he says, it's amazing. The Lord blessed you, verse 13. I carried out the Lord's instructions. I mean, there's a bad conscience right away. By the way, I did everything God told me. Okay, you did? So what is this bleeding of sheep in my ears? What is the lowing of cattle that I hear? Verse 15, Saul said, well, the soldiers brought them. By the way, in Hebrew, he doesn't use the word soldiers. He just says they, a vague third-person plural. He said, well, you know, I did everything God told me. Oh, yeah, they're here. Well, they brought them. You know, they shouldn't have brought them. And then he says, that's blame-shifting. But more than that, that's always, always in self-deception, blame-shifting always is part of it. But the other thing is very often religiosity is. See what he says? We spared the best of the sheep and the cattle. It's a sacrifice to the Lord, of course, but we totally destroyed the rest. Look how religious I'm being. By the way, Elizabeth Elliott tells a story. Elizabeth Elliott was a missionary. And she had, she was one of three children. And her little brother was named Tommy. She tells a story about how when they were little, they used to be able to take the paper bags that they saved underneath the kitchen sink and get them out. And they could always play with them. But once they had them out, you always had to put them back. You could play with them as long as everybody put them back. And so one day, Tommy had them all out and they were everywhere. And then suddenly he realized, oh my goodness, piano lessons. So he ran into the living room where he had to practice his, oh, he had to practice his piano. And of course, being in that missionary family, he was playing hymns, you know. In comes the father. Tommy, why did you leave all these things? You left the kitchen a mess. And Tommy says, but daddy, I'm singing songs to Jesus. And Elizabeth Elliott remembers what he said. He says, Tommy, there's no good singing songs to Jesus when you're being disobedient. To obey is better than sacrifice. See, what he's saying is, well, see, I'm being religious. I'm sacrificing. I'm, you know, I'm going to church and I'm giving my tithe and I'm, you know, reading them. sacrifice. What does God really want? He doesn't want your sheep and goats. He wants you. He wants you. Religiosity is always a part of the self-deception. But here's the worst thing of all. It's really pretty sad, but you've got to at least mention it. At the end, when he realizes that Samuel's not being fooled and God is obviously not going along with this, then Saul said to Samuel, verse 24, I have sinned. Now, you know, when David, in 2 Samuel 12, when David does something even worse than Saul here, he also says the same word, I have sinned. But when David says, I have sinned, God accepts the repentance and forgives him. But when Saul says, I have sinned, he doesn't. Why? Well, you can even see immediately, look, I have sinned. I violated the Lord's command. I was afraid of the men. He has deceived himself. He says, I'm repenting. I'm repenting. But it's actually self-pity. It's not repentance. He's not sorry for the sin. He's sorry for the consequences of the sin. He's not sorry for what he did. He's sorry that he's been caught. He's sorry because of the bad things that are coming into his life because of it. If you took those consequences away, he'd be right back into it. And he doesn't see it. He's self-deceived. I'm sorry. I'm really repenting. Look at me. I'm upset. You know, I'm beating my breasts. I'm beating myself up. I see what a horrible thing I've done. Why in the world aren't you coming back and forgiving me? Because you're not repenting. What do you mean I'm not repenting? Self-deception. Saul, the minute these consequences go away, you're going to go right back into what you were doing before. You see how self-absorbed you are? No, he can't. Okay, now how are we going to escape what destroys Saul? How are we going to escape it? Well, we better figure out what the heart of it is and what all these forms of self-deception we're talking about have in common. And I think it's right here. There's two places where you can see what's going on. It's interesting. In the very beginning, verse 12 says, early in the morning, Samuel got up and went to meet Saul. But he was told, Saul has gone to Carmel. There he has set up a monument to his own honor and turned and gone down to Gilgal. But the heart of the heart of it is down here in verse 17. Samuel says to Saul, although you were once small in your own eyes, did you not become the head of the tribes of Israel? The Lord anointed you king over Israel. Now there it is. You were small in your own eyes. And God made you king. God made you big. You were small. God made you big. But now you're trying to make yourself big. You're trying to create a monument. This is the reason why he makes this fascinating statement in his sort of oracle when he says, arrogance is like the evil of idolatry. And here's what we have. What is it? Why do I have trouble? Why did I have trouble admitting that there was probably something wrong with the car? Because Kathy's father and my father could always just pull over to the side, pick up the hood, and immediately figure out what was wrong with the car. That's what the men in those families did. They'd pick up the hood of the car. They'd go, oh, it's a thing of your thinking. And you know, I just happen to have three in the trunk. You know, I just pop the thing right in here, pull the old one out. You know, I couldn't do that. I never could do that. I could never do that. I didn't want to. I couldn't, you know, pull over to the side. I would just look, and they said, there it is. It smells bad. I don't know what's going on. Why did the pilot? Of course the pilot was proud of being a good pilot, but he was too proud. You see, arrogance is like the sin of idolatry. He was too proud. He says, you know, these people, they, you know, I'm not going to be late. I am not going to stay here and be another hour and a half late because I have to de-ice again. I know what I'm doing. I'm going to go. What about parents who say, I've got this perfect kid? Athletic, you know, great, great, uh, grades, you know, popular, uh, what's going on in every case? The reason why they're in denial, the reason why they're self-deceived is because their self-image is based on something. And whatever the thing their self-image is based on, whatever they see as a monument to themselves, whatever they see as basically how they're making themselves big in their own eyes, I'm raising a great kid. I'm a great pilot. I'm a great pilot. I'm a great pilot. I'm a great pilot. I'm a great pilot. I'm a great pilot. monument to themselves, whatever they see as basically how they're making themselves big in their own eyes. I'm raising a great kid. I'm a great pilot. You know, I'm a manly guy. You know, I know how to fit. In other words, whatever your self-image is based on, you will have to be in denial and you have to filter out. You'll have to suppress any, any information that basically jeopardizes that self-image. I need to believe I'm like this. I need to believe I'm like this. That's how I feel good about myself. I need to believe it. So in comes information that doesn't fit with that, filter it out. And that's the reason such awful things happen. As long as you're trying to become big in your own eyes, as long as you've got anything that you're basing your self-image on in order to feel, you know, big, good, monument, you will not be able to be honest about that thing. You can't admit what's wrong with your kid. You can't admit that you're just normal in this way. Certainly that's why religiosity, by the way, is one of the main ways in which self-deception happens. I need to believe that I'm a good person. I need to think of myself as a good Christian, a decent Christian, a mature Christian. So in comes information that shows you're not. We've got to do something about it. You know it, but you don't know it. You just filter it out. In fact, getting big in your own eyes is definitely the way to get evil. Because in the New York Times article at one point, the interviewer was saying, okay, why in the world would a 20-year-old kid having a fairly good life in this Western country go over there and start beheading people? And this is what the guy said. This is what the expert said. Can you imagine a 20-year-old kid whose peers are getting drunk, obsessed with finding a girlfriend, but he realizes I could go to Syria and Iraq and do something that within an hour gets a response from the President of the United States. So if he goes to Syria and becomes involved with the Islamic State, he goes from being the manager of a second-rate clothing store to someone giving headaches to the President of the United States. What? It's exactly what Saul's doing. Exactly. I want to feel big. I want to know I'm getting a rise. The world notices what I'm doing. And if you need to become big in your own eyes, that automatically means you build your self-image on something that leads to self-deception, that can lead to some terrible, terrible things. What's the solution? Well, the solution, interestingly enough, Samuel gives Saul the solution. He gives it in an Old Testament version. All we have to do is show that since we live on the other side, we live after the New Testament, we actually have an even stronger resource. And I'll be brief about it, but it's very clear. The answer is in verse 17, although you were once small in your own eyes, didn't you become the head of the tribes of Israel? The Lord anointed you king over Israel. In other words, you were elected through sovereign grace. You were not better. You were not smarter. You were not wiser than anybody else. You were taller, but apart from that, Saul, you were small in your own eyes, and you were small in your own eyes, but God actually swooped in and made you king by grace. And he says, you're rejecting the grace of God. You're trying to go out and build a self-image without the grace of God. You're trying to make yourself big in your own eyes, and that's the reason why everything's going wrong. Some years ago, I heard Edmund Clowney preach a sermon on Deuteronomy 7, verse 7 to 8. Some of you heard me. It is one of those things that changed my life, and therefore, some of you heard me refer to it before, but it explains this and brings us home. Deuteronomy 7, verse 7 and 8. I'll just read it to you. Deuteronomy 7, verse 7 and 8 is where, you know, Moses is actually talking to the children of Israel, and he says, the Lord did not set his love on you or choose you because you were more numerous than other peoples, for you were the fewest of people. But it was because the Lord loved you that he brought you out of Egypt with a mighty hand. Okay? Listen, did you hear that? God didn't love you, O Israel, because you were greater. In fact, you were the fewest. You were the least of nations. But it was because the Lord loved you that he set his love upon you and brought you out of Egypt with a mighty hand. If you listen carefully, it's a completely circular argument. Why did he love you? Because he loved you. Why did he love you? He loved you because he loved you because he loved you. And then Ed turned around and said, let me give you an example. He says, oh, men, if your wife comes to you and says, why do you love me? Everything's on the line. And he says, here's what you might say. Honey, I love you because you're beautiful. You've got a great figure after all these years. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You're beautiful. You And he says, here's what you might say, honey, I love you because you're beautiful, you've got a great figure after all these years, you are, the sexual chemistry is great, you have a career, had a great career, which enhances the family coffers, you are athletic and we can do stuff together that I couldn't do with somebody else, I mean, there's all sorts of ways in which you're so much fun to be with and I just had this great time with you and you're hilarious and you had zest in my life, he says, oh my goodness, at first, maybe if she's really stupid, she'll feel good for about a minute and then she'll begin to, wait a minute, what if I gain weight, what if I get tired of my career, what if I get injured, wait a minute, and she realizes you're not loving her because you love her, you're loving her because of the benefits she brings into your life, you're not loving her, you're loving what she gives you, the only way to answer a question like that, that will satisfy the deepest need of a heart, is to say, honey, I love you just because I love you, just because I love you, it's unconditional, and you see, if you know that you're loved because you're XYZ, the XYZ becomes the basis of the self-image, and you'll always need to be that XYZ, and you'll have to filter out any information or any data that calls that into question, so if someone says, I love you because of XYZ, the XYZ becomes the self-image, but if somebody says, I love you because I love you because I love you, then the love becomes the base of the self-image, and you're free to admit the worst things about yourself, you're free to finally be honest, you've got the emotional ballast, you're not threatened because your self-image isn't based on you being this perfect little this or perfect little this, you can admit, finally, you say, well, can't you get unconditional love from human beings? Sure you can, except then you can't, yeah, if you get unconditional love from a human being, let's just say a spouse or a parent or something like that, that's great, except then you're never going to be able to be really, really, you will not be able to handle anything going wrong with that person's life, you'll be in denial if there's anything wrong with that person, the only love that is truly unconditional, that gives you the basis of a self-image that leads you to become more honest about yourself instead of less, more deceived about yourself is the unconditional love of God, now, when he told this to Saul, that was the best Saul had, the best that Samuel could offer, that we have a God of grace, it was a kind of principle, you're saved by grace, not by works, if you think you're saved by your good works, and that creates a self-image that leads to self-deception, but we've got something better, we don't just have a principle, we've got a person, Jesus Christ was great in everybody's eyes, a Philippians 2 says, but he became small, you know, that place in the rock opera, Jesus Christ Superstar by Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber is a place where, where Jesus comes into the presence of Pilate, and Pilate looks at him, and says, oh, so this is Jesus Christ, I am really quite surprised, you look so small, not a king at all, he was great, he became small, so that you and I, if we admit that we're small, that we're sinners in need of grace, that we can have a name that will last forever, Jesus Christ lost everything, he's the true king of kings, he doesn't take people prisoner, he liberates, he doesn't kill people, he saves people, he gives his life, he doesn't take me because of what Jesus Christ has done, you can have that unconditional love, and that is the only self-image, you have to live into it, you have to take it out, when your wife asks you to do something that will be embarrassing, you have to say to yourself, I don't have to be this, I don't have to be like her father, I don't have to be like her father, I don't have to be like my father, that's not where my self-image rests, you have to take it out all the time, and you have to be in a community, in which you're trying this, you're using the gospel on each other, Hebrews 3.13 says, exhort one another daily, lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, sin is deceitful, and the only way you're going to get through that, is if you have a community of brothers and sisters inside the church, that you have given a hunting license to, they can come and exhort you, they can talk to you about what's wrong with you, so that when you see it, you start to get defensive, use the gospel on it, and you become more and more clear-eyed about who you are, and less and less self-deceived, and more able to really know your strengths and weaknesses, and really able to see the world as it is, instead of going around in a fog, in denial, in blindness, and in self-deception. Dietrich Bonhoeffer and Life Together says, there's nothing more liberating than to be so loved you can finally admit that you're... he who is alone with his sin, Bonhoeffer writes, is utterly alone. Christians may still be left to their loneliness because though they have fellowship with one another as devout people, they do not have fellowship as sinners. It's the grace of the gospel, which is so hard for the religious to understand, that it confronts us with the truth and says, you are a sinner. You are a great, big, desperate sinner. Now come as the sinner you are to God who loves you. The gospel message is liberation. The mask you wear before human beings will do you no good before him. He wants to see you as you are. He wants to be gracious to you. Know the freedom of saying, I am a desperate sinner and as I am, God loves me. Let's pray. So Father, free us from the self-deception that we have because to a great degree we don't ground ourselves in your unconditional love. Forgetting what Jesus Christ did, he's the true king of kings. He doesn't take life, he gives his life. He doesn't enslave people. He liberates people. And though he was great in everyone's eyes, he became small, so small, so that we, believing in him, could know that we are great in the eyes of God. And Lord, in that self-image, we have a clarity and we have a reality and we have an honesty that we could not get any other way. So please, Lord, as we think about these things, show us how to apply this to our life by your Holy Spirit, we pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
