TITLE: Second Lost Son (and the Dance of God)
SCRIPTURE: Luke 15:20-32
TOPICS: Sin Forgiveness Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: The Prodigal Son and the Elder Brother
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/second-lost-son-and-the-dance-of-god/

============================================================

Now, the part that we looked at last week and the part that comes, the part of this story that's called the parable of the prodigal son, that comes right before this passage that we read, tells about what the younger brother did. And it's a little hard to understand the outrage and the seriousness of it because we live in an individualistic Western culture. But you have to realize this. Let's try as much as possible to put ourselves in the shoes of that culture, as much as we can do here in five seconds. The young brother comes to the father and says, my slice of the inheritance. Since he was the younger of two brothers, he would have gotten probably 40% or something like that. Give me my part of the inheritance. Liquidate your part of the estate that would go to me. Even though you're not dead, I want your things, but I don't want you. I don't want you involved with my life. I don't want you governing my things. I want your things. I don't want you. Give them to me. I'm leaving. And you have to understand that in that culture, this was an absolute outrage. He had brought tremendous humiliation on the family. He brought tremendous humiliation and shame on his father. He essentially destroyed the family estate by insisting it be liquidated, the land, the cattle, whatever it was. And he goes off and squanders it. And this is immense. And yet, we see that when he returns, the father that he betrayed, the father that he humiliated, don't forget, those of you who've got any kind of background in Eastern cultures, you know what it means to be shamed. To be publicly shamed by the only father in his entire society that ever had a son do something like this. You know, what kind of father must he be? Here's this man who's been this kind of, this shamed and this betrayed, and he comes out and he welcomes him with open arms and he receives him back in. And when you see that, and you see him kiss his son, not wait, he won't even wait till he repents. We looked at this last week. He doesn't kiss him because he repents. His son is able to repent because he's kissed. He goes and he grabs him and he lifts him up and he kisses him and he hugs him. And if we stop the parable there, and most people do, in their memory, in their thinking, and very often in the preaching, if you stop it there, we just kind of get a little moist and weepy-eyed and we get all kind of sentimental and we say, oh. Oh, and, and the moral of the story is be forgiving, be loving, be accepting. Now, I can guarantee you there's not a historian on the face of the earth. There's nobody who understands ancient history. There's nobody who understands this text, no matter where they are on the spectrum. There is nobody who believes that there was anybody listening to that parable who was getting a little moist. Nobody was getting weepy-eyed. Nobody was getting sentimental. The people who heard Jesus' story were utterly thunderstruck. They were utterly outraged. They were absolutely amazed. And the reason is because the story doesn't end there. Now, this is a long set of stories. We know that the religious and moral leaders have come, and you see this in verse 1 and 2 of chapter 15. They have come and they have challenged Jesus and they say, we don't understand you. Why is it that the moral and religious people are offended by your preaching and all the sinners and the outcasts flock to you? We don't get it. And Jesus tells three stories. The shepherd going after the lost sheep. The woman going after the lost coin. And then the story about these two brothers. And the climax is not the prodigal son returning, but the dialogue, the debate between the father and the elder brother. If you actually see the whole chapter, if you see the whole story, if you realize this is not the parable of one son, but the parable of two sons, you will come to see this. What Jesus is saying and what outraged the people, Jesus was saying that this whole chapter is not so much about prodigals, it's about Pharisees. And it is not so much a wonderful assurance that if you had a broken, messed up life, he would receive you, even though, of course, it is. It is that. It is that wonderful assurance. It is a great assurance. But it's not the main point. This is not an assurance to prodigals. This is not an assurance to bad and immoral and messed up people. This is an absolute in-your-teeth warning to good people. The whole chapter, in this entire chapter, Jesus Christ is saying, nothing comes between you and God like morality and goodness and decency and respectability. And the people who are listening are thunderstruck. You know why? Because the purpose of this parable, or this whole chapter, I mean, the purpose of this chapter and this parable is not to get us a little bit weepy. It is to blow out. and who we are and how we relate to him in morality and religion. And therefore, we've been saying this each week of the three weeks, but today, when you get to this final climax, this is the climax. The climax, this must be the main point. This dialogue must be what the whole thing is about. Don't you see? This is a series of short subjects, but when you get to the end, this is the longest one, and this is the end. This is the climax. And when we actually look at the elder brother, we figure out this point. We see this point. Jesus is giving an incredible warning to good people. An unbelievable warning to good people. This is the reason why whenever the gospel is recovered, whenever you get into a phase in the church, whether it's the great awakenings of the 1740s, whether it's the great awakenings at various parts of the world in the 1850s and in 1904 and the Reformation, whenever you get to a place where the church gets vital, you always see the same thing. Morality is preached against, to a great degree. Goodness is denounced and warned against. And as a result, in flocks the outcasts, out goes in outrage the good people. That has happened over and over again. I listened to tapes by a guy named Dick Lucas who preaches at St. Helens Bishopsgate. St. Helens Bishopsgate is an Anglican church right in the center city, right near all the various, in the financial center of London. But years ago, in the 1740s, when there was a tremendous awakening, tremendous awakening, and the gospel was being preached in the streets and being preached in the churches and all sorts of people were becoming converted and coming into the churches, John Wesley preached in the pulpit of St. Helens Bishopsgate. And on his way down, you know, the steps, came down the steps, wish I had steps to come down from, but, well, I have steps, I have steps, don't do this to me. On his way down, the warden of the vestry, which is like the secretary of the board, all right, the warden of the vestry came running up and met him at the bottom and said, Sir, you must preach here no more. That's in the Wesley's journals. What was, what, why were people so offended? The established people, the middle class people, the moral people are always offended by the real message of Jesus. And the people who would never darken the doorway of a church, when they hear the message of Jesus, they're interested, they come to ask questions. That's the point. How could that be? If you want to understand how that can be, ask this question, who is the elder brother? What's going on with the elder brother? When we look at the elder brother, what do we learn? And we learn these things. Number one, first of all, we learn he's lost. First, the thing that's just astounding, when all the Pharisees and all the religious leaders and all the moral people know doggone well, and every commentator says this, that in the elder brother, Jesus Christ is showing moral people their picture. He's holding a mirror up. He's saying, look at this. This is who you are. And the first thing we learn is the elder brother is lost. He's as lost as the younger brother. Now, how do you know that? Well, first of all, don't forget that you have three parables. And in every parable, the whole point is, something is where it shouldn't be. The sheep is not where it ought to be. The coin is not where it ought to be. The younger son is not where it ought to be. And in every single situation, you have someone going out to get it back. You have the shepherd going out to get the sheep back, because it's not where it ought to be. You have the woman going out, searching all through the house to get the coin back. You have the father running out to get the prodigal son back. And now what do you have? In verse 28b, he went out to the elder brother. And this is the, it is so unmistakable. He's as lost as the prodigal son, as the coin, as the sheep. You see that? Henry Nowen wrote a book on this called The Parable of the Prodigal Son. And Henry Nowen just points to that, I'll just write, read it. He says, not only did the younger son who left home get lost, but the one who stayed home also became a lost man. Exteriorly, he did all the things a good son is supposed to do. But interiorly, he wandered far from his father. So the point is, it's a very important point. He is lost. Now, do you realize what this means? Jesus is saying to the religious people and the moral people, you are as alienated from my message and from my heart as this young man is from his father's heart. But now, somebody points out, and this is important, let's, let's, I will only take a second on this. Let's, let's, we have to realize that what Jesus is saying here is, it's not the only place. said here is, you can be with God and be far from God. Because you see, in verse 31, he comes out, and what does he say to the elder brother? When he begins his speech, his pleading, and by the way, the word pleading does mean tenderly. He says, my son, you have always been with me. Now, somebody says, well, that means he's not lost. No, no, no, no, that means he's so lost. Over and over again, Jesus says this. For example, in 14.9, John 14.9, he says to Philip, Philip says something off the wall, and he says, Philip, have you been with me so long, and you still don't know me? But probably the worst case of this is in Matthew chapter 7, verse 21, where Jesus says, on the last day, people will come to me and say, Lord, Lord, didn't we do mighty deeds in your name? Didn't we prophesy in your name? Didn't we do miracles in your name? And Jesus will say, I never knew you. Now, the point is, look real carefully. It is possible, Jesus is saying, to never disobey any of God's orders. It is possible to be obeying every one of God's orders and be lost. The people who say, Lord, Lord, the word Lord, Lord, Lord, we've done all these wonderful things for you. This is in Matthew chapter 7, verse 21. These are people who are very religious. These are people who are very busy, and they're also doing it in Jesus' name. They're in the church. They're on the bandwagon. They have the right beliefs. They're obeying everything Jesus says. This is saying, you can obey every order. This isn't a hypocrite. You think, oh, he's a hypocrite. We're not talking about hypocrites. We're not talking about somebody who on the outside says, yes, of course, I obey God's law. I obey all the orders. But on the sly, you know, behind the scenes, he's doing something else. We're not talking about that. He says, I've never disobeyed an order. We have to take him at face value. You can obey all the orders and be utterly lost. Another way to put it, you can just be surrounded by the father's issues. Surrounded by the father's, you can be involved with the father's issues, involved with the father's affairs, involved with the father's business, involved with the father's orders, and not be involved with the father. Because when it comes right down to it, the elder brother can't even fathom how the father is operating. He doesn't understand what the father is doing. Here is something that is at the very center of the father's heart. Clearly what he is doing, right here, gets to the heart of who the father is. The elder brother can't understand it, which means the elder brother has been with God and doesn't know God a bit. But the elder brother has been obeying everything, extremely involved, and he's lost. Keep that in mind. That's the first point. You can see right away, everybody's going, what? Okay, that's the first point. The second point, and it gets worse, or better, I'm not sure. The first point is, we learn that the elder brother is lost, meaning that you can do everything right. You can be very busy, very active. You can be obeying all the orders and still be lost. But more than that, secondly, it doesn't just say the elder brother is as lost as the younger brother. This story is actually telling us the elder brother is more lost. This is telling us the elder brother is more lost than the younger brother. Well, what do you mean by more lost? Well, now, if somebody asks me the question and answer time, what do you mean by more lost? Of course, in one sense, of course, in certain perspective, you're lost, you're lost. You know, we used to laugh about this. I mean, if a lion mauls you, cuts off your head, strews your body parts all around, you're dead. And if a little black widow spider pricks you, and you'd hardly even know it, but you die that night in your sleep, you're dead. Now, which person is more dead? Well, one person is ugly dead, and one person is pretty dead, but you're just dead. But from another point of view, this is very clear. Here, the father has got a Jekyll and a Hyde. He's got a Jekyll son, a Hyde son. He's got a disciplined, nice, respectable son, and a Hyde son, undisciplined, unselfish. And in the end, Hyde goes in, and Jekyll does not. And what Jesus Christ is getting across here is not just that the elder son is lost in spite of his goodness. What Jesus is getting across here is the elder son is lost because of his goodness. See, why isn't he going in? You see why he's not going in? Why doesn't he understand the father? Do you see why he doesn't understand the father? Why is he angry at the father? Do you see why he's angry at the father? Because I obey everything. He says, because I obey, I don't like the way you're treating me. Because I obey, I have a right to say I don't like the way you're running the universe here. Because I obey, you see, it's because he obeyed. one of the main teachings of Jesus Christ. This is one of the things that gets recovered in times of great vitality. This is one of the things that you can go for years and years and maybe even centuries, I mean decades, and never hear in a church. But Jesus over and over says to the pimps and the prostitutes, about the pimps and the prostitutes, he says to the Pharisees, the pimps and the prostitutes go into the kingdom of God before you. And as my friend John Gerstner once put it, and I'll return to this in a second, he says, the thing that really separates us from God is not so much our sins, but our damnable good works. Now, how could that be true? How could your goodness actually make you more blind? Well, I'm giving it away. How could your goodness separate you more from God than badness? And here's, let me give you two answers. And you can see them in the elder brother. The two answers are, number one, the reason goodness actually makes you more lost than badness does, number one is goodness masks your battle with God. Goodness masks it. The Bible defines sin as trying to be your own Savior and Lord. The Bible defines sin in a sense as cosmic treason. The Bible defines sin as overthrowing your rightful Savior and Lord and saying, no, I want to do that. The Bible defines sin as trying to be your own Savior and Lord. And here's the point. Younger brother lostness. In younger brother lostness, you just do it. You're conscious. You say, yes, I'm going to be my own Savior and Lord. I don't need God. I don't need religion. Don't tell me what's right and wrong. I will decide what's right and wrong for me. So, you know, you know you've done it. And therefore, when there's smoke, we know where the fire is in younger brother lostness. When your life falls apart, you say, maybe I need God. But in elder brother lostness, the goodness masks the fact that you are also being your own Savior and Lord. Because of your goodness, you're not all that dependent on God. You don't want total salvation. You just want help at certain points. Because of your goodness, you don't pray to him day and night in dependence on him. You pray when you're in trouble. Because of your goodness, you don't really make him your Savior and Lord. You're your own Savior and Lord. But the goodness masks it. And therefore, when your life stops working, when your life falls apart, when there's smoke all over, you can't find the fire. I don't know how many times I've heard people say, I tried Christianity. I tried God and it didn't work. They don't know what they mean. I tried God and it didn't work. What they mean is, I wanted something, God didn't give it to me. You see, the younger brother lostness says, I set my heart on these things and I realize now that those things could never satisfy me. When your life falls apart, you say, I can see those things never satisfy me. But you see, in elder brother lostness, you've set your heart on other things besides God. He's not your Savior and Lord. You're just using him. And therefore, when your life falls apart because you're not getting the things you really, really want, you blame God and you say it didn't work. In younger brother lostness, when there's smoke, you know where the fire is. In elder brother lostness, when your life is falling apart, you have no idea where it's coming from. And it's because goodness masks the fact that you're being your own Savior and Lord. But then secondly, the second reason why goodness makes us more lost than badness is goodness doesn't just mask your battle with God. Okay, get this. Goodness is your main weapon. In elder brother lostness, goodness is your main weapon in your battle against God. You use your goodness against him. Can you see the elder brother doing that? See, if the elder brother had felt he hadn't been a good son, he would have come up and said, well, Father, this doesn't make sense, but you know, well, okay, let me hear your side of it. Oh, no. But what he does is he comes up and says, I have obeyed. I have been good. I have done everything just right. And therefore, I demand that you stop treating my inheritance the way you are. The natural human heart, until the Holy Spirit comes in and shows us, until the Holy Spirit comes in and he intervenes, the natural human heart will take goodness and always use it like this. Good deeds, moral rectitude, caring for the needy, helping your family. You see, however you define it, what your heart will do with that goodness is you will use it to take control of God and the people around you. You will use your goodness to feel superior to other people and to say, you owe me. But most of all, you will use your goodness to try to get control of God and to say, you owe me. That's what he's saying here. He says, Father, you can't just treat me any old way. You can't just do anything. I, I, difference between an elder brother and a Christian, there's practically no better place than that fascinating spot in The Great Divorce. The Great Divorce is a fictional account by C.S. Lewis of a busload of people, this is fictional, by the way, a busload of people from hell who go to the outskirts of heaven. And people who are in hell are met generally by people who they knew from earth who are in heaven. And the people from heaven come on down and they try to urge the people from hell to come to heaven. Here's an interesting example. What you're going to find is the ghost is a person from hell. The bright man is a person from heaven. Look at me now, said the ghost. This is one of these encounters, slapping his chest, but the slap made no noise. I've gone straight all my life. I don't say I had no faults, far from it, but I'd done my best all my life. See, I'd done my best by everybody. That's the sort of chap I was. I never asked for anything that wasn't mine by rights. If I wanted a drink, I paid for it. And if I took my wages, I'd done my job. See, that's the sort I was. The bright man said, it would be much better not to go on about that now. You'll never do it like that. Your feet will never grow hard enough to walk on the grass that way. You'd never get to the mountains. Ghost. Who's going on? I'm not arguing. I'm asking for nothing but my rights. I got to have my rights. Same as you. See? Oh, no. It's not as bad as that. I haven't gotten my rights or I wouldn't be here. You will not get yours either. You'll get something far better. That's just what I say. I haven't got my rights. I always done my best. I've never done anything wrong. And what I don't see is why I should be down there and a bloody murderer like you, which he was, should be up here. Well, who knows whether you will stay down there. Maybe you will be put above me up there. Just be happy and come. What do you keep arguing for? Said the ghost. I only want my rights. I'm not asking for anybody's bleeding charity. Oh, then do. At once. Ask for the bleeding charity. Everything is here for the asking and nothing can be bought. That may be all right for you if they choose to let a bloody murder in all because he makes a poor mouth at the last minute. That's their lookout. But I don't want charity. I'm a decent man. And if I had my rights, I'd have been here long ago. And you can tell him I said so. It was almost, the ghost was almost happy now that it could in a sense threaten. Yes, that's what I'll do. I'll go home. I didn't come here to be treated like a dog. I'll go home. Damn and blast the whole pack of you. And still grumbling, but whimpering a little as it picked its way over the sharp grasses, the ghost made off. Now, this is exactly only a much more powerful picture than I can get across. This is a perfect picture of the elder brother. I just want my rights. When your goodness becomes a way for you to get leverage over everybody else, so instead of looking at what comes to you from other people and what comes to you from God as a gift, when you use your goodness to demand your rights everywhere, all over the place, you're as miserable as this young man is, this older brother is, and you are utterly alienated from the father's heart. Now, that's the second point. The goodness makes them further away, and here's the reason why. When you become a Christian, the first thing you know a little bit about is you have to repent of your badness, the things you've done wrong. But many, many, many people think they've become Christians only because they've repented of their badness, and they haven't repented of their goodness. Well, you say, how in the world can I repent of my goodness? If you only repent of your badness, here's what will happen. You think you've become a Christian, but what you've actually done is you're continuing to say, if I'm really good, if I try really hard, if I work really well, if I'm a good husband or good wife or good child or good son or good daughter or good father or good mother, if I do all these things well, what's happened? You're still an elder brother. You still are. And you will have these same marks in your life that he's got that are signs of elder brother lostness. What are those signs? Okay, let me just give you a quick rundown. It's frightening to see them, but take a look at the signs of elder brother lostness. He's not in a pigsty. You can't find it that way. He's not cursing God. He can't find it that way. He's not doing things wrong. He's not breaking all the laws of God. You can't find him that way. He's not outside of church. You can't find him that way. You can't just, you know, you say, I know how to find non-Christians. 11 o'clock Sunday morning. I'll just see who's walking out there on the street. Then I know who a non-Christian is. Well, see, the problem is you can't find him that way. He's not out there on the street 11 o'clock on Sunday morning. Well, how do we know if you have elder brother lostness in your life? Well, here it is. Number one, let's take a look real quick. First of all, he is very, very angry about how his life goes and he compares himself to others. He says, I never got a goat. up here and me down there i am a better person i deserve this now you listen this is a sign of elder brother lostness you're always looking around and saying other people are having a better life than me who don't deserve it as much as i do and you're why because you feel like god owes me that's self-righteousness that's elder brother lostness and your misery your deep misery comes from the fact not not because your life isn't going the way you want that's not it it's how you're interpreting it the reason you're so miserable is not because of the circumstances stop telling yourself ah the reason i'm so cynical and so angry and so bitter and so cold inside is because my life hasn't gone very well that's not it it's how you're looking at your life nobody's life goes that well you know from the outside you think their life goes better you don't know see that's the self-righteousness that says i know better and god owes me and that's the first sign anger tremendous anger at the way everything you know has to happen you see the problem is elder oh by the way there's actually two kinds of anger when things go wrong see elder brothers have two kinds of anger because elder brothers believe that either i'm good and i'm valuable or i'm sinful and i'm worthless but the gospel says you're sinful and incredibly valuable see elder brothers say if i'm living up and i'm obeying all the rules and i'm doing it right then i'm good and i'm valuable and then when things go wrong the anger is toward god i hate you how can you do this to me but if you're not living up if you aren't living up to your standards if you're not making it the way you want to then you feel sinful and worthless and then when things go wrong you get angry but you don't get angry at god you get angry at you you say what an idiot how did i do this why is my life's going wrong it's all my fault you're going to be filled with anger but the gospel which is a completely different grid it takes you completely out of the elder brother religion it takes you completely out of this the gospel doesn't say you're either good and valuable or sinful and worthless but you are very sinful and absolutely valuable in christ and because you know you're sinful when bad things happen you don't complain but because you know you're valuable when bad things happen you know it's not a punishment did you hear that you see if you're a christian and you understand the gospel because you know you're sinful you don't complain when bad things happen, but because you know you're valuable, you know it's not a punishment. You know it's because of some other broader and bigger plan. You know it's because God isn't going to take out of your hide something he took out of Jesus' hide. You see, the anger, when anything goes wrong, that's a sign of elder brotherness. Secondly, now look carefully, he hates the law of God that he's obeying. It's a dead giveaway in verse 28. What does he say? I have slave for you. You know, and even the word orders is a giveaway, don't you think? But I'm so glad, you know, his slip is completely showing. His slip is a little showing there with orders. He says, I follow your orders, not even your commands, not even your directions, not even your guidance. He says, your orders. But then he says, slave. And he uses a word that means just what it sounds like in English. And here's what's so strange. The people who believe they're saved by obeying the law always, if you, on the top, right, they're law abiding, but underneath they're law hating. They hate it. They despise it. They're just using it. It's a slavery. It's a task master. They're not lawless in their behavior, but they're lawless in their heart. And the lawlessness of their heart is shown in their utter moral scrupulosity. That's how they're trying to beat the law. That's how they're trying to win. They hate it, and they're trying to win. They're trying to kill it. They're trying to get rid of it. And I'll put it another way. Now, this is very, very important. This is the difference between an elder brother and a Christian. Both the elder brother and a Christian do the will of God. Generally speaking, I must say, that elder brothers sometimes do a little better job of it when it comes to moral scrupulosity. But there's a big difference in why they're doing it. What makes you a Christian or not a Christian is not so much whether you're obeying the will of God, but why you're obeying the will of God. Let me give you a quick illustration. When I was in college, I had a music appreciation course, and I had to listen to Mozart so I could pass the test. So I had to listen to Mozart so I could pass the test. I had to pass the test so I could get a good grade in the course. I had to get a good grade in the course so I could get a degree. I had to get a good degree so I could get into a good grad school. I had to get into grad school so I could get a white-collar job. Now, I used Mozart to get money. but something's happened to me in Mozart over the years. Now I use money to get Mozart. Now I spend the money that I make with my something kind of collar job. And why do I do it? Now what does Mozart give me? Mozart just gives me Mozart. Now here's the difference. When you find something beautiful, it is its own reward. When you find something beautiful, it's just itself. When you find something beautiful, you look at it, or you have it, or you listen to it, or you're with it just for what it is. And if, on the other hand, you listen to it, or you look at it, or you have it in order to get something else, you see, then you're not doing it out of aesthetic joy. You're not doing it out of just a sense of beauty. You're not doing it for itself. A Christian can speak like the psalmist. In Psalm 1, what does it say is the mark of a godly man? It doesn't say a godly man is someone who preaches day and night, someone who reads the Bible day and night. It doesn't even say that. Or someone who prays day and night, someone who's busy in church day and night. It says, his delight is in the law of the Lord, and on it he meditates day and night. In Psalm 119, it says, I love thy law, it's sweeter than honey to my mouth. That is utterly impossible for the elder brothers to say. Because they obey God to get something that they find beautiful. And a Christian is somebody who says, because you have saved me, and because, here's the thing, why does God love me? In the elder brother's mind, God loves me to get worshipers. God loves me to get adherents. God loves me to get constituents, I guess. But when you see the gospel, why did Jesus Christ die for me? He can get nothing out of it. Nothing, nothing, nothing. He died for me because, he died for you because, he died for us because, he must find us beautiful. He must actually love us for who we are. And when you recognize that, that you're a sinner saved by grace, what ends up happening is, you begin, for the first time, to treat God aesthetically. For the first time, you find that you love him for who he is, you obey him not for what he's giving you, and as a result, your obedience becomes personal, aesthetic, and absolutely unconditional. See, elder brothers say, I've just about had it. I've obeyed you, and I've obeyed you, and I've obeyed you, and I haven't gotten what? Well, I haven't gotten what? I haven't gotten the real things that I love, the real things that I think would give me meaning, the real... If you have a condition on your obedience, if you say, if God doesn't answer that prayer, if God lets that happen, then what good is being a Christian? And see, that is the elder brother, because the elder brother has not examined his premise, and you haven't examined yours either. And the premise is, God is not the thing I need. God is not the ultimate beauty. God is not the thing that my heart's really after. You see, your obedience is unconditional, because now you obey God for who he is. You obey him out of love. You're not a slave anymore. Quick, let's go on. First of all, we see elder brother lostness, always angry at what's going on in your life, either at yourself or God, back and forth, one or the other, or both sometimes. Secondly, you don't really love the law of God at all. You don't meditate on it. You don't find it beautiful. You know, you're not after the character of Christ. That's not what... You don't meditate on the law of God. You knuckle onto it. You hate it. You're using it, but you don't love it. You're lawless in your heart, even though you're very lawful in your life. Thirdly, there's a combination here of a lack of joyful assurance and a tremendously judgmental spirit toward others. On the one hand, a lack of assurance. There's a very funny thing that the commentators say. He says, you never even gave me a goat. Now, goats are very cheap compared to fatted calves. So what he's saying is, you never gave me a goat to have a party with. And in verse 31, what does the father say? All I have is yours. You've always been with me. And commentators say, the father's actually saying, but son, you never asked me. Now, the point is this. There is no dance in the heart of this elder brother about his relationship with the father. He's never had a party. He's never asked for a party because underneath it, he not only doesn't love the father, he's not really sure where he stands with him. He's got to know his hostility. He's got to know how much. He, just as much as the younger brother, the younger brother tried to get control of the father's things without the father by going away. And the older brother tried to get control of the father's things without the father by staying. He knows that deep in his heart. no sense of joy. See, when you ask a Christian, are you a Christian? It doesn't take long. The reflection happens and immediately there's a dance. You say, this is incredible. I'm a Christian and it's astounding. It's amazing. How could it be? But elder brothers, if you ask them if they're Christians, they say, of course I'm a Christian. Why are you asking? What are you up to? What are you thinking about? How dare you ask a question like that? There's never a party in the elder brother's relationship with the father. There's never a party. But with Christians, we lose it, but it doesn't take long. If you do a little reflection, your eyes start to dance, your heart starts to dance. He's got no assurance. He has no wellspring of joyful assurance. And yet, he is very quick to refuse to admit that this young man is really back in the family. He doesn't call him my brother. What does he call him? The son of yours. He doesn't even say your son. See, your son would be the son of yours. Now, this is very, very typical. Here's a sign of being an elder brother as opposed to being a Christian. When you're an elder brother, you're never sure where you stand with God. You're always nervous. You're always insecure. There's never a joy. There's never a dance. However, you are very sure about other people where they stand. Because since you believe you're saved by being good, if you see somebody doing something wrong, you say, that person can't be a Christian. Look at her do that. Christians don't do that. Well, that's true. But that doesn't mean she's not a Christian because maybe she's saved by grace. Well, I don't think like that. You see, the point is, if you are an elder brother, you're very unsure of yourself and you're very sure of everybody else, you've got them all pegged. But if you're a sinner saved by grace, if you understand the gospel, first of all, you become incredibly sure about yourself. Because see, now when you look in your own heart, sure you see things that are bad and wrong, but you know what Jesus has done for you. You are able to relax about yourself, but when you look at other people, you're very, very charitable. You start to say, well, you know, that person's not living right. But after all, you're not saved by living right. You see, suddenly, what happens is you become the most unjudgmental people in the world. There's an exclusivity about the elder brother always. The elder brother says, I, if I was going to have a party, I'd only invite my friends. But the commentators will tell you a fatted calf was way, way, way too much for a family to eat. Even if you can invite all the servants. The one commentator I read said, there's no way you kill a fatted calf unless you want everybody in town to come. No matter who they are, you don't think, all those people out there in town thought the father was a terrible father? And don't you think there's an awful lot of people out there that probably think the father is an idiot for asking, for letting this guy back in? But you see, the difference between a Christian and an elder brother is elder brothers are always, always judging and looking down. And they're saying, oh boy. You see, elder brothers are always judging people. Christians are the least judgmental people in the world. Christians are even saying to people who don't believe what they believe, I would like you as much as you're willing to feast with me. Maybe I can't convert you. Maybe I can't get you to see what I see. That doesn't mean I don't want to eat with you. See, that was the whole point. Jesus was eating with sinners. Eating with sinners. And so Jesus puts himself here as the father, killing the fatted calf, saying, even the people who I'm sure not only thought that I must be a terrible father who have lost my younger son, but even the ones who probably think it's incredible. I mean, in Eastern, in Oriental societies, what he did is probably would, many people would be offended by it. They think it's ridiculous. The whole town's invited. There's an exclusivity about the elder brother. There's an incredible inclusivity about grace. Well, there's a lot of other things we could say. For example, the elder brother can't forgive. Why not? If you think you're saved by your works, you always feel superior. You say, I would never do that. If you can't forgive a sin against you, you know what you're thinking in your heart of hearts? If today you're having trouble forgiving somebody, you know what you're saying in your heart of hearts? You're saying, you have to be saying, I would never do that. I would never do something like that. Well, that's elder brotherness. I'm not saying you're an elder brother through and through, but you've got a little elder brother in there or you wouldn't be in that. See, don't you see it's the self-righteousness that's really screwing up your life. It's not your badness. It's your goodness that makes you angry. It's your goodness that makes you worried. It's your goodness that makes you hate obedience. It's your goodness that makes you look and say these rules and say, oh gosh, I guess I have to do it, but boy, it's better than going to hell. It's your goodness that makes you miserable. It's your goodness, which is at the heart of all the problems. It's your self-righteousness. Self-righteousness is the cause of racism. It's the cause of classism. It's the cause of so much of the family breakdown. It's the goodness. And here's how you know it. One last thing. Somebody's saying, gee, all you're doing is bashing conservative people. You're bashing people who feel like morals are important and doing the right thing's important. Okay, let me just point one thing out. Elder brothers are not just conservative people. A moralist doesn't have to be a conservative people. One last thing. The elder brother hates evangelism. One of the ways you can tell an elder brother is they hate evangelism or they might give lip service to it, but they're terrible at it. And I don't know how many times I've talked to people, and they're very liberal, but they're very moralistic. I don't know how many times I've talked to people who say, hey, dancing, raising your hands, talking about people being lost and found. Well, yes, of course, the poor people, the uneducated people, they like that kind of religion, but you're a college graduate. Grow up. There is nothing more absolutely paternalistic toward poor people. There is nothing more hidebound and proud as to sneer at the only kind of religion that younger brothers, that outcasts, that poor people, that broken people have ever embraced in any kind of main way, you see. The only kind of religion that's ever spread among the people that Jesus loves so much has always been supernatural religion, has always been religion that said, once I was lost, now I'm found. That's the only kind of religion. It's the nice people, it's the moral people, the respectful people, and the liberal people who, they want religion that's very rational, very ethical, you know, very noncommittal in some ways, not much doctrine. And of course, they'll put up with the fact that those uneducated people, they dance, see, they sing with the father, they say, hallelujah, a younger brother has come back, hallelujah, you say, well, okay, for them, not for you. What an elder brother. You don't have to be a conservative to be an elder brother. You don't have to be a conservative to be a moralist. You don't have to be religious to be a moralist. You can be an incredibly secular moralist. And New York's really filled with a lot of them. One last thing. Some of you were younger brothers and when you became Christians, you were very excited to see when you read the Bible that Jesus is always harder on Pharisees than pimps and prostitutes, that he's always harder on elder brothers than younger brothers. And as a result, you hate elder brothers now. You think, I can love everybody but Pharisees. I can love everybody but moralists. I can embrace everybody but those kinds of people that have ruined Christianity. I can, don't you realize what's happened? You were younger brother, but now your own heart and with a little help from the devil is turning you into an elder brother toward elder brothers. And the one way that you will be able to really see that your Christianity is not just one more flip-flop through your life is that your judgmentalism is even destroyed against judgmental people. And therefore, take a look, Jesus comes out in the Father and basically pleads with them. He says, come home. Come in. My son. He doesn't say, you fool. You rebellious. You prig. You Pharisee. My son. Okay? How can the elder brother be recovered? Well, we talked about it last week. I'll just say it this way. It's fascinating that the end of this sermon, in every other parable, you've got a shepherd going out to get the sheep. Right? You've got the woman going out to get the coin. You even really have this father dramatically going on out. But you see, at the very end, we actually have a failure by one of the searchers. What do you mean a failure? Okay, it shouldn't have been the father to go out. Here's what should have happened. Jesus Christ is showing us in the bad elder brother what a true elder brother would have done. Years ago, believe it or not, this was a Time Magazine article. During the Vietnam War, a young man was shot down behind enemy lines and he was a Mia. He was missing in action. And his American brother sold most of what he had, put most of it on his back, went into the jungles of Vietnam and for months, I think years, I can't remember the article. I have to go find it, wandered around behind enemy lines looking for his brother. And what's so fascinating is the villagers and even the enemy soldiers, they so respected that, you know, Eastern people, Oriental people very often are much bigger on family than us. They so respected that, that they let him pass and the word spread in the jungle and they just called him the brother. Now there's a real brother. Brother. Brother.
