TITLE: Self Esteem – Who Am I? Whose Am I? (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Identity God's Love
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/self-esteem-who-am-i-whose-am-i-an-open-forum/

============================================================

The clues tell us so much. If you just listen to the music and think and reflect, but let me try to spell it out. Let's tackle the question of personal identity in the modern era. What is the meaning of the question, who am I? And I'd like you to see some of the inadequate answers we have right now to that question and the clues that show us the way to go, the right way, the best way, the only way. So first of all, what's the question? The question, who am I? What's that mean? Now, let me give you a definition. The word identity, my identity, what is the word identity? The word identity means, it means being identical. My identity is what is always identical about me. See, I have a lot of roles, a lot of roles. For example, I'm a son to two people. Yes, just two. And I'm a husband to one, just one. And I'm a father to several. I haven't counted them recently. I'm a pastor to an awful lot. I'm a friend. You know, son, pastor, father. The roles are incredibly different, but unless there's something about me that's identical in every situation, I don't have a self. Myself is whatever is always identical about me. It's always there. It's always true. A sense of what I'm about, a sense of my value, my purpose, that's always there. Then, not just roles, the other thing that differs around me, around you, is circumstances. Sometimes I'm in successful circumstances, sometimes in disappointing ones, or even circumstances of failure or tragedy. Sometimes I'm surrounded by people who believe what things I believe, and then I'm surrounded by people in other cases that are absolutely hostile to it. What's my identity? My identity is that which is always identical about me. No matter whether I'm successful or whether I'm failing, no matter whether I'm with one crowd or with another crowd, if there isn't a core, an unchangeable core, if there isn't some kind of internal self-consistency, if there's not something that's always identical, that's always true about me, if there's not something that you always know about your value and purpose in any circumstances, you don't have a self. You don't have an identity. Now, there's been in the last, well, there's actually, and there still are in this world two basic answers to the question of who I am, two basic ways of going about establishing personal identity. Now, at this point, it's going to sound a little bit more like what we called it, a lecture. Those two ways I'm going to call the traditional way and the modern way. In traditional cultures, this is the answer to the question, who you are. Traditional cultures say, you are your duties. You're your duties. Because traditional cultures are collectivist cultures. Here's what I mean by that. In traditional cultures, people don't even actually sit around and ask, who am I? They don't do that. And the reason they don't do that is because the answer comes at you from the very, very beginning of your life. And that is, I'll tell you who you are, says those cultures. You are in our family. You are our people, you see. And therefore, you are your duties which are assigned to you with reference to the place you are in this community. Apart from the community, you have no identity. But as long as you know your place, you have an identity. And that's the reason why a word that's gone today, but at least in the West, but was very important and always is important in traditional cultures. That is, that identity is based on the idea of honor. Honor. You have honor as a man or a woman or a husband or a wife or a son or a daughter or a leader or a follower. There are things that you do, and those are the honorable things to do. But if you scratch under that, what they mean is you've got a spot in the group. And if you don't assume that spot in the group, you have no identity. You have no self. About 115 years ago, I had a grandfather born in Italy. And when he was, you know, I guess in his upper teens, if I got this straight, if I remember correctly, what they said to him was this. They said, this is your family, and your family has always done this. This is your trade. You can't move to some other village. You can't do some other trade. This is who we are. We are these people. This is your family. This is your name, and this is your trade. My grandfather says, I don't want to do that. And, you know, what do you do in a situation like that? In a traditionalist culture, this is who you are. You have an assignment. understand in those days, if you said, I don't want to be what society, what the culture tells me I want to be, there's only two things you could do. You could go in the military, or you could go to America. And my wife has a theory about this. My wife says, who are the people who live in New York? They are either the descendants of, or they are the most maladapted maverick member of every family in the world who have come to live here. They live here, and that does explain the traffic patterns. So that was the only thing my grandfather had to do. And by the way, my grandfather did come to America, and therefore, never mind. And the rest is history. Now, what I'm going to say is, that was the way the traditional approach was. A lot of you are from families that have moved here, and you were either raised in, or your family was raised in traditional culture, and you know that that's the way it's done. It's collectivist, and therefore, you are your duties. I have a self if I'm doing my duties, and if you don't have your duties, if you won't do it, if you don't feel like you fit, if you don't want to do that. In traditional cultures, the group closes ranks. You're shut out. You don't have a self. There's tremendous agony. Now, there's the modern approach. And the modern approach is actually a reaction to the traditional approach. And there's a lot of good reasons why. The modern approach saw the traditional approach as absolutely oppressive. What does the person do who says, I don't want to do that? That's not what I want to do. And they close ranks. They saw it as oppressive. And the modern, and here I'm talking mainly about Western secular society, they said, no, we have to come up with a whole different approach. And whereas the traditional approach says you are your duties, because those cultures are collectivistic, the modern answer to the question, who am I, the modern answer is you are your dreams. You are your desires, your deepest desires. Why? Because modern culture is radically individualistic. No greater difference could possibly be imagined. Can you just imagine my great-grandfather sitting down with his children in Italy 115 years ago and saying, kids, I just want to impart, this is my wisdom I want to tell you as your father, and this is what I want to say to you. Climb every mountain. Ford every stream. Follow every rainbow till you find your dream. See, modern, you couldn't imagine that. You see, modern culture, which is, the modern approach to identity, which is reflected in popular songs like that, in Broadway, you see, that is as far away from my great-grandfather's even conception. And yet that is what you have been told, and I have been told, if you were raised here, if you were raised in a Western culture, if you were raised in Western secular culture, you were raised there. If you're from Latin America, if you're from Asia, if you're from Africa, if you're even to a great degree from many, many parts of Europe, that's not what you were told. But if you were here, if you're from here, that's what you're told. You're told, you have to find out what you most want to do. You have to discover your dreams, and you have to go do them. And that's the end. You see, in a culture like this, where everyone's free to find out who you want to be, everyone's free to decide what you want to live for. Everyone's free to decide what your identity is. You go and discover it. You find out. Of course, we're happier. We're much happier than they are. And they were. We don't have the same problems they do. We don't have the confusion. We don't have the anxiety. I'm being cynical. Did you really think so? Have you reflected? We are not happier. Of course not. We are far more anxious. We are far less happy. And here's the reason why. The reason why is, when you look at traditional cultures, you think slavery. But the modern approach, the modern approach to identity is also a slavery. And even though I don't want anyone, even for a second, to assume that I am saying, let's go back to the traditional approach. Not for a second. But I am telling you this. The modern approach is probably less functional. And here's why. As I already said a minute ago when we take a look at these songs. It used to be, in the traditional culture, you could work for the sheer joy of the work. Or you could love for the sheer joy of the love. In modern culture, though, we're trying to find ourselves in our work. We're trying to find ourselves in our love. You see? We're not just working. We're not working. I count. I don't know if I've got a purpose. I don't know if I have value. I don't know if I have worth, unless I find one of these dreams and reach it. You see, you think that's freedom? It's not. Now, the greatest expose, I think, of the modern, fragile approach to identity is in a place that you'd never think. Whenever I mention it, usually people's eyebrows go up. And I think the man who wrote this himself didn't realize what a devastating expose it is. But it's in a book that's kind of breezy and sort of not very, doesn't seem like very heavy philosophy, and yet there's a part in there that I think is absolutely devastating. I don't think the author even knows how devastating it is because he doesn't even give a prescription. He doesn't really say, what are we going to do about this? Not really. Not very well. But this book, which is not profound philosophy at all, it's a very big bestseller. It's a management bestseller. It's Stephen Covey's book, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. And in the second habit, which is, I think, and it doesn't matter, which is, I think, begin with the end in mind, in that he says, every human being, now he's really thinking of the West, he says every human being has what he calls a PC. No, not what you're thinking. A personal center. And he says a personal center is something which is the source of security, power, and meaning in your life. He says everybody's got one. Everybody's got one. He makes a list, which is a really pretty good list. But he says you're going to be centered on something. And in his list, he says you can be spouse or marriage-centered. You can be family or children-centered. You can be work or advancement-centered. You can be money-possession-centered. You can be pleasure-fun-comfort-centered. You can be approval-relationship-centered. You can be ideologically enemy-centered. You can be religious and or morality-centered. Now, what does he mean by centered? This is a simple thing. What is your personal center? Well, let's go back to our definition of modern identity. What is your greatest dream? What is it that you think about when you don't have to think about anything else? What do you long most for? What is your greatest dream? But this is the dark side of the modern view of identity. Your personal center can also be understood in this sense. What is your greatest nightmare? See, that's the other kind of dream. What is the thing that you know that if you don't get this, if you don't have this, it's curtains. You won't have a self. You won't be able to look yourself in the mirror. You won't have any sense of worth. You won't have any sense of value. Everybody's got this. You have this. I have this. Every one of us has this. In the modern play, in the modern society, we're all told, go get it. Go out and get a personal center. Find something. Your dream, you see. Then climb and forward and follow until you get it. And Stephen Covey is wise enough to say that everybody's got something. Everybody's got something which is not just your greatest dream, but therefore, by definition, it is your greatest nightmare, too. Because if I, you see, if my greatest dream is to have this perfect love relationship, then I might be able to handle a lack of success in work, but I'll never be able to handle a loss of that love. Or if I make, you see, morality, for example. If I'm, and Stephen Covey says, he says, you can be religious. Do you think I think this is a good idea? No, it isn't. I'm a minister, you say. Surely you think that's the answer. Instead of living for the other thing, you should live for faith and you should live for being a good person. No, no, because you see, what happens if I fail? What happens if I find that I'm not as honest as I thought? I'm not as self-sacrificing as I thought. I'm not as noble as I thought. What happens? When you lose these dreams, the greatest dreams are your nightmare. And Covey goes so far, and he just sort of, you know, he just drops this. And I just was devastated reading this thing. He says, you know what's interesting? If you make any of these things your personal center and your bottom line, if you make any of these things your identity, it actually introduces distortions, pathologies, and dysfunctions into your personality right away. And he gave an example. He says, what if the most important thing to you, what if your personal center is your spouse, your marriage, a good marriage, this other person? What if that's how you know that you're somebody? The answer is, if that's the case, you will be emotionally dependent on that person. You will be terribly controlling. You will at least be emotionally dependent. At worst, you'll be jealous. The other person's problems you will not be able to handle. The other person's problems will utterly devastate you. It's a prescription for the very thing, which is your best, your greatest nightmare, a bad marriage. really centered on your children, a happy family? At the very best, you'll try to live your life through your children, and if you succeed, they'll hate you, or they'll have no self themselves. They'll have no self themselves. Or if you ever talk to anybody that knows something about child abuse, they will tell you, very often the people that have the biggest problem with child abuse are not people who don't love their children enough. No. The people very often who struggle with child abuse are the people who build their whole life on their children, and just cannot stand their rejection, and cannot stand any kind of brokenness in their children's lives. If you build your life, he says, on your children, if that's your personal center, it's a very prescription for the nightmare. And I can't keep going on this, but look, if you're centered on work, at the very best, you will be an incredibly boring person. Unbelievably shallow, he says. And it'll probably be worse. At the very best, I said, at the very worst, you will lose your spouse, you will lose your family, you will lose a lot of your friends, and in the end, you will lose yourself. Who the heck are you if all you are is your work? You don't know who you are. You will become a boring person. You'll become boring to yourself. If you're money and possession centered, you will end up being willing. If that's the thing, I know that I'm somebody because I've got money. I've got money. A whole lot of people, surely some people in this room don't want to admit that that is really what makes you feel like you're somebody. If that is the case, you will do work that only brings in the money and is of no value or benefit to anybody else, and eventually that will get thin. Eventually, that will mean you'll feel soulless and kind of empty. Money, possessions. You know, there's a great place where Michael Musto, the Village Voice, let's see if I have it right here. Michael Musto in the Village Voice, not the whole Village Voice, but yeah, he says, fashion week is the period of ritualized yearning. He's talking about that fashion week, you know, 7th on 6th. He says, fashion week is the period of ritualized yearning in which people jockey for visibility while hoping that nearness to a runway will purge them of that nagging feeling of soullessness. See, he says, fashion is not about fashion. It's about me. Beauty is not about beauty. Art is not about art. Work is not about work. Politics is not about politics. If it's your personal center, it's a way of dealing with the fact that you are afraid that you're empty inside. And yet Stephen Covey points out, look, what if you're an approval junkie? Approval junkies, A, cannot take criticism. You're always having your feelings hurt. You're just devastated. So you're always breaking off with people. And approval junkies cannot give criticism, which means that you're no good for anybody. You're a lousy friend. You're of no benefit to anyone. Do you not realize that to make approval and relationship the most important thing in your life is the very prescription for the nightmare? If it's your dream, it's your nightmare. On and on and on. And then he ends. He ends. How dare he end? Who will solve this riddle for us? Well, first of all, let me solve it this way. First thing is, I want you to see there's a deeper question than the question, who am I? We put it on the, for goodness sakes, it's right there on your program. There's a deeper question. Don't you see? The first thing we learn, the real answer, the deeper question to who am I is whose am I? You belong to somebody. Now, one of my favorite popular songs is that wonderful song by the Righteous Brothers. And in that wonderful song by the Righteous Brothers, there's a little sort of interlude. I don't know if it's called a recitative. They're not, do you know what? They're not really singing. You know, there's sort of little music in the background and he's sort of speaking. Is that a recitative? I don't know. And he looks at this woman and he gives what I would call you, I'll tell you what it is. It's a liturgy. It's a liturgy. He says, he says, baby, I can't make it without you. And I'm, I'm, see, I even remember that. And I'm, I'm telling you, honey, you're my reason for laughing, for crying, for living and for dying. And then it's bump, bump. Anyway, you know how it goes. That's liturgy. Thank you. Thank you very much. Oh, I got one. Tom, is Tom here? I got one. I got applause. Okay. Now, what is that? That is worship. I can't make, baby, I can't make it without you. And I'm telling you. for living, for dying. You're my personal center. I was thinking about this a few weeks ago when I was preaching on a place where John the Baptist comes to Jesus Christ and says, I'm in doubts about you. And he says, are you the one? Are you the one from heaven? Are you the Messiah? Are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another? And that's a very interesting question. Here's the reason why. Because he says, are you the one, or should we look for another? He doesn't say, are you the one? Because John the Baptist implies, and I hope that now you will see, that if you don't make Jesus your Savior, you will make somebody your Savior. If you don't belong to God, you will belong to someone. You are not your own. You see, Mindy in that, that's the last piece that she did, that great piece, where it says, when nobody needs me, who will I turn to? I've got to have somebody. Now, somebody's going to say, no, no, no, no. If you really want to be a strong person, don't depend on others. Don't let yourself be validated in a relationship. Don't let someone else out there tell you that you're worthwhile through love and a relationship. You should just validate yourself. Decide who you are and just say, that's all that matters. I don't need anybody else to validate me. Rubbish. It doesn't work. We're not made like that. If you would do that to yourself, you couldn't do it. But if you tried to do it to yourself, you could become a tyrant. You could become a hard person. You could become a person absolutely unaccountable to the human race. Nobody really works that way. Just imagine this. Can you imagine? Let's just say that you're a composer of music and you say, you know what? Every single person in the whole world hates this piece of music. Every critic, and not just every critic, but every lay person, everybody hates it. It doesn't matter. I know that I'm a great musician. I'm a great composer. I validate myself. I don't need anyone else to validate me. You can't do it. It can't be done. And she was right. She says, I still need somebody. I am not my own. Nobody is. Nobody can generate identity. You see, John the Baptist says, are you the one who is to come, or should we look for another? Which means, if I don't, out of a love relationship with a personal God and creator, if I don't turn, if I don't give myself to you, if I don't get my identity from you, I will give myself to someone else. If I don't treat Jesus as Savior, I will get somebody else as Savior. I will. I will have to say to somebody, you're my reason for laughing, for crying, for living, and for dying. It may not be a person. Not exactly. It may be a thing. It may be a career. It may be a cause. But you can't do it alone. And that's what Mindy's song was telling us. It's pointing and saying, you've got, it's not a question of who am I, it's whose am I. You will turn to someone or something and say, you're my reason for laughing and for crying. Oh my, but will that Savior, and you will have to have it to have identity. You will have a Savior, but will that Savior be like him? Will it forgive you? No. He is the only source of identity that forgives. Your job's not going to forgive you if you fail at that. If that's your dream, you're climbing every mountain, you're fording every stream, you're following every rainbow, and you don't get a promotion. Do you think the career God is going to, the career Savior, the career person, do you think he's going to forgive you? Can't. You can try to change. And this has happened so many times, so many times. It's so interesting in the beginning, you had a man singing about work. I have a name. I can't wait to see my name up there, you see. You see, in other words, here's a man getting his identity through work, and then you have a song by a woman getting her identity through love. And oh my, you know how easy it is to say to women, and you're half right when you say it, and you say, hey, you shouldn't need a man. Don't get your identity from a man. Go out and get a career. Okay? And the smart women look at you, and they say, why should I leave the ranks of the largely female and make relationship my salvation and join the ranks of the largely male who make their career their salvation and are just miserable? Because you see, if he's not the one, you will look for another. And will it be like him? Will it forgive? It can't. It's pretty intriguing that the last song that George sang, Free at Last, is pointing to this. It's pointing to this. It's pointing to the fact that if Jim had decided to be selfish in a man. have been free. See, it's a very intriguing illusion. It's really trying to say freedom is something more spiritual than just saying, I am going to be happy. I'm going to get what I want. I'm going to reach my goals. He did not. He sacrificed himself, and yet as he's singing, someday I'll be free, you can see that he's actually achieved a kind of freedom. Now, I want you to know that becoming a Christian, which is to say, I am not going to live for career, I'm not going to live for relationships, these things no longer. I am not going to be enslaved to these things. To go to Christ at first looks like what? It looks like you're coming back and you're losing your freedom, just like Jim. Self-sacrifice seems to be the end of freedom, but self-sacrifice, if you're giving yourself to Christ, is actually the beginning of freedom. Lastly, most important in some ways, Jean Valjean is not very excited when the bishop forgives him. In the actual book, it's a very, very, very interesting explanation by Victor Hugo, explaining why he has this incredible struggle. Jean Valjean, my brother, says the bishop. The bishop forgives him, and just, this is the very end here of the lecture, but I'll take a second to set it up for you. The bishop has Jean Valjean, who is a convicted criminal, but he's out of prison. He's done 19 years in prison. He's had a terrible life. He was thrown into prison for stealing a loaf of bread because his family was poor and he was stealing bread just to feed his family and so forth. And therefore, he'd become an incredibly hard man. And he gets out of prison and he comes and he stays with the bishop. The bishop does hospitality for people in the street. However, Jean Valjean leaves and steals the bishop's candlesticks. Well, he's picked up by the gendarmes. He's picked up by the police. They bring him back to the bishop and they say, look, this man stole your candlesticks. And the bishop looks and says, you remember? He says, oh, you forgot the silverware too. He says, yes, of course I gave that. Here, you forgot this. And then he looks at Jean Valjean after the police are away and he says, Jean Valjean, my brother, you no longer belong to evil but to good. It's your soul I am buying for you. I withdraw it from the dark thoughts and from the spirit of perdition. I give it to God. Now, this is what Victor Hugo says. Jean Valjean left as if he were escaping. He was prey to a mass of new emotions. He felt angry without knowing at whom he could not have said whether he was touched or humiliated. At times, there came over him a strange relenting, which he tried to resist. This condition wore him out. Listen, he was disturbed to see that within him the frightful calm which the injustice of his fate had given him had been shaken and he did not know what would replace it. Now, what does that mean? He had become a self-righteous man. It's not just Pharisees that are self-righteous. He had become a self-righteous man. He had decided because life stinks, because of the injustice of life, I can rip anybody off anywhere. I have a calm about it. My conscience is dead. Why? Because he felt superior to the world. He felt superior to the people around. He felt superior to the establishment. And now a man comes in and says, I forgive you. And he realized that grace would give him an entirely new basis for having a personal identity. An entirely new basis. He realized that if he would base his life on the idea that someone loved him, someone forgave him, because the bishop represented God himself. If he looked at Jesus Christ dying on the cross, not for people in general, if you see Jesus up there dying on the cross, forgiving people, he's just an example. In which case, he's a crushing example. Who can live like that? And morality is your personal center. But if you see Jesus Christ on the cross dying for you, though you've rejected him, dying for you, forgiving you, what happens then? Suddenly that changes everything. What if I had a Savior who loved me for who I was? Then I could work for the joy of work and not to find a self. I could love for the joy of love and love people for who they are and not to try to get a self out of them. It's a whole new approach. Grace. And so here's what we read. When Jean Valjean left the bishop's house, he could understand nothing of what was going on inside him. He stubbornly resisted the angelic deeds and the gentle words of the old man. In opposition to this celestial tenderness, he summoned up his pride, the fortress of evil. He dimly felt that this pardon and grace was the hardest assault, the most formidable attack he had ever sustained, and that his hardness of heart would be complete if he could resist the kindness. And if he yielded, he knew he'd have to renounce the hatred, and he'd have to renounce the hatred with which the acts of other men had filled him for so many years, and in which he found satisfaction. He had to conquer or be conquered. The struggle was a gigantic, decisive struggle. He reeled like a drunk. How long? Where did he go? Nobody knew. It was simply established that that very night, the stage driver who, that hour, rode the Grenoble Route, about three in the morning on his way through the Bishop Street, saw a man kneeling in prayer on the pavement in the dark. See, Jesus is the one you can turn to. When nobody needs you. Because you know what? He doesn't need you. He just loves you. And when you're in a relationship with him like that, it just alters the whole thing. It's not the group. You can look at your group and you can say, it's good to be part of a people. You can look at your race and say, it's good to be part of a race. You can look at work and say, it's good to be. It's good to work. It's good to love. But I'm not beautiful because of you. I'm beautiful because of what he thinks of me. We have one more piece. And in that, you can listen to it two ways. Yolanda is going to come and sing it. And if you listen to it, you'll see what transformation happens when you experience grace. And you can imagine the ultimate transformation that comes from experiencing the ultimate grace. You can imagine the ultimate grace. Let's get started.
