TITLE: Self-Control
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 9:23-27; 10:11-13
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Practicing The Christian Life
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/self-control-2/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture comes from 1 Corinthians 9, verses 23-27, and then chapter 10, verses 11-13. I do all this for the sake of the gospel, that I may share in its blessings. Do you not know that in a race all the runners run, but only one gets the prize? Run in such a way as to get the prize. Everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. They do it to get a crown that will not last. But we do it to get a crown that will last forever. Therefore, I do not run like a man running aimlessly. I do not fight like a man beating the air. No, I beat my body and make it my slave, so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified for the prize. These things happened to them as examples, and were written down as warnings for us, on whom the fulfillment of the ages has come. So, if you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don't fall. No temptation has seized you except what is common to man. And God is faithful. He will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear. But when you are tempted, He will also provide a way out so you can stand up under it. This is God's Word. We have been looking at Christian practices, and Christian practices are supposed to be disciplines by which our character changes. Tonight, instead of looking at one practice, I would want to talk to you about how a number of practices come together to create one particular character quality, which is self-control. Helping professionals, pastors, counselors, medical professionals, find out very quickly in their career that there's a lot more self-control problems out there than anybody really thinks. And a self-control problem is when you're doing something that you desperately want to stop, but you can't. There are an enormous number of people who are out of control in their lives. There's the classic addictions, like drinking and drugs, like spending and gambling, like various sexual desire addictions, like overeating, undereating. Those are the classic addictions. But we shouldn't think of self-control just in those terms because we have trouble controlling our tongues, our thoughts, our time, our emotions, like anger and anxiety. And since some people, actually, since a lot of people have severe problems with self-control, and because all of us have some problems with self-control, we better figure out what to do about it. Otherwise, our problems with self-control will strip us of our careers, of our relationships, or even our physical lives. This interesting passage, or these two passages from 1 Corinthians 9 and 10, are Paul's insight into what the Bible says about self-control. And we'll start to make progress if we grasp three things that Paul mentions. The centrality of the heart, the power of the gospel, and the endurance of Jesus. Now, first of all, Paul talks about the centrality of the heart. The word self-control doesn't really appear in this English translation, but it's actually there in verse 25 because it says everyone who competes in the games goes into strict training. And the word strict training is the English rendering of the Greek words panta, ego, kratia, which literally means in all things, ego, self, kratia, rule. Paul says athletes have to exert self-control, self-rule in panta, all things. And then he uses a bunch of examples. He says runners, look for the prize in verse 24. He says wrestlers, the word compete there is actually the word wrestlers, agonistas. Wrestlers compete for the crown, the wreath, the gold medal, as it were. Boxers don't just fight the air, but they aim for the chin. And then Paul says, I beat my body. Now, he's likening himself to an athlete here. And that sounds terrible. It sounds like self-flagellation. But the word beat there means to wear down resistance. So it's a word that's actually used, for example, in Luke 18 to describe the widow in Jesus' parable who wears out the unjust judge with her constant appeals until he gives her justice. And what Paul is saying is that he's not literally an athlete. He's not able to say an athlete. He's not able to say an athlete. He's not able to say an athlete. just judge with her constant appeals until he gives her justice. And what Paul is saying is that he's not literally an athlete. He's saying he is wearing down resistance in every area of his life so that he can reach the goal and the prize, just like an athlete. But what is the prize? He's not talking about, in his case, actual Olympic gold. What he's actually saying is in verse 27, I beat my body and make it my slave so that after I have preached to others, I myself will not be disqualified. You see what he's saying there? He preaches the gospel, and he wants to practice what he preaches. He doesn't want to preach it and then himself not live it. And he's saying all Christians ought to be like that. We ought to be as disciplined as Olympic athletes. In every single area of your life, you should be subjugating everything for the goal of living a life consistent with your beliefs, the gospel. Now, what's the key to that? In ancient Greek times, and also a lot of people think this today, the secret of self-control, they thought, was willpower. The secret of control is willpower. So if you have a tub of ice cream right in front of you, Breyer's chocolate ice cream. I don't know why, but I would think in this room right now, that would be a particularly poignant metaphor. And it's very caloric and very bad for you. How are you going to exercise self-control with that incredible tub of ice cream? And the answer is only if your mind says, don't do it, even though your heart is saying, ha, ha, ha, do it. Okay. So willpower, the Greeks believed, was the mind or the will over the emotions and the feelings. And that's willpower. In fact, and that's self-control. A lot of people think that's the case. Just say no. That's stoicism. That's ancient Greek stoicism. Take the will and just clamp down the emotions. The Bible never talks like that. That's not how the Bible sees it. One of the reasons is because the Bible sees every part of you as being in the image of God. Your mind, your will, and your emotions are all in the image of God. You know, the Greeks believed the emotions were lower faculties because it had to do with the body. And they felt the body was bad and the spirit was good. And therefore, the mind and the will was better, higher faculties than the emotions. But the Bible says the reason you've got emotions is not because you're some kind of lower creature, but because God has emotions and you're made in his image. God loves. God gets angry. God has emotions. So your mind, your will, and your emotions are all reflections of the image of God. And also, your mind, your will, and your emotions are all tainted by sin. All of them. So you don't trust your reason or your will over your emotions because they're all tainted by sin. In other words, if your faculty, if sin was blue, your faculties would be blue all through. You wouldn't have more blue in the emotions than you would in the intellect. So the Bible never makes that horrible mistake, and it is a horrible mistake. There's great ramifications there, of saying that somehow self-control is taking the mind and the will and clamping down on the feelings or the emotions or desires. Oh, no. Well, then what is the secret of self-control? Paul says it. Look at the athletes. Don't they have desires? Don't they want to eat the ice cream? Sure, they want to eat the ice cream, but they don't. Don't they want to stay out partying with their friends and staying out late? Sure, they want us. They want that, but they don't. Why? Because they want the prize more. They want the gold medal more. Self-control is not a matter of the will. It's a matter of the heart. It's a matter of setting the heart on the higher thing. It's not a matter of you having higher and lower faculties. It's setting the heart on the higher thing. It's setting the right thing. And that orders all the other feelings and wants. So, for example, Jacob, back in Genesis, was working for a very difficult man named Laban. It was a very awful, horrible job. He was a tough man to work for. It was very tedious. It was very hard work. And then he came to understand that if he worked seven years for Laban, he would get Rachel. And Rachel was the joy of his heart. Rachel was the light of his eyes. Rachel was the beauty and joy of his heart. And we're told in Genesis 29, listen, so Jacob served seven years to get Rachel, but they seemed like only a few days to him because of his love for her. Now, that's interesting. It must have been hard to get up in the morning and go to that job. It must have been tough to report to work. It must have been hard to kick back your work all day. It must have been very tedious. No, he experienced complete self-control. He had no problem getting it. doing his job. The seven years seemed like a few days. Why? What was the secret? Willpower? No, joy power. They seemed like a few days because of his love for her. He set his heart on a prize. He set his heart on something of, you know, she was the passion of his life. And as a result, he was able to say no to all kinds of other things. He was able to experience self-control in all things, ponta. And what the Bible is saying is the matter, the issue of self-control is not a matter of the will and putting the will to clamp down the feelings, but setting your heart and your desires on the one thing that is going to order all of the other wants. So, in fact, even the tub of ice cream, if you think about it, really wasn't a matter of the will over the feelings and the wants, right? It's not like you wanted the ice cream but you knew you shouldn't. No, no, no. Self-control comes from, there's two wants there. You want fitness and health and you want to win the Olympics and you also want the ice cream. May the best want win. And it will win. The higher want will always win. In other words, what you set your heart on, if you set your heart there, then that will order everything else. And so, basically, self-control is a matter of the heart, not of the will. What you're most passionate about. Okay, so what is that one thing that if you set your heart on it will bring you self-control in all things? Well, let's first of all ask the question, how do, what are our alternatives? What are the things that we have out there that we can set our heart on? Let me give you one. Career success. What if the main thing that you have set your heart on is career success? That's the thing that turns your crank, it's the light of your eyes, it's the most beautiful prospect, it's the thing that you most passionately want with all of your heart. Thomas Chalmers, Scottish Presbyterian minister, wrote a very famous sermon that I often like to quote. He says in it, We only cease to be the slave of one appetite because another has brought it into subordination. A youth may cease to idolize sensual pleasure, like partying all around, but it's because the idol of material gain and career success has gotten the ascendancy. There is not one personal transformation in which the heart is left without an ultimate object of beauty and joy. That heart's desire for one particular object may be conquered, but its desire to have some object is unconquerable. The only way to dispossess the heart of an old affection is by the expulsive power of a new one. Isn't that interesting? See, he says if you set your heart on career success, it will bring you self-control, not in all things, but in some things. He says a youth may cast out the idol of sensual pleasure and partying all night, but it's because the idol of material gain and career success has gotten the ascendancy. Let me give you an example. What if you're a parent and you've got children who are in their teens and they're in their college years, and one of the things you'll probably feel like is these kids have no discipline, especially when it comes, they can't even spell the word punctuality. They're always late. They're just undisciplined with their time. In school, in college, they even got some bad grades because they couldn't get up in the morning or they couldn't get there. And no matter what we do, they don't seem to be able to be punctual. You can say, your parents and your grandparents want you to be there on time, and they're not there on time. So is there nothing? Is there no way that these young people can get the control of their time? And the answer is, yeah, let them get into the workforce. And suddenly, all these kids who can never seem to be in the class on time or dinner on time or family event on time, suddenly they realize that their career is in jeopardy if they're not there on time, that their money is in jeopardy, that their ability to pay the rent is in jeopardy, and they're there. Suddenly, bang, wow, discipline, self-control. Why? Because if you set your heart on career success, it will bring you a lot of self-control in some things, but not in all things. And here's why. If you set your heart supremely on career success, what happens when you get in a place where, if you tell the truth, it's going to hurt your career? What if you get in a position where, if you cheat, it will help your career enormously? You're under temptation, are you not? Will you have the self-control to tell the truth? Will you have the self-control to resist? passion of your heart is career success, there's nothing you love more than that. Then you will lie. You will cheat. And not only that, if you find that you're starting to slide or slip and your career success is starting to slip away from you, then you know what's going to happen. You'll start to lose control of your emotions. You'll start to get too anxious. You'll start to blow up and you'll not be able to keep your temper. But most of all, if you still continue to find you're losing career success, you may start to go to all those kinds of addictive behaviors to fill up the emptiness and the kind of self-loathing you're starting to feel. There's the sexual addictions. There's the drugs. There's the eating. There's all sorts of ways in which you kind of medicate yourself. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Career success. If it's the thing you most love, if it's your Rachel, if it's the beauty of your heart, it'll bring success in some areas. But in other areas, you'll be completely out of control. And boy, I tell you, New York City is filled with people like this who, because they've set their heart on career success, they're incredibly disciplined in some areas, unbelievably productive, unbelievably skilled, disciplined in some of your areas. In other areas of their life, they're completely out of control and they know it because they put their heart in the wrong place. Well, what is the thing that if you set your heart on it will bring the self-control? And Paul gives it to us in his first sentence. Look at verse 23. He says, I do all this. Now, what is all this? He's talking about all of chapter 8 and 9. He's really looking back on all the things he does as a minister. And got to keep this in mind. Paul was one of the four or five most influential figures in the history of the world. He was one of the four or five, five or six, you know. And he was up there with, well, I won't go through the list. He was one of the most influential leaders in the history of the world, movement leaders. And when you see what he had to go through to do his job, you know, he was whipped, he was flogged, he was stoned, he was shipwrecked, he was imprisoned, he was persecuted, he was hounded, and he kept doing his job. Where did he get that self-control? I do all this, and here it is. There's one thing, but it's got two aspects. I do all this for the sake of the gospel that I may share in its blessings. Now, look carefully. Here are the two things, or the one thing with two aspects that he has set his heart on. The blessings of the gospel. What's the gospel? The gospel is that even though you are deeply flawed, you will always be deeply flawed because of what Jesus Christ did on your behalf on the cross, if you believe in him, the Father's love for you is now as lofty as the stars, as unchanging and as inexorable as the mountains. You are endlessly, infallibly, unconditionally delighted in by God. And if that is the main thing you set your heart on, if that's the joy of your life, if that's the thing that your heart exalts in the most, more than anything else, more than career, more than human approval, more than anything else, you will have self-control in all things. In fact, if your heart was there, if my heart was there, I would, you would have self-control in all things. You say, how could that be? Because think about it. If you put your, if you set your heart on anything else, you can lose it. If you set your heart on anything else, you might lose it or you might enhance it by lying. You might avoid losing it or you might enhance it by lying or by cheating. But is there any situation in which lying or cheating would help you, would help enhance your stature in Jesus Christ, your status in standing in Jesus Christ? No. Or, you know, career success and other things, you can start to lose them. And what happens if you lose them? And you're failing. And then, of course, you lose control of your emotions and you start to go to the addictions. But is there any way to lose this? No. Not if you understand it. And therefore, the radical security makes it unnecessary to do the things that your heart, if you fixed on anything else, will feel it has to do in order to maintain it, in order to keep it, in order to deal with the loss of it. But Paul doesn't only simply say, oh, here's how my self-control comes. I just sit here as a great mystic. I'm just a mystical one and I'm just sitting here enjoying the blessings of the gospel. Now, look carefully. What brings himself control? to enjoy the blessings of the gospel. It says to share them. And you know what? If you don't think about this, you might actually get the impression when he's starting to talk about his heavenly crown and not being disqualified and sharing in the blessings of the gospel. There are many people who've read it through superficially the first time and said, oh, Paul is saying that he's living this self-controlled life so that he can earn the blessings of the gospel, so he can earn a place in heaven. Now, if you've read anything else that Paul has said anywhere else, you know that that couldn't be what he means. That would contradict everything else he ever said. And besides that, if you look down into the word, you'll know something. And the word is the word koinonia, which means fellowship. And it has the prefix S-Y-N, sin, at the beginning of it, which actually means joint fellowship. And what he's actually saying is this. I have the blessings of the gospel, but it's the passion of my life not to enjoy them alone. It's the passion of my heart to have other people see the beauty of Christ that I see. And it is the passion of my life to not have anything in my life, in the way in which I live and act, that would make it possible for other people to miss the beauty of God. I don't want anything, anything to disqualify me from that prize. What is the prize? The prize is sharing the blessings. It's having other people find Christ and enjoy these blessings too. And you know what Paul's saying here is that what's really interesting is he has become completely outward focused away from himself. When he was a Pharisee, he tried to have self-control so he could achieve, so he could excel, so he could go up the ladder. And ironically, when you make yourself the passion of your heart, when you make your own self-interest and your own glory, the passion of your heart, you won't have self-control. Isn't that ironic? But he said finally self-control came to him when he rested completely secure in the blessings of the gospel and then made the passion of his life to share that with other people. So the passion of his life was to order everything in his life so that people saw the beauty of Christ through him and that no one saw anything in him that would make it possible for them to stumble or miss the beauty of the God that he loved. And that complete outward focus toward God and others turned him into a self-controlled person. Now, how are we going to get this? Let me tell you a story that has always given me, just haunts me. Actually, I don't have a lot more to tell you because I want you to see, though, that the disciplines I've been talking to you about, the community disciplines where you're accountable to one another, the meditation and worship disciplines where you take things that you know with your head and work them into your heart so they really become real to you. All these things we've been talking about for weeks, I want you to see what we're really doing. These aren't just things that you do to get some inspiration. I remember some years ago, there's somebody I knew who was a man who was a professing Christian and who also was very respected, very well-known, you know, very admired, you know, very acclaimed because he was so competent and so skillful at all he did. But there was actually a secret addiction in his life. And because of that secret addiction in his life, when it finally came out, he lost everything. When it was made public, he lost everything. He lost his job. He lost everything. And when I talked to him, he was actually, it was sometime after this and he was starting to rebuild his life and he was poised. There was a peace about him and he actually found that he had licked all those areas in which he had lacked self-control. And I remember he said this to me and it has haunted me. He said, you know, I was a profess, I'm a professing Christian and I always said what matters the most is what Jesus thinks of me, but that's not how my heart really operated. My heart operated on two functional principles. And those two principles were this. One, that by my competence and by my hard work, I could control what people thought of me. And two, what people thought of me was all that mattered. He said, I said what mattered to me was what Jesus, that Jesus valued me. But my heart was saying what really matters is that people value and you can control that by your incredible performance. And it was the result of that, that he actually got into the addictions in order to keep himself going. But when it all fell apart, he says, you know what? He says, not too many people, but some people have been in my shoes. And that is, I finally arrived at a place where nobody loved me. Bye. Bye WAR. even me, not my wife, not my kids. Once they realized what a hypocrite I was, no one but Jesus. And when you get to the place that the only person in the universe that values you is Jesus, then finally, finally, you start to build your life on that. And he says, I just couldn't seem to do it until I lost everybody else's admiration but Christ. But I know that God loves me in Christ, and as a result, it was the one thing I could build my life on. And when I started to build my life on that and not care what anybody thought and not care about anything but that, he says, I lost all my need to do all those awful things. I lost all my need to control what people thought of me. I lost all my anxiety. I lost all my drivenness. I lost all my addictions. I lost them. Boy, that's haunted me. You know why? Because I think most of us don't want that to be the way we do it. We don't want to find self-control like that. I don't want to get to the place where I say, well, here I know I'm finally building my life on what Christ thinks about me because nobody else thinks anything but ill of me. I mean, when that happens, then you're forced to finally do what the gospel is said, which is to live and make the highest passion the blessings of the gospel. Well, how do you do it? Well, they're actually outlined in chapter 10, verses 11, 12, and 13. The first one talks about things that are written, which is the word of God. It's meditating on the scriptures until the things you know with your head become real to your heart. Verse 12, when it says, take heed you think you stand unless you fall, that's talking about the relational disciplines, the community disciplines we've been talking about. See, verse 11, if I had the time, I could recap, and I don't because we've been through all this, recap the fact that the worship disciplines, the meditation disciplines, the meditating on the scripture disciplines, where things that are just up here in the head start to really get down and start to affect you in the heart. Or the accountability disciplines, where you have people who, because you don't trust yourself, you can't handle life. You can't, to think you stand is to fall. And therefore, you let people in, and you show them about your besetting sins, and you allow accountability. You don't just come to church and take notes. You really get deeply involved in community. You see now where all of these disciplines are going? But the heart of it all is to see the last verse, is where it says, if you want to resist temptation, you must see that God is faithful. Now, where was God faithful? Here's my favorite spot. It's in Hebrews 12. Therefore, let us throw off everything that hinders and the sin that so easily entangles, and let us run the race with perseverance that is marked out for us. Let us fix our eyes on Jesus, the author and perfecter of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, making light of its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. Consider him who endured that you may not grow weary and lose heart. There it is. And look at how interesting this. First of all, it says, if you want to endure, if you want to have self-control, if you don't want to grow weary and lose heart and give up, then look to Jesus' self-control. You said, well, I never thought of Jesus as exerting self-control. Well, here it is. Jesus Christ knew he was going to die, knew he was going to suffer, knew he was going to be betrayed, knew he was going to be forsaken by the Father. You talk about a hard job. You talk about a race to run. You talk about wrestling. And yet he did it. In fact, he did it so well that it said he made light of this terror and the shame of the cross. He knew what he had to do, and he did it. And he did it. In a sense, when he says took it lightly, he laughed at its face and took it. He did it. Where did he get the self-control to do that? And you might say, well, he had this incredible willpower. Well, I suppose he probably did, but he didn't rely on willpower. He relied on joy power too. It says, for the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross. There was the secret of his self-control. It's the very same thing I've been telling you during this whole sermon. The secret of self-control is not willpower. It's setting the heart on the right thing. It's joy power. Jacob, it was just a few days, all that seven years of terrible labor, because his Rachel. He set his heart on Rachel. Jesus must have set his heart on some kind of Rachel. Jesus must have set his heart on some beauty. And it was the passion of his heart. And because it was the passion of his heart, he was able to even endure the cross. the passion of Jesus' heart that gave him self-control? What was it that he wanted? What was it that he didn't have before the cross that he would have wanted? You say, well, what could that have been? It couldn't have been the Father. He had the Father. It couldn't have been heaven. He had heaven. It couldn't have been the command of the universe because he had the command of the universe. Well, what was it that he didn't have before the cross that he had after? What is it that he set his heart on? What was his Rachel? What was it that he wanted? And the answer is, there's only one thing. You and me. The thing that gave him self-control. The thing that was the passion, the highest passion of his heart was us. We were his Rachel. And when you see him enduring because you are his beauty and delight, you will be able to endure because he will become your beauty and delight. The thought and the knowledge that he loved you like that will make you love him like that. The thought that he made you his beauty will make you, him, your beauty. And the self-control he had because you were the passion of his life will bring self-control into your life because he's the passion of your life. And to the degree you know that he made you that, he'll be that to you. Don't you see? The secret of self-control is not willpower. It's joy power. It's gospel power. Fix your eyes on him. Use the disciplines. And self-control will slowly but surely come. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have shown us this. Self-control is not just a matter of programs. It's not just a matter of willpower. And spiritual disciplines are not just ways of getting a little bit of inspiration. Rather, spiritual disciplines are the key to self-control. And we ask, oh, Lord, we know that if we actually loved you with our whole heart, if you really were the passion of our heart, we wouldn't have self-control problems. We do have self-control problems. And therefore, we ask that you would help us a bit by bit, more and more, make you the pearl of great price, make you the matchless beauty of our heart. Help us to exult in what you've done for us more than we exult in anything else so that we can follow in Paul's footsteps and follow in your son's footsteps and endure to the end. We ask this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
