TITLE: Sent in Love
SCRIPTURE: John 13:1-5
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Jesus, Mission, and Glory: New Purpose
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sent-in-love/

============================================================

The scripture reading this morning is John chapter 13, verses 1 through 5. It was just before the Passover festival. Jesus knew that the hour had come for him to leave this world and go to the Father. Having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end. The evening meal was in progress and the devil had already prompted Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to betray Jesus. Jesus knew that the Father had put all things under his power and that he had come from God and was returning to God. So he got up from the meal, took off his outer clothing, and wrapped a towel around his waist. After that, he poured water into a basin and began to wash his disciples' feet, drying them with the towel that was wrapped around him. This is the word of the Lord. Now, Redeemer is actually asking God to send us out into the city in a whole new way, in a more radical, more heightened way. That's actually what the Rise Campaign is all about. Jesus, on the night before he went to the cross, was about to send his disciples out into the world in a new way, and so he trained them. And from John chapter 13, starting right here, all the way to John chapter 17, we have the longest body of Christ's teaching in the Bible. And it's all there as a training course to get the disciples ready to be sent out. Now, we are going to undergo that same training course because we're going to spend the entire year looking, verse by verse, at this same body of teaching. Now, it starts. Jesus, you might say, is training, getting you ready to get into the world. It starts with this remarkable act of foot washing. It's clearly a symbolic act. You see, in verse 3, it says, Jesus knew. It's talking about in his head, he was thinking about who he was and what he came to do, that he had come from the Father, he had come to earth, he was going back to the Father, he was going to rule and reign. And then it says, in verse 4, so he got up, took off his outer clothing, wrapped a towel around his basin, poured water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet. In other words, he's thinking about heavy, high theology, and therefore, he gets up and he does the foot washing. So the foot washing is a sign, it's a symbol, it's a picture. Of what? Well, much, of course, but let's just look at it like this. Thinking about the foot washing, thinking about its meaning, we're going to learn something about Jesus' person, who he is, his power, what drives him, and his pattern of life for us. The pattern of life he gives to us. So his person, his power, and his pattern of life for us. Okay? So first of all, let's think about what the foot washing tells us about who he is, about his person. What Jesus does here is socially, not just jarring, but offensive, at least to the people who are there. Because, yes, we live in a, we're talking about a climate, which was hot and arid, and people wore sandals, and when they got to a lovely meal, of course, you had these very dirty, dusty, smelly feet, and therefore, the feet were washed before the meal. Who washed the feet? Slaves, and not even high-ranking slaves. I mean, there were all sorts of ranks of slaves, but a higher-ranking slave wouldn't even do this. Only the most, the lowest of the low, it was an incredibly menial task, and it was considered extremely offensive. But here, it's not just that a host, the host of the meal would never do such a thing. Even a higher-ranking slave wouldn't do something like that. But certainly not a guest of honor, a rabbi, a teacher, a person who had a position of status and honor in society would never do such a thing. That's the reason it was so incredibly jarring. But Jesus is deliberately doing it. There's a shocking juxtaposition of his social status with his behavior. But don't forget, this is a sign. And what's it a sign of? It's a sign of who he really is. Because you will never understand Jesus unless you understand him as a conundrum. You will never really come to grips with who he is unless you see the conundrum. The conundrum of his high status and his humble behavior. Because this isn't just a teacher or a rabbi. Jesus made claims, high claims, higher than essentially anybody else ever has. Buddha, Muhammad, if you are not a man, this is a person who has yet нашего family life has been seeking the same food aboard I don't know. teacher or rabbi. Jesus made claims, high claims, higher than essentially anybody else ever has. Buddha, Muhammad, repeatedly and clearly denied that they were God and denied that they were some kind of angelic being. But Jesus repeatedly and clearly claimed to be the God, the creator God of the universe. Sometimes he did it directly, like we saw last week. If you were here last week, John chapter eight, the very end, Jesus Christ says, before Abraham was, I am. And that's the divine name that God gave to Moses in the burning bush. Who are you, Moses said. God said, I am that I am. Jesus takes that name on himself. In John chapter eight, Jesus says, to know me is to know God. In John chapter, well, actually, John chapter six, John chapter 12, he says, to see me is to see God. In Mark chapter nine, he says, to receive me is to receive God. And we're going to see, by the way, in John chapter 14, Jesus actually says, no one comes to the father, but by me, no one comes fully and truly to God except through him. These are astonishing claims. In fact, even when Jesus says he's the son of God, modern readers sometimes might misunderstand that. Ancient readers knew what he meant. Ancient listeners knew what he meant when he said that, because if you're the son of a father, if you're the only son in those days, you inherited all the wealth, all the position, all the status of the father wasn't divided. And therefore to say he was the son of God, all the listeners, usually when he said that, they picked up stones to try to stone him. You can see that in John five, because they knew he was claiming to be equal with God. So directly, he's constantly saying, I'm God. I'm equal with God. I'm equal with the father. But indirectly, he does it all the time too. Almost every page. So Mark chapter two, he claims the right and the power to forgive sins. John chapter six, the right and the power to give eternal life. Mark chapter 14, the right and the power to judge the world and everyone in it. And in the Bible, whenever an angel appears and people try to worship the angel, the angel says, get up because I'm just a creature like you don't worship me. So every time you try to worship an angel, he says, get up. And every time somebody bow down to worship Jesus, he basically said, stay there. You know, when Thomas said, my Lord and my God in John chapter 20 falls down and worships him. And Jesus doesn't say, don't worship me. So listen, this isn't just a rabbi or teacher. The claims of Jesus are as high and as lofty as anything anyone's ever said about themselves. But on the other hand, the foot washing caps a whole life of behavior, which is exactly the opposite of the claim. See, are you hearing the conundrum now? The foot washing caps a whole life of behavior that completely opposes, contradicts the highness of the claim because it's so low, it's so humble, it's so sensitive. What do I mean? Well, you know, Jesus, Jesus constantly ate with people, ate with, by the way, in that, in those times meant you were having intimate friendship and relationship with. He ate with people that society saw as outcasts, people that were rejected by society, people who were shamed by society. So Jesus eats with the tax collectors. That got the liberals mad because the tax collectors were on the side of the Roman oppressors and they were making lots and lots of money. They were greedy. And so if you were a social justice, liberal Jew at the time, you said you shouldn't have anything to do with those tax collectors. They're beyond the pale. On the other hand, Jesus ate with prostitutes and that got the traditionalists and the conservatives upset. He actually touched lepers and nobody touched lepers. Everybody was afraid of contamination. In fact, Jesus also, listen, careful, Jesus also ate with Pharisees. Now we live in an era that says, as a truism, you should be tolerant of everybody except intolerant people. But see, Jesus was not intolerant of intolerant people. He was tolerant of intolerant people, which means he was more open minded than anybody today. So there's a humility here, his willingness to associate with people. He went to the margins. He went to the poor, the oppressed, the shame, the rejected, and he mixed it up with them. He hung out with them. But it wasn't just, he wasn't, it's not just his humble behavior, but also his sensitive behavior, his care, his insight, his wisdom. What do I mean by that? Okay. It's so weird to see in John chapter three and four, Jesus meets two people who don't know who he is. And he's kind of blunt and hard with Nicodemus in John chapter three. He's kind of tender and careful with the woman at the well, John chapter four. You go to John chapter 11. brother Lazarus has just died, and they're both grieving. But Jesus is really kind of tough and hard on Martha, and he's gentle and careful with Mary. Or even look, in Mark chapter 5, there's a woman who has a flow of blood, and she wants to be healed, and she touches Jesus, and she wants it to be private. She wants the healing to be private. Jesus says, no, it's got to be public. Come out and tell everybody what's happened. Two chapters later, in Mark 7, he meets a deaf mute, and everybody's sitting around him, and Jesus takes the deaf mute into a private place, away from everybody else, to heal him. So he gives the deaf mute privacy. He forces, basically, the woman with flow of blood into public. He's tough with these people. Why? I'll tell you why. Because Jesus Christ is not an ideologue. He's not driven by habit, by temperament, by an ideology. He's infinitely sensitive. He gives people exactly what they need. Exactly. There's an insight. There's a listening, an ability to enter into what the person actually needs. You never see a jarring note. You never see a, you know, a wrong step. So you see this conundrum, infinite highness and infinite lowliness. Unbelievably high claims, radically contradicted by the most gentle and humble and kind and servant-hearted life in every regard. And this is the capstone of it, as it were. Somebody once tried to explain it like this. They wrote it down like this. In Jesus Christ, you see tenderness without weakness, boldness without harshness, humility without any uncertainty, indeed towering confidence, unbending conviction, yet complete approachability, insistence on truth, but always bathed in love, power without insensitivity, integrity without rigidity, and passion without prejudice. Now, what do we see? This juxtaposition of the high status, the high claims with the lowly behavior, the humility, the sensitivity. John Stott, who was a great Bible teacher last generation, reading this passage says that in his case, the main thing that proved to him that Jesus Christ was God was the beautiful, striking, astounding juxtaposition between the loftiness of his claims and the lowliness of his behavior. When you put them together, how do you understand Jesus? Do you see? Because if you had the claims, the high claims, without the servant heart, who is he? He's just another religious quack, making these great claims, trying to get followers. But if you have the servant heart, but not the high claims, then you've just got another teacher of love. If you try to get out of it by saying, well, maybe he never claimed to be God, no, his history, increasingly historical scholarship is showing you, no, he did claim to be God. So you see, the high claims and the lowly servant, beautiful, melt in your mouth, sweetness of his behavior means he can't just be a nice guy. He can't just be a religious quack. And it concludes, it leads you, it pushes you. This is what John said. It pushes you. And I hope you're feeling the conundrum pushes you to a rational and emotional conclusion. The rational conclusion is he actually must be the son of God. The emotional conclusion is he's beautiful. He's beautiful. So that's a picture of his person. Secondly, however, this gives us not just a picture of his person, but also a picture of his power. What drives him? What's his motivation? And that comes not from three and four. It comes up here from verse one. Look at the sentence. Having loved his own who are in the world, he loved them to the end. Having loved, he loved. Having begun with love, he loved them to the end. Now, look, that's a proposition in a sense. What this is saying is the thing that drove Jesus Christ was unconditional love, unending love. And you can talk about unconditional love and, okay, as a proposition, that's fine. But what's great about this picture, what's great about this story, this chosen symbol, this picture, is it shows us something really poignant about how strong Jesus love really is. Jesus Christ is washing their feet in the face of forces. from doing that, would stop other people from loving. Jesus Christ is experiencing huge pressure, forces that stop the rest of us from loving, but it doesn't stop him. And it shows us that his love is essentially infallible. His love is unstoppable. No matter what you throw at it, it can bear it. Well, what sort of forces do I mean? Well, let me just show you two. One is he's loving them in spite of his impending death. He's loving them. He's just thinking about their needs. He's serving them in spite of his impending death. Look, it's not that hard to comfort people when you're comfortable, but when you're in pain, it's very hard to think about anybody else. It's actually not that hard to give some money to somebody if you're flush. It's a lot harder if you're not. And let me give you an extreme example of this. If you're hammering and you suddenly hit your thumb, don't ask that person to pass the butter or anything like that. I mean, that person is just, sorry, I can't do anything for you. Why? I'm in pain, you know, because pain makes you absorb. Pain naturally, perhaps, but it brings you into yourself. Here's Jesus Christ. You don't know how much in pain he is in. You'll see in the Garden of Gethsemane. But the fact of the matter is that he is getting the sins of the world are being put on him. He knows what he's facing. He knows the agony he's going to go through. He's probably beginning to experience it now, but he thinks of somebody else. See, the rest of us, self-pity. When problems are happening to us, when we're upset, when we're hurting, when something's going wrong, the self-pity pulls us in. We don't even notice anybody else's needs, but Jesus Christ, no matter the pain, Jesus Christ loves us without a molecule of self-pity. But then secondly, and maybe even more importantly, Jesus loves us in spite of the unworthiness of the recipients. Now, you notice how, isn't this kind of interesting that John, I'm going to give you something that John wants you to know from this passage. John is trying to give you something, and I'm giving it to you because right in the middle of this interesting story about Jesus washing the feet, in verse two it says, the devil had already prompted Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, to betray Jesus. So right in the center of this interesting story about Jesus getting up and laying aside his garment and taking on the form of a servant, you notice how the very, you know, the act of foot washing actually is parallel to Philippians chapter two, where it says he rose from his throne, he emptied himself of his glory. He became a servant. That's exactly what Jesus does. He rises from his meal and he takes off his outer garment and he girds himself with a towel and he takes a base and begins to wash the feet. And in the midst of all this, suddenly he says, by the way, Judas was going to betray him. Why does John say that? Here's the reason why. Jesus Christ is washing the foot, the feet of somebody who's going to get him killed. There's no indication that when he got to Judas feet, he says, no, not you. I know something about you. He washed all their feet. And we actually, we also know, see, he also knew that Jesus, that Peter was going to deny him in an egregious way, deny that he ever knew him. See, one is going to betray him. One is going to deny him and all are going to forsake him. They are all going to hurt him terribly. Guess what? He washes every single one of their feet. He serves them without exception. He washes the feet of the person who doesn't believe in him as well as the person who does, the people who do. He washes their feet no matter what. Now, what does that say? Here's what it says. Remember how I said it's very hard to love when you're hurting? Okay. Secondly, it's really hard to love when you're getting nothing out of the relationship. I mean, look, uh, sociologists talk about this all the time now that modern people tend to conduct their love relationships pretty much the way in which they conduct their economic relationships. When you enter into an economic relationship, uh, it's got to be mutually beneficial. I'm buying your product, which means I'm trying to get your product at a cost that makes it possible for me to keep on buying it. Uh, and you're, you're, uh, taking my money because it's, it's, you're getting more money than it costs you to make the product. And we're all benefiting because we're all making a profit. But as soon as one of you starts to say, wait a minute, I am not getting my money's worth. I'm giving more than I'm, I'm giving more value to you than I'm actually getting. Then you drop the relationship. Well, most people today, that's how we do love relationships too. in a marriage, I'll be in a friendship, I'll be in a church until my needs aren't being met, and then I'm out of here, which is very much the way we do in economic relationships. That's not the way it is with Jesus. The cost-benefit thing is not there. Oh, no. And this is what this shows you. When Jesus Christ, if you believe in him, Jesus Christ puts his love on you, and once his love is put on you, nothing can dislodge it, not a million failures. Nothing can dislodge it. He loves you, why? Because he loves you. You say, well, how could that be? How could his love be unconditional? It tells you. Having loved, he loved. Do you remember that place? We talk about this every so often, Deuteronomy chapter 7, where God is speaking to Israel, and he says, he says, I did not choose you because you were a great nation or you were a better nation. It was because I loved you that I chose you. That's circular. It's deliberately circular. He says, I didn't love you because you were X, Y, Z, God says. I loved you just because I loved you because I loved you. And that's where unconditional love comes from. Because if you say, I love you because you were X, Y, Z, that means you did something, and then I do something. You did this, now I love you. But it doesn't say that. It doesn't say, them having given themselves to Jesus Christ, he loved them to the end. It says, having loved them, he loved them. The reason he loves them to the end is because he loved them at the beginning. In fact, the whole relationship happens because Jesus Christ puts his love on you, and it's not because you're worthy. He doesn't love you because you're perfect. He loves you because he's perfect. He doesn't love you because you're great. He loves you because he's great. His love is not a function of your holiness. It's a function of his holiness. So, when Jesus Christ deliberately washes the feet of all these people who are about to hurt him terribly, and he's getting nothing out of the relationship at all, how much better for him to be, in a sense, looking up from the pages of this text and looking right at you and say, come be my disciple. Come be my disciple. Once we enter into a love relationship, I will never forsake you. There is nothing that can be thrown at my love that will ever dislodge it. I was forsaken on the cross, paying the penalty for your sin, so that now I will never, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever forsake you. So, what's the thing that moves him? What's the thing that drives him? What is his power? It's the power of unconditional electing love. Now, that leads us to one. Oh, by the way, no, not quite. Like, somebody might say, before getting to the third point, somebody might say, but wait a minute, wait a minute. So, he's just like that? I mean, where does that come from? And the answer of theologians throughout the ages has been the doctrine of the Trinity. See, I know, I know the Trinity hurts your head. Because the Trinity, the doctrine of the Trinity, the Christian doctrine of the Trinity is that there's only one God, but within the being of God, there are three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, who have all been knowing and loving each other throughout eternity. But do you know what that means? What does it mean to love someone? It means to glorify them. It means to delight in them. It means to lift them up. It means to say how wonderful they are. It means to give yourself to them. That's what it means to love. And from all eternity, the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit have been giving themselves to each other, loving each other, glorifying each other. And therefore, many people have taught that when Jesus Christ gave up his glory and came down to serve us and to serve our needs, he was only doing for us what he'd been doing for all eternity. Another way to put it is, it is the essence of the greatness of the... There are religions out there that say God is too great to become a human being. God is too great to become a little human being and be killed. But the Christian understanding of God is that is the greatness of God, that he could give up his greatness for love. That's the very essence of the greatness of God, that he was able to give up his greatness and become something lesser out of love. What is more glorious than losing your glory for the love of someone? And that's the reason why one of the greatest things that C.S. Lewis ever wrote, I think, one of the most poignant and eloquent things he ever wrote, was when he says that when Jesus Christ came to earth and died on the cross, listen to what he says. I'll read it twice. Jesus Christ, when he came to earth and died on the cross, he did that in the wild weather of his outlying provinces. he did that in the wild wild weather of his outlying north. today. Jesus Christ when he came to earth and died on the cross he did that in the wild weather of his outlying provinces which he had done at home in glory and gladness see when he went to the when he went to the cross it was like going out into the wild weather of his outlying provinces to do something he'd been doing at home in glory and gladness with the father and the spirit for all eternity when he was crucified he did that in the wild weather of his outlying provinces what he had done at home in glory and gladness because from before the foundation of the world the son glorifies the father and the father the son in self-giving love so from the highest to the lowest self exists to be abdicated off the throne and by the abdication it becomes more truly self to be there upon yet the more abdicated and so forever this is not a law which we can escape the only thing outside this system of self-giving is hell hell's fierce imprisonment of self-absorption no self-giving because of the doctrine of the trinity is the ultimate reality you must get into self-giving or else you're on your way to the hell of self-absorption so jesus christ basically loved and therefore loves to the end because that's who he is okay lastly what does this mean for the way in which we actually live and of course of course jesus christ later on in this text and we're not there yet you notice we only did verses one to five but we're going to go on we're going to go right through this this whole these whole four chapters this year and later on jesus sits down and says now i i'm this is a pattern the what i have washed your feet i want you to wash other feet now we're going to spend the whole time when we get there on that but here let me just say three things quick just three things quick about how what jesus christ did should affect the way in which you live number one it means you should be respectful and loving and kind and courteous to people who oppose you we live in a time in which everybody is talking about our polarization that we don't have conversations anymore we just flame people we demonize people there's a local recently the pew research center which does polling of you know the population they ask questions generally hot button questions what's your position on this issue what's your position on this issue a or b a or b a or b and they've been doing this for years but one thing i just noticed that i thought was kind of hidden but very significant in a footnote it says they always usually ask not only what is your position but do you have any sympathy for the other position and you know right now people who say yes to that second question are historic lows that people know where they stand and think the other side are crazy or evil and it's almost a proverb that you should be tolerant of everybody but intolerant people and jesus christ washes the feet not just of intolerant people but somebody's trying to kill him what does that mean it doesn't make that doesn't mean make it easy for somebody to sin against you it means to be respectful to be courteous at least to be patient to be humble to people who oppose you you wash your feet wash their feet by the way we'll see we're going to talk about this he certainly calls judas out you know on the other hand he's washing his feet so first of all it does mean christians we ought to take the lead in being respectful in being kind in being courteous in being open not demonizing our opponents that's number one number two part of the pattern is this the topsy-turviness of the world has a view a model of greatness and jesus christ gives us a different model of greatness you can't really understand this passage unless you read it together with luke 22 luke 22 tells us that in the upper room there was a a dispute between the apostles who said they were they were arguing about who was going to be highest up in jesus kingdom when jesus came into his kingdom and jesus stops the debate and he says who is greater the one who sits at the table and is waited on or the one who serves and he says i am among you as one who serves jesus is deliberately saying there what is greatness is it power is it the number of people who serve you is it your wealth is it the number of your homes is it the powerful people you know is greatness measured by the number of people that serve you or is greatness measured by the number of people you serve two opposing views of greatness and jesus says i'm among you as one who serves now luke 22 doesn't tell us about the foot washing iろう great right so is Thank you. the argument but when you put them together and you realize they both happen together it's so obvious why Jesus Christ is doing this isn't it and what he's trying to say to the apostles is here you are immersed in the world's understanding of greatness when you're on the very doorstep of the greatest contradiction of the world's idea of greatness you'll ever the world will ever see because I am going to ascend to the heights by descending to the depths I'm going to I'm going to be I'm going to save the world by becoming weak by serving by losing my power by being beaten up and killed and tortured and therefore the Christian understanding of greatness is the way up is down the way to influence and power is to serve and the way to find happiness is to not care about your own happiness but seek the happiness of others and the world will tell you exactly the opposite you live in New York City most of you I guess and therefore you are we are we are swimming in the world's understanding of greatness but we ought to just fill our minds with Jesus here's one last thing this caught this cost benefit relationship thing you know I said that most of us are very influenced by it when you're into a relationship you feel like well unless I'm getting something out of it I don't know how I can keep serving I don't know how I can be keep helping this person but once you understand what Jesus Christ did for you it blows the it blows the cost benefit thing completely out of the water do you know why look at what's in the basin wait when Jesus Christ washes their feet he's serving them later on a few verses later he's going to say I am making you clean so the the water is his salvation it's symbolic for salvation do you know what's in there do you know also by the way Jesus in another place it's in Luke chapter 12 verse 37 he says that that on the last day he's going to gird himself and serve us at the table it's a metaphor for saying you might when you read that you say I thought he was going to be on a throne and we were going to serve him doesn't it say we're bowing down and worshiping him in revelation but then here in Luke chapter 12 it says I'm going to gird myself and wait on you okay these are metaphors I mean don't don't sweat it but here's the what it's trying to say is I am going to I'm going to show you my glory I'm going to give you fullness of life I'm going to give you a glorified body do you have any idea how deep your heart's desires are for joy you know one of the advantages of being older is that as time goes on you realize nothing will satisfy but God or so I mean when you're younger you think if I have these four or five things I'll be happy and the older you get the more you can drive you can drive 10 trucks of gold and jewels and status and all sorts of things into your heart and it just gobbles it up every human heart wants happiness and we can nothing seems to make can make you content and Jesus is saying I will do that I will serve you I will finally fill your heart the beauty you've been looking for the wealth you've been looking for when you finally see the glory of my face face to face he's going to give you everything and what does that mean about the cost benefit thing here's what it means Christians are you Christians if you're in your right mind you never look at somebody else and say oh you're not being thankful to me you're not being nice to me I'm going to have to pull back Christian when you are in your right mind you look at the world you say world you owe me nothing I am no one's creditor I'm everyone's debtor because I am eternally rich beyond the dreams of an earthly trillionaire and okay maybe I'm in a relationship over here and I'm not getting what you know I could get you know from it but so does a trillionaire get worried if he loses 20 bucks look at what Jesus Christ is giving me he's my he's my friend he's my spouse he's my brother he's my shepherd he's my king he's going to meet all of my needs according to his riches of glory so why in the world would I not just serve I'm rich why would I ever pull back you need to look at the world and say I can kneel and serve you and never get up because the ultimate power of the universe knelt all the way into hell to serve me if you know his love you'll be able to serve other people cost-benefit analysis just blow it away if you're in your right mind but are you in your right mind if you see what he's promising here when he says I'm going to be doing this the rest of eternity I'm going to be serving you I'm going to be meeting all your needs according to my riches and glory you you going to kneel down and you're not going to get up and get all upset because you're not getting yours because the ultimate power of the universe knelt all the way into hell in order to love you. Look, you need this love, everybody. No friend love, no spousal love, no love from parents or love from children will ever fill the deepest recesses of your heart. How can you live without this love? You can't live without this love. So get it and then live as loved as you are. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for this remarkable picture, not only of the greatness of Jesus' person, but of the unconditional, endless, patient, compassionate power of his love for us. And we're just simply asking over the next few weeks as we look at this wonderful picture of kneeling love, divine kneeling love, that you would transform us into his likeness, into his likeness. And make us, give us the servant hearts because we're so filled with what Jesus Christ is giving us. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
