TITLE: Sex, Money and Power: The Christian Counter-Culture
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel and Community Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-money-power-the-christian-counter-culture/

============================================================

Okay, Tuck gave us a great overview of what community is and the importance of Christian community, and one of the things that we learned this morning is that Christian community is not just a supportive place where Christian individuals come to get inspiration and affirmation for living their individual lives. The Christian community is supposed to reflect a new way of being human. As a group, we're supposed to be reflecting a new way of being human. We're an alternate city inside New York City. We're an alternate way of being a human society. So we're not just a support group for individuals. We are, as individuals, supposed to be coming together and showing how the gospel changes the way in which human life goes. And so we are a counterculture. Now, what I want to do in a ridiculously short amount of time is to take three areas that are so important to human life, sex, money, and power, and show how inside the Christian community the gospel changes the way in which we use sex, money, and power. So the way we utilize that in our community is pretty radically different than the way it's utilized out in the world. The gospel frees us in the areas of sex, money, and power and then reshapes us. There is a place in 1 Corinthians 7 where Paul says something that sounds really very odd. He says, That's 1 Corinthians 7, 29 to 31. Now, notice that cuts across, you know, sex, money, and power there. And here's what he's saying. At first, it sounds very strange. What it simply means is the gospel frees you from putting too much of your hope, too much of your meaning, getting too much of your joy out of sex, money, and power. In other words, sex, money, and power are all demoted in your life. Remember, religion is, I perform, therefore I'm acceptable. The gospel is, I'm accepted through Jesus Christ, therefore, out of gratitude, I perform. Two radically different ways of living, two radically different kinds of character. But if you are working on the religious principle, I perform, therefore I'm acceptable, you have to find things, something that you perform or that you have, that enables you to feel that you're a worthwhile person, you're significant, and you're secure. And so you're going to latch on to either sex and or money and or power in certain forms and certain ways that you've just got to have. Now, Paul says, once the gospel comes, once you realize that the gospel is that by grace that you are part of the new people of God and you are going to inherit eventually the new heavens and new earth, he says, you sit loose to these things. You buy things, but you're not engrossed in them. And it's really amazing, especially in the family-oriented culture that Paul came from, to say, those who have spouses should live as though they didn't. And what that really means is, when it comes right down to it, it means you look at anything, even your spouse, your children, your money, and you look at them and you say, you know, as important as you are, you are not my life. You are not my life. Not anymore. Now, to the degree that the gospel has grasped our hearts, to that degree we get a certain freedom in those areas. So that's the first thing that happens. The second thing, though, the gospel doesn't just give us freedom in those three areas. It reshapes the way in which we use sex, money, and power. Along these lines, because of the freedom and because of the pattern of Jesus and the cross, now we use sex, money, and power to build human community and to build Christian community, not just simply to meet our own needs. And that's the essence of why we use sex, money, and power so differently. We now use sex, money, and power not just for personal satisfaction, not just for personal fulfillment, but to build community, human community, and Christian community. We're completely reshaped, and that's why we're going to look very different than the rest of the world. Now, that's the overview. Got it? Now, so those of you who are really in a hurry, you know, you've been in New Yorkers for a long time, you can leave and read it. So I'll read it on the subway on the way home, and I'll save myself 45 minutes. But for the rest of you who would like me to help you unpack that, let's talk a little bit about sex, the theology of sex, the gospel theology of sex. and in some ways they're not actually out there as three separate things, but they're three influences. You've got sexual realism, the view that says sex is just a biological appetite, you shouldn't treat it any different than that. Secondly, you have, I put down here, sexual Platonism, that is the idea of sex as a kind of animal passion, it lowers us. And then you have sexual romanticism, and this is a view that came especially out of the romanticist movement that sees sex as repressed creativity. While Hellenism, that's the Platonist strain, located the source of evil in the physical, which means that sex was sort of an animal thing that pulled us down. Romanticists locate, and by the way, every worldview besides Christianity villainizes something. Instead of saying sin is our problem, it says that's our problem. So Greek philosophy said it was the body. So it turns the body into a villain. Romanticism says culture. The corporate represses the individual. And therefore, Romanticism, you know, Rousseau and those kinds of folks said, human beings are in their pristine, unspoiled original state, are brimming with natural goodness and creativity. It's only society that stifles it. Goodness is achieved by liberating the basic primal instincts of the individual, which in themselves are pure. And opposed to Romanticism was Victorianism, which believed that goodness is achieved only by suppressing the primal instincts, because Victorianism was more rooted in the Platonic understanding that the body is bad. Have you ever seen The African Queen? You know, it's one of the best movies ever made, you know, with Catherine Hepburn and Humphrey Bogart. And, you know, Humphrey Bogart is this, you know, she's a missionary type, and he's a kind of, you know, tough guy, and at one point he gets drunk at one night, and he wakes up the next morning and realizes he was probably out of line, and she's not hardly speaking to him. Do you remember this part? And he says, you're not mad at me just because I had a little bit too much to drink. She's not, you know, she's just reading her Bible or something. Won't even speak to him. You know, here you have the two sides, you know, the Victorianism and the Romanticism, because he says, it's just human nature. I got drunk, it's just human nature. One of the great lines, she says. Nature, Mr. Allnut, is what we were put on this earth to rise above. It's one of the great lines of Hollywood. Nature, Mr. Allnut, is what we were put on this earth to rise above. And there you have the two approaches to sex, you know. And then you've got the biological approaches. Hey, it's just a, now look at the comparisons here. It's the middle of page 44. While the first view sees sex as inevitable, it's a biological drive, you can't stop it. These are the people who, by the way, write our sex education material. They just say, you know, you can't stop it. It's silly to talk, you know, it's a biological drive. The second view sees sex as a necessary evil, because it's the only way we can have babies. Not anymore, really, but that's the way we've been. The last view sees sex as a critical way of self-expression, a way to be yourself. For biological realists, all sex is right if it's safe. For platonists, all sex is wrong, unless you do it to have children. For romantics, the quality of interpersonal love is the primary touchstone that makes sex right or wrong. Now, the gospel sees every one of those as wrong. The gospel is very unique in its approach to sex. Contra to the Platonistic view, it teaches that sex is very, very good, and there's an enormous amount of emphasis in the Bible on the goodness of sexuality. Secondly, contra to the realist view of sex, the sexual appetite is not a good guide. I mean, even your physical appetite, even your appetite for food, as we all know, is not a good guide. It's silly to say, well, when you're hungry, you eat. We all know that there's all kinds of stuff going on there, and there's a lot of us that should be eating and we don't want to. There's a lot of us who shouldn't be eating when we want to. There's eating disorders. I mean, it's silly. Even your physical appetite, you can't just follow your physical appetite. You have to kind of get it under control because it's not a good guide. How much more so is this true with sex when there's a whole lot more going on there than just the biologicals we all know? And then thirdly, the Bible says, and this is my key, the Gospel says, contrary to the Romanticist view, love and sex are not primarily for individual happiness. They're for building community. God created sexuality to build community, not just to personally fulfill you, not just for your pleasure, which is maybe a male way to think about it, not just for fulfillment, which is just maybe a female way. They're both wrong. They're both individualistic. It's there to build community, human community and Christian community. Now let me show you how, three ways. First of all, in the biblical understanding, this is what sex is for. Sex is for expanding community. Except for all, in theeousness, public helping those people build community. You're an alumni group that has gorgeous elements into there for creating a community. Let me show you how. Three ways. First of all, in the biblical understanding, this is what sex is for. Sex is for expanding community. Now, the Catholics are real big on this, and they're right, okay? Sex is sacred, in the Christian view, because with God, it co-creates new souls. Have you ever thought of it like that? See, the Catholic theology is pretty good about this. They understand that. They say sex is, this is not, I mean, you know, you can eat and eat and eat and eat and eat, and it's not going to create a new soul. It's going to create a whole lot more of something. Something will expand, but not community. But sex creates new beings, new souls. It expands both the human community and expands the Christian community. Now, here's what's interesting. Now, you've heard me say this recently, and now I can give you a little more of the theological underpinnings for it. Christianity is the very first religion in history and the first culture, actually, there's never been a culture before, that said that long-term singleness is an okay way to live an adult life. Up until that time, there was no religion, there was no culture that said that was okay. The whole idea was you have to have a family. You're nobody without a family. You must have children. You must have heirs. You must have heirs that take care of you when you get older. You must have heirs that carry on your name. Otherwise, you're nothing. Every society was like that, incredibly family-centered. Along comes Christianity, and you have Paul talking and saying, you know, if you're married, great. Don't try to be single. But if you're single, don't overdo the idea of getting married. You know, it might be fine to be married. No one had ever talked like this before. You know that? When you and I read it from our vantage point, it seems interesting. Maybe, you know, some people say he's a little cynical about marriage. Some people say, well, that's okay. You don't realize how radical it was. Now, why? Why? And the answer, Stanley Hauerwas gives us this answer here in the middle, this big paragraph in the middle of page 45. It says, Christianity, unlike any other traditional religion or culture, held out singleness as a viable way of life. Jesus himself, St. Paul, we're single. Jesus spoke about those who stayed unmarried because they can better serve the kingdom of God in that state. Paul says singleness is often better for ministering as a sign of the coming kingdom. And here's what Stanley Hauerwas says. One clear difference in Christianity and Judaism and all other traditional religions is the form of entertainment of the idea of singleness as the paradigm way of life for its followers. Singleness was legitimated not because sex was questionable, like in Platonism, but because the mission of the church is between the times. We must remember that the sacrifice made by singles was not just in giving up sex, but in giving up heirs. There could be no more radical act than that. It was a clear expression that one's future is not guaranteed by the family, but by the kingdom of God and the church. Now, to complete the thought, if you are single and you are radically committed to the mission of the church, you are evangelizing and discipling and ministering and expanding the people of God, you are, then what? You're expanding community. If you're having babies and raising them and nurturing them in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, you are expanding community. But what's interesting is, because of the gospel, because of the understanding that God is recreating the human race by creating a new people of God with whole new approaches to money, sex, and power that eventually is going to fill the whole world, that's our understanding, that's our hope. That means that you can actually fulfill that mission either by being married or not. And what that means then is sex, you see, if you say, well, how could a single person ever be fulfilled? You're thinking, like a modern Western individualistic person, the purpose of sex is to expand community, and you may not be, it may not be the main way that God calls you to do it. But you see then how different the Christian prohibition of sex outside marriage is. In traditional religion and culture, premarital sex was taboo, we know that. But so was singleness. I think I mentioned in my sermon, you know, Caesar Augustus, I think, or Tiberius, anyway, I think it was Augustus Caesar, decreed that if a woman was widowed in ancient Rome, she had two years to get married or she would be fined. You know, the idea of singleness was just not considered possible in traditional society, because the family is an idol. Because you had no self without a family, you had no identity, you had no, there was no, there was no way in which you were really contributing. But you see, the kingdom of God is different. You can do that either through being married or through being single. So the Christian taboo versus premarital sex is clearly different in its inspiration because singleness is now considered a viable alternative. In traditional societies, premarital sex is forbidden because it undermines the family. In Christianity, premarital sex undermines the kingdom. Why? One, we abstain from sex outside marriage because it undermines the character quality of faithfulness which builds community. We're going to talk about this in the, in, when you have sex with somebody that you're married to, it strengthens your ability to be for锻子 Sophie that doesn't make any rules as to you. So if you don't have sex without faithfulness which builds community. We're going to talk about this. When you have sex with somebody that you're married to, it strengthens your ability to be absolutely long-term, end-of-your-life committed to a person. Now, not all marriages last. I mean, we are sinful in its fallen world. But when you have sex with somebody you're absolutely committed to in every way, so you're not just physically one with them, but you're legally one, economically one, you know, you've taken all the vows and all that, it strengthens, it stabilizes community. It stabilizes and sweetens the relationship. It makes you feel more bonded. When you have sex with somebody that you actually are not committed to, that person hasn't made a vow to you, you haven't made a vow to them, it actually weakens your ability to get into that kind of relationship. I mean, if you want to be really, really crass, it's the old thing about saying, well, why should, why do I need to be married? I can have all the sex I want. You know, there's plenty of people willing to give it to me. In other words, sex outside marriage undermines stability of community, and it certainly undermines the character quality of faithfulness, which sex can, see, sex can make you more faithful or can make you less, depends how you use it. Look at B. We abstain from sex outside of marriage to witness to how God works in the gospel. God never gives himself to anyone intimately and in depth unless they make an exclusive commitment to him. Can you imagine God saying, well, I'm going to come into your life, I'm going to, I mean, I'm, you know, this, let me be crass, I mean, not crass, let me just be, let me be graphic. You know, sexual imagery is continually used by God in regard to his relationship with us, his people, and with a soul. He, you know, we unite with him. He doesn't do that. He's not going to give you intimacy. He's not going to come into your life. He's not going to, he's not going to penetrate your life with his love unless there's an exclusive commitment to him. That's the way it works. That's the way he works. And if sex is an, is a mirror, if it's a reflection of God's image, which it is, then we need to use it the way God uses it. You say, what do you mean way God uses it? Well, intimacy and exclusive commitment go together with God, so they should go together with us. And C. We abstain from sex outside of marriage because our commitment to its use in kingdom building. If we were to have sex, we have it as open to life. We have sex in a place where if God uses that to co-create a new soul, it will come into the only place where children really can be raised that we know safely. Children cannot be warehoused. We cannot, we do not know how to raise kids. It's pretty much proven that unless children are raised in a family, very individualized, you know, care from parents, not in an orphanage, not in a warehouse, not in something like that. That's the only place where we know kids can be raised to be, to grow up pretty much well adjusted. So you want to have sex in such a way that it creates and solidifies a real human community in which if children are born into it, they can be raised safely. So it's common to say, anyway, we've talked about that. So the first thing is sex builds community in that it expands community. Secondly, sex cements community. I already talked about this a little bit, but let's, let me explain what I mean by this. According to the Bible, sex is a covenant renewal ceremony. You know what Lord's Supper is? In baptism, you make your, you come in, you might say you get married to God. All right, let me just come, I mean, I know this is being taped and everything. If you want to say, in baptism, it's like getting married to God. The Lord's Supper is like sex with God. I mean, listen, this is, this is a, this is a real good analogy. Honestly, it's, it's, it works. In the Lord's Supper, you're getting intimate with him. You're not, you're not starting your relationship. You're renewing your relationship. You get married married and you're coming into a relationship with each other, but sex is a way of renewing your covenant. It's a way of, of going back to the, going back to intimacy, going back and renewing your, your love for each other. It's, that's what it is. It's a covenant renewal ceremony. I mean, in the Old Testament times, you would make a covenant, but every so often you would get the covenant out. You would reread it. You'd remember why we did it. You'd remember what we mean to each other and you would embrace or something like that. That's what sex is. And, and that's why in the romantic view, sex is self-expression. But in the biblical view, sex is a form of renewing of one's self-donation. See, what you do in marriage is you give yourself away. And what you're doing in sex is that you are renewing that self-donation. And therefore, secondly, we said, we said, we said, obviously sex expands community. Secondly, sex cements it. It deepens it between two people. And thirdly, and this is the most, and this is on page 46. The most amazing thing about the gospel view of sex is, thirdly, we could say sex cosmically swans It cements it as a covenant renewal ceremony. And it cosmically sweetens it. Now, there is no view of sex I know. It's not in Buddhism, not in Islam, not in secularism, certainly, that has as lofty an understanding of sex as this. Look at, let me just read it to you. It's in page 46, the sex delights, the dance of sex. Sex is sacred because it is the analogy of the joyous, self-giving, and pleasure of love within the very life of the Trinity. The Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit live in a relationship of glorious devotion to each other. They pour love and joy into one another's bosom continually. Sex between a man and a woman points to the love between the Father and the Son as well as that between Christ and the believer, which is what Paul continually says. Um, despite the realism of 1 Corinthians 7, which explodes the romanticist view of sex as strictly personal fulfillment and says, no, sex is for building community, and therefore you don't have to have sex to build community if you are a Christian single. On the other hand, the Bible rather baldly and openly celebrates the delights of sex. Sex is supposed to be recreational and wonderful because it mirrors the joy of relationship in the Trinity, because it points to the eternal ecstasy of soul that we all will have in heaven in our loving relationships with God and one another. It is a sort of embodied out-of-the-body experience. That's from Peter Kreft. The reason sex is so powerful, according to the Bible, is it's a foretaste of what we're going to have with God in all other sanctified beings in heaven. You have to work so incredibly hard with one person. Because of our sin, it's very hard to mold two souls together. And you can only do it with one person. And there are only times in the best marriages when you get close to it, and there's times in the best marriages when sex gets close to it. But when you get there, the reason it's so powerful and it's so delightful and it's so wonderful is because it's actually a foretaste of what's going to happen in the future. And it cosmically sweetens the community you've got. Of course, is that going to be in the future fun? Yeah. Is it going to be pleasurable? Yeah. That's why sex is fun and pleasurable. But, and here's what's intriguing, as soon as those of you who are single are saying, and you're telling me that it's okay to be single if it's this wonderful? You're telling me it's okay to be single if it's this wonderful? And I think probably the best way to go at this is to say, yeah, because in, let me see here. Yeah, okay. Your main need is a spousal love of Jesus. Sex is for fully committed relationships because it is to be a foretaste of the ecstasy of joy that comes from being in complete union with God. The most rapturous love between a man and a woman on earth is a hint of what, you know, of what it's going to be like to be in complete union with God. And that we see that in Romans 7, Ephesians 5, where Paul directly says that. It's a practical point because, on the one hand, this analogy shows that sex can be a super-sacred experience. Meeting God face-to-face will be an enormous joy, and so it's an earthly analogy. But, on the other hand, this teaches us that sex here cannot possibly fill the cosmic need for closure that our souls seek in sex. Our souls are looking for something that sex is not going to be able to give you. Only the beatific vision will really fill up the need for love and closure that your soul has got. Paul is realistic that not everyone has the gift for lifelong celibacy, but virtually everyone is called to celibacy at some point, you know. Everybody. Many are called to do it in marriage, by the way, for various reasons. The only way through is negatively to realize that much of our burning comes from being brainwashed by the romanticist and realist views of the world. They make sex an idol. We then deal with it like any other idol. Tell, remind yourself that sex, as a God, always becomes a demon. Tell, remind yourself that people with great sex lives find it's not enough to give them joy and fulfillment and identity. Positively, we are called to really experience a spousal love of Jesus available in prayer. Single people are often unaware they have greater flexibility and freedom with their time, and they have a practical opportunity for a very deep prayer life than very often married people don't have, or certainly married people with children don't have. And so, you know, what's really odd is to say, you know, if you live your whole life as a single, and then you spend, you know, which is just a blip compared to the, you know, all of eternity with God, you're not going to have, in the long run, any less fulfilling of a life. There is a great deal of pain, by the way, even involved in having a good marriage. Because if you have a really good marriage, then you're joined at the hip, and if any one of you is suffering in any way, it just pulls you down. You just can't get lift off for a long time. I mean, so that's why Paul can look at the whole thing and say, you know, honestly, honestly, do not say, it would be so much better to be in that condition. I mean, whatever condition you're in, you're in. do want to understand what sex and marriage is all about, you understand it's not about personal fulfillment. It is about building human community, it's about building Christian community. Now, one more thing to talk about, because we've got to talk about something about money and power as well. Now, Paul, when Paul says, when you have sex with a prostitute, don't you realize you're being one flesh with her? How can you do that? It's a very, very intriguing passage. And what he's basically saying is, when you have sex with somebody, you are joining yourself physically without joining yourself in every other way. When Paul and the Bible talk about being one flesh, it's not just talking about the physical. It's saying that every single area of your life needs to come in contact. Now, when physically you're literally coming in contact, that's supposed to mirror the fact that every other part of your life has come in contact. And if you bring yourself together physically without bringing yourself together in every other way, if you make yourself physically vulnerable without making yourself personally vulnerable, if you donate your body but you don't really donate your independence, you don't want to give up your independence, you're being selfish and you're destroying what sex really is supposed to be, which is a commitment apparatus. It's supposed to be a way of completely entrusting yourself to somebody. So by having sex with someone, but at the same time holding back the thing that sex is supposed to take with it, which is your independence. You're supposed to be giving up your independence. You're supposed to be becoming interdependent. You're destroying what it was built for. Now, after my sermon, a couple people emailed me and said, oh, my gosh, you know, and, of course, this is New York, and I've had plenty of sex before marriage. I'm not married now. Have I ruined my ability, you know, to commit myself? And I say, all I know is every sin damages you to some degree, and every sin can be repaired. That's all. No, I'm not saying it's worse than any other kind of sin. Every sin damages you to some degree. And you have to say that. You have to say, yeah, this is the kind of damage you can do with this. We have to be a community in which people are using sex, are not just refraining from sex for the old Platonistic sex is dirty approach, but because you understand what sex is for. That's the key thing. Now, if you're single, now I don't want to bore those of you who are not single, so this will be very brief. If you're single, there's two opposite, you might say, cultural idols you can fall into. Traditional culture made marriage an idol. And there are many singles who over-desire marriage. They're ridiculously unhappy because they're not married. They're far too obsessed with the idea of finding somebody and getting married. On the other hand, that's, you might say, the idol of traditional culture. You're not gospel-shaped. If you really feel, deep down, because your mother told you this, that you're nobody until somebody loves you. You know, Jesus tells you, you are somebody because I love you. You know, your mother and your father may say, you know, unless you have, you know, a spouse and a family and kids and all that, you really, you know, you haven't really arrived. Traditional culture hits you very hard. You have got to resist that. On the other hand, contemporary culture says be afraid of marriage. Be afraid of ever giving up your independence. You know, marriages are dangerous and they break up and you see all the things that have gone wrong. That is the contemporary idol. And these are people, if you are affected by the contemporary idol, you become a perfectionist. You do not want to get married. Or if you do want to get married, you want to get married to somebody who's absolutely perfect. It's a perfectionistic idol. No doubt about it. I'm coming right out and saying it. The women tend to make, the female version of that tends to be, I want security. I want somebody, I want to marry somebody of status, somebody who's going to be financially secure. The male version of it tends to be physical. We all know that. Incredibly exacting understanding of what the body's going to look like and that sort of thing. Now, here's the problem. I would say in Redeemer, in most any church I know, you've got a lot of people who are affected by one idol. That is, they over-desire marriage. You've got other people who are affected by other idol, which is they're avoiding marriage and they're perfectionistic. And sometimes they date one another. And then there's explosions. I mean, literal explosions all the time. But you've got to realize, and I put down here, don't forget, there's basically two real purposes of marriage. One is to build a Christian community, which de-emphasizes the need necessary to be married, so people who ever desire marriage erodes that idol. The other theological purpose of marriage, and this is the last thing I've got to tell you, is sanctification, not fulfillment. There are many sociological explanations for why singles today put off marriage and are so slow to move into commitment. One reason given is that because so many younger adults are now the product of divorce, they are suspicious of prospective partners. Another reason is that in the past it was hard to get sex without being married, but that's no problem anymore. I'm sure that's true. These are certainly factors. being celibate and who have come from intact families and homes and who nonetheless are having as much trouble moving into committed relationships as everybody else. So that can't be the whole person. Here's what I think. I propose the reason for the perfectionism that so many, especially New Yorkers, have got goes deeper. The culture sees the purpose of marriage as fulfillment. Ephesians 5, though, says the purpose of marriage is your sanctification, growing into glory. Husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the church, gave himself for her to make her holy, cleansing her by the washing with water through the word, and to present her to himself a radiant church without stain or wrinkle or any blemish. Now, you see, marriage here is held out as one of the best possible ways to learn about our sins and growth out of them through speaking the truth in love with somebody else. This process takes sacrifice. It's not an easy process. It's threatening and painful. This does not fit into the contemporary model of marriage's fulfillment. The contemporary model is you find somebody who's already without spot and blemish. It's somebody who's low maintenance, somebody who doesn't really need that much. Now, you know, of course, the fallacy is, what makes you think you are without spot and blemish? You know, here you're looking for somebody who's nothing like you. You know, what if they, what if you actually found somebody like that? You know, why would they want you? But there isn't anybody like that. I think it's only fair to say that while there have been many happy exceptions, the Christian community of singles in most cities operate in pretty much the same way. In the Christian singles mind, most candidates are immediately eliminated from consideration on the basis of looks, polish, material, social status. This is simply another way in which Christian singles are being, as Tuck said this morning, affected by the world, the stories the world is telling us instead of the story of the gospel. You're looking for somebody beautiful in the most superficial possible way, forgetting there's only one kind of beauty that's going to be here a billion years from now. And it's the kind of beauty that two Christians working together on each other with the word can give to each other, okay? There is a great need for you to understand what real attraction is. Everybody, I was just talking at lunch with some people, everybody says, well, you know, you can't get married to somebody unless there's chemistry. Absolutely right, if you define chemistry properly. I wouldn't trust what most of you think is chemistry to be the chemistry that I'm talking about. Here's what I'm talking about. Physical attraction is something that must definitely grow between marriage partners, and it can come easily if you've already got the deeper attraction I'm talking about now. Comprehensive attraction is what I mean. Comprehensive attraction is something that you can begin to sense with people if you deliberately disable the default looks-polished screening mode that I just talked about. So we have, in other words, you know what this is. You come into a room, and if you see some other people of the opposite sex, you immediately eliminate about eight of the ten. You just eliminate them immediately because of how they look. You know you do that, or because of the polish, okay? It might be true that men do a little faster than women, but you all have some kind of, you know, we all have some kind of screening. So you don't even find out about the character. You don't even find out about real beauty. You don't really find out about the people. You don't know who they are. You just eliminate them. Now if you are willing to disable the default looks-polished screening mode, you might actually find comprehensive attraction. In fact, you may find, to your horror, by the way, that you are feeling it with people who directly violate your old screening policy. When that happens, you say, I just, you know, this is a great person, but oh my gosh, this isn't the kind of, you know, part of it, part of it is being attracted to the person's character or spiritual fruit. Jonathan Edwards said the true virtue in any person, the contentment, peace, and joy from the gospel is beautiful. It's hard to define what we mean by beautiful. It's symmetrical. It's attractive. I don't know what it is, but it's beautiful. Part of it is being attracted to their mission in life, not just their fruit. Part of it is being attracted to what they want to do with their lives. What is their deepest mission in life? What part of the work of the kingdom does he or she have a passion for? On the basis of both of these, you must become attracted to the person's future self. That's what Ephesians 5 is about. It tells us that the purpose of marriage in Ephesians 5 is to discern the person's future self and to say, man, I am attracted to what you're going to be. And I'm also attracted to what you are now. Obviously, what you're going to be and what you are now, there's a lot of overlap. But what you say is, I see what you're becoming and what you will be, even though, frankly, you aren't quite there yet. The flashes of your future attract me. Ultimately, your marriage partner should be part of your mythos. C.S. Lewis spoke of a secret thread that united every person's favorite books, music, places, or pastimes. Do you know what that is? Certain things arouse in you an inconsolable longing that gets you in touch with the joy that is God? Certain landscapes, certain music, certain movies, certain books. else, you know, smart people, good people, and they read the book and they say, that's nice. And you can tell it just doesn't grab them. It's not the secret thread for them that reminds them that life is really, has meaning and there is a God and there is, you know, light and high beauty for you ever beyond the reach of shadow. Now, we all have those, the person you marry has to be part of that thread. That thread has to go through that person. Certain things arouse in you that inconsolable longing. Bernstein said that Beethoven's Fifth always made him sure, despite his intellectual atheism, that there was a God. Beethoven doesn't do that for me, by the way. Mozart does. Everybody has something, well, see, everybody has something that moves you so that you long for heaven or the future kingdom of God. Sometimes you will meet a person who shares to a great degree the same mythos thread. Often that person is part of the thread him or herself. This is very hard to describe, obviously, so I'm going to stop. By the way, if you're willing to take off your polish screening mode, there's really, around Redeemer, there's plenty of people, I'm sure, will be comprehensively attractive to you. Really. Now, let's do the same thing. Let me do a little theology of money, a little theology of power, at least, and we may have to talk in the Q&A more about the ramifications. Now, there's really not much difference. I mean, I, you see, look, I'm not stupid. I know that you're much more interested in sex than money or power, but you shouldn't be. You shouldn't be. You shouldn't be, all right? Because it's roughly analogous. You're supposed to use your money for building community, not for personal fulfillment. You're supposed to use your social slash cultural slash racial power for building community, human community and Christian community, not, you know. So, look, first of all, here's something on money. Again, we've just been through this. Wasn't that the last sermon I preached? I think it was, yeah. The Hebrew Bible's view of wealth and prosperity can be summarized under three headings. No other religion affirms all these three things. It's a little bit like the sex theology, too. First, the material world is an intrinsic good. Material goods and pleasures are not an illusion, like the Eastern religions believe. They're not spiritually corrupting influence, like Western paganism, Hellenistic religions, and dualistic religions. The land, its produce, wine, meat, you know, beautiful homes, a great feast. I mean, physical is good, that's the first thing. And we are owners, we are stewards who are managed God's wealth and gratitude without pride or self, number one. Number two, however, sin and injustice leads to continual abuse of the material world. God wants those with more of his property to use it not for personal ends but for the protection of those with less. If you go through all of this, and by the way, there's a pretty lengthy outline of the Old Testament and some of the New Testament's approach to wealth and possessions. You will find that if you are anywhere near above average, if the amount of wealth and possessions you have is above average to the rest of the world, which, of course, by being Americans it is, if it's above average even within this community right here, if what you make is probably above average than what most of the other people are making, God holds you responsible to take a lot of that and spread it around to build the community and strengthen the other people in it. It's just there, read it, read it. The widow, the poor, the immigrant, the powerless are tests now to see whether the gospel has actually shaped the way in which you look at your money, because the gospel is he was rich but he became poor so that through his poverty we might become rich. And the third thing is God forms a people who are to model to the world a redeemed society in which wealth and possessions are used to build up community and not for personal fulfillment. That's the three things. Now, if you want the practicals and you say, well, how much do you mean? You know, that's right. You know, it's not the sex question, is it? You know, it's the money question. The money question is, okay, okay, okay, okay. How much are you talking about? That's what they always say. Okay, pastor, that's really very inspiring. How much are you talking about? And here, here it is. Here it is. Number one, the tithe. The Old Testament called believers to tithe, give 10%. The New Testament nowhere, I mean nowhere, explicitly requires tithing. The only place is in Matthew 23 and a parallel passage in Luke where Jesus castigates the Pharisees for only tithing and not giving to their families in need because they tithed. You know that? In other words, he says there's a place where the Pharisees are not helping out their community, they're not helping out their parents because they've already tithed. They say, well, I've already tithed. I've already given my tenth. And Jesus comes after them. what's motivating your approach to money. It's just, it's just compliance. You know, what's the standard? What do I have to do so I'm on the good side of God? And he goes after them and says, you know, if you were loving, then you would, you would, you're right to tithe, he says, but you need to be able to go beyond tithe because love and a concern for community should be the thing that really is what draws the money out of your pocket, not just a feeling like, well, I've got to do what God says so he'll bless me. So in the Old Testament, 10% was how much you were supposed to give away to charity, to church, to others. In the New Testament, the tithe is never mentioned except once when someone is castigated for only tithing. And what do we conclude? This means that while the church cannot require members to give any particular amount of money, I can't do that, Jesus assumes his followers will go beyond the tithe in giving. This is only reasonable. Since we have greater privileges, joy, knowledge, and power than our ancestors in the faith in the Old Testament, how in the world could we expect to be less, to be expected to be less generous with our giving than they were? You know, it's silly to say, well, back in the Old Testament, they gave 10%, but we don't have to. I mean, in other words, if we had so much more than they had, how in the world could we have less expected of us? So the tithe, in general, for you, not because I'm not going to look at you, the officers are not going to look at you, because this is something between you and God. Nevertheless, first of all, a tithe of your income is a minimum rule of thumb, okay? Secondly, surplus and sacrifice is the second way you decide what to do with your money. Jesus warns against storing up beyond what you truly need. I know that it doesn't take much for you to think you need that fourth home. And there are plenty of people who really do feel that way. I mean, that's an extreme case. Okay, yeah, but, you know, it is astounding the kind of things that I pay for now, and I think it was necessity, like my cell phone. I'm not saying I'm wrong. Maybe I am, but it's amazing. Can you imagine just 10 years ago, if somebody said, well, you know, everybody's going to have a cell phone, you're going to pay this amount of money every month for a cell phone. You'd say, well, you're kidding. Why would in the world I do something like that? And yet we have to. It seems to be careful. Just all I'm trying to say is watch out. Watch out. Don't just assume that things that used to be just two years ago considered a luxury now are a necessity. Don't let that happen too quickly. Recognize the fact that we should, you know, we should be trying to push up our percentage of giving as the years go by, not pushing it down, because more and more things that used to be luxuries are becoming necessities, at least in our mind. Sacrifice is the main thing. You have got to be able to give to the place where it really is making a difference in the way you live. If you're wealthy enough to give 10% and yet it makes no difference as to how you live, where you go on vacation, you know, things you buy, even where you, if it makes no difference how you live and you haven't given enough, it's not sacrificial. But perhaps as the last, the last, and we got to stop here, the, the last point is community. And here's what I mean by that. You are never going to be sure that you aren't kidding yourself about your money unless you're willing in community to talk about with somebody else how you spend your money. Now I would say in general that it means this. You almost have to go to somebody who is in some similar straits than you. I mean, we all know that if you're making, you know, $300,000 to $500,000 a year and you're raising a family in the city, you probably don't want to sit down with, you know, somebody making, you know, a single person making $40,000 a year and say, well, here's how much I make and here's how much I spend. Could you help me? You know, I mean, the single person, you know, probably has almost no concept of how much it costs to raise kids and so on. You probably need to go find somebody else who's, roughly speaking, who's a Christian that you trust and who's basically, you know, making the same amount of money and, and, or something like that and that you trust to say, do you really need to be, you know, you probably could give away more. I mean, unless you're willing to be kind of open with some other people about your money, I'm afraid you're going to, you shouldn't trust your own heart on things like this. So, in fact, the word, as I've mentioned in my last sermon, you always know when you're committing adultery, unless you're, well, most everybody knows when they're committing adultery, because the sex act is, roughly speaking, something you can tell you're, you're engaging in. But greed is not something that you never, nobody knows how to define greed and yet the Bible talks about greed on almost, you know, every other page. It's clearly a problem and yet how are you, how are we going to define greed? Nobody thinks they're greedy. Unless you are talking to one another, unless we in our community are talking to each other, we're going to be guilty of greed. We've got to hold ourselves accountable. Now, that's all I'm going to say because time is up and besides that, money and power are kind of linked. But the last part of this is about the fact, and well, I just preached. got to keep in mind white people in this country have power and we don't we're kind of oblivious to it I remember I gave you the the illustration in the sermon some years ago a black Christian friend of mine said you know trouble with you white people especially white Christians is you don't think you have a culture and I said what are you talking about which of course showed that you know and uh and he said well you know what he says uh we non-white people know that uh the way in which you make decisions the way in which you make you know conduct your relationships the way in which you express your emotions are white ways there are other ways to do it but when you're in the church or when you're in you know you you don't consider those ways the white way you consider those the right way you know you just think well this is the way it's done and there are other ways of doing it and they what he always said is you know be be open to the possibility there's other ways of doing it don't don't think that your way is the only way to do it you've got you've got the reins you've got the power now what I'm going to what I try to say in this passage in this passage in this section in this last section is on the one hand in the church there is a limit to the kind of diversity racial diversity you can have in any church the minute I decide whether I'm going to quote Nietzsche or not in the sermon you know when I quote Nietzsche in the sermons I'm moving toward people who know what Nietzsche who Nietzsche is or even think wow that's kind of cool that's interesting I never understood that about Nietzsche and other people who be totally put off I don't know who the heck he is I mean every illustration I use every time we choose a piece of music we're moving culturally towards some people and away from others so there's oh there's no way that a church can uh on the one hand there's no way a church can possibly comprise the full spectrum of all the different racial and ethnic groups there are there is a Korean way there is a white way there is a black way there's a Latino way to make decisions in a group and and and yet when when Redeemer staff get together to make a decision I can't do well you know in March we did the Korean way in April we'll do it I mean I know I I've been on staff I've seen Korean church staff and when you make a decision the oldest pastor speaks first and says this is what I want to do and then the next person makes a minor revision by the time you get down to the youngest pastors there's nothing to say other than wonderful ideas you know and then but that's not very democratic you see so in a white church what you do is you actually get those you know the eyes that listen to everybody else and then you know kind of make a decision move in a different direction uh there's a limit you know I'm white I can't I you know I'm a white guy I started the church I uh I recognize that that's going to be the dominant that's going to be the that's going to be the dominant note here and yet according to what I think the Bible calls us to do we need to be bending over backwards to try to be as diverse as we can anyway we are supposed to be being willing to be in convenience being willing to recognize that just because I like music this way just because I like decisions this way just because I like it this way doesn't mean it's the right way uh and what we have to do as much as we possibly can is be as diverse as we can uh be as inconvenienced as we can make as be be as patient as we can be as sympathetic as we can to comprise as many people and many different groups of people as we can we should be a bias toward ethnicity in a church as long as we understand that every church only has a limited range of people that it probably can hold to we need to be very careful not to trample on each other's cultural sensibilities not just assume our culture is right we're supposed to be serving one another and reaching out to one another and not just trampling on each other and uh and doing power politics inside the church I think we've been fairly free of that in Redeemer but I think by and large most of us white people over the years have still been relatively oblivious it's just a way of saying you know the white way is the right way and uh we need to actually have an we need to be open enough in in just in a little speech like I'm making here to have non-white people come and say yeah I've always I've always wanted to ask you this and I haven't had the guts until I heard you say this so now I'm going to ask you about this uh and we need we need to have that kind of attitude inside the church because we've got to be different than the way the races get along outside the church so let me close this in prayer and then I'll tell you where you're going next let's let's pray for a second our father uh we here we know we are a church of people in Manhattan who are pretty ambitious I mean we wouldn't be here otherwise uh there's a lot of bright people there's a lot of people who are eager to uh make progress in their careers uh people who are here very often are folks who have been very shaped by the uh culture's uh story that your individual rights and your individual here we are, sitting and saying, no, the gospel story is different. How are we going to let this sink into our lives so the way in which we treat each other and use sex, money, and power makes us distinct? Only with your help. And I know, with each other's help. And so help us to help one another in this next hour and constantly in our community here at Redeemer. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
