TITLE: Sex and Gender in the Community – Case Study, Pre-Marital Sex
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Life Together in Gospel-Community (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-gender-in-the-community-case-study-1-pre-marital-sex/

============================================================

This is the last MCM for the year, and, you know, in the very beginning I set out with a subject, and what I was going to do was we were talking about community this year in our teachings. Sorry, I'm getting a little closer. And we were talking about what it means to build an alternate city. New York is a city, but we're called to be a city on a hill. And when Jesus Christ says he calls us to be a city on a hill in Matthew 6, Matthew 5, in the famous place in the Sermon on the Mount, he says you are a city set on a hill, and you're supposed to be showing forth the glory of Jesus Christ so people will praise God for their good works. And we said you can't be on a city, you can't be a city on a hill by yourself. That's the theme of the year. When God calls you to be an alternate city in New York City, we're supposed to be creating a city so the world can see what a city would look like under the lordship of Christ. And you can't do that by yourself. You can't do that just by coming to services and having a great quiet time. You have to do this by creating an alternate society. The church is supposed to not just be a congregation of individuals who are coming for inspiration and even for salvation in the more individual sense of that term. We're all supposed to be coming together to show the world a community of the king, a community in which power, money, and sex, for example, we've been looking at that this year, are used and conducted in a very different way. So now that you know, if you've been coming, you know that. One of the things I discovered is this is a very big subject and there's no way we can get done with it in the ten months that we had, the ten meetings that we had. And so I just gave up. And I said, well, there's next year. I'm not going anywhere, hopefully. A lot of you aren't going anywhere, though a lot of you are, because it's New York. However, so I didn't get finished. But remember what we started doing is we set down some basic principles for how sex, money, and power, the big three, operate differently in the church. And we've really set down more principles. We talked about multiculturalism and racial reconciliation and power sharing. We talked about money and possessions. We talked about sexuality. But we haven't gotten down yet to anything very nitty-gritty. And one of the purposes of this meeting is since you are leaders in the church, you're going to be in positions where you're giving people guidance. And I wanted to start to at least begin to do some case studies and create some papers that you can take hold of and look at and say this is guidance that my church is giving us on how we are going to be conducting ourselves in a community with regard to this issue. Now, one issue that is constantly coming up to me and has got to be coming up to you, or if it's not coming up to you, it's because people just don't want to bring it up, but it's out there. And that is the Christian understanding of not adultery, but sex between two people who aren't married, is a big issue. Take a look here in the very middle of the first page. This is the case study we're going to look at tonight. Let's take the principles and just apply it to one very, very, very practical issue. We love each other. We're dating. Why can't we sleep together? Fairly. We're not married to anybody. You know, we're not married to each other either. But what's wrong with that? Now, as I put down here in the middle of the middle paragraph, in sophisticated urban settings, like New York, the Christian ethic of abstinence outside marriage is not even on the periphery of our of their mental maps. It is considered, at best, laughably unrealistic, at worst, pathological with psychological hang-up, and an abnormality. Christians that profess the biblical sex ethic can expect to be met with incredulity, sarcasm, hostility, and when you're in the midst of a budding new relationship and that happens, it's a horribly painful thing. And this is almost a routine problem that is happening all the time in Redeemer. And one of the reasons why we, you know, 70 or 80 percent of the people that go to Redeemer are single. However, those of you who are married, you're surrounded by, and your brothers and sisters are single people. People in your small groups are single people. So you're dealing with this all the time. Now, right now, mainstream opinion in a place like New York City goes like this. The mainstream view goes like this. Adultery is usually wrong because it hurts the one you made a promise to. But there's nothing wrong with sex between two loving, consenting adults. And that's not only the pervasive view in a culture, but it actually is a view that is pretty pervasive inside the Christian community, too, now. Very often it's not brought up. There's just lots and lots of Christians out there who say, well, I'm not going to bring it up because I know there's a lot of people with a pretty conservative view here, but I just don't see it that way. They're just not telling you. You know, you may be the small group leader. they know that you wouldn't approve. But there's just lots and lots of Christians today that are conducting themselves on the basis of this and really pretty much don't feel that that's that big a deal or that big a problem. They know there's other Christians that disapprove, but they, you know, what you don't know, what you more conservative kinds of Christians don't know won't hurt you. And so it's not even brought up. Or in many cases, it's brought up. If you are married and raising a family, I've had at one point every one of my sons come in and sit down and say, gee, Dad, I know you're not supposed to commit adultery, but where does it say anything about, you know, premarital sex? Every one of my kids has come in and sat down because their friends say there's nothing in the Bible about that. So what do we got to do? Let me give you a case study. How do you respond? How do we respond as leaders? So we're being, we're not talking about all the big cosmic stuff we talked about before. Let's ask ourselves, how do we deal with that? And it's a big issue in a place like Redeemer. It's a big issue, I think, in any big city church. It's probably a big issue everywhere. But let me give you a couple of, let me give you some background. Biblical attitudes, I'll be quickly on this, but they're important. There's three basic contenders with the Christian view of sexuality. Whenever you find out what a person's sex ethic is, underlying it is a more, it's more of a worldview, always. I think I've tried to teach you that here. And there's three basic kinds of attitudes toward premarital, you know, sex that are grounded in different worldviews. The first one is what I call realism. Now, that's what they call themselves. Sexual realism says sex is a natural appetite. When you feel like doing it, do it. Just be careful. Like all appetites, don't overdo it. Just like eating. You know, you find a way of expressing it. But it's just an appetite. This view of sex is usually called realism. And almost all the people who write public school sex curricula are realists. Because their whole attitude is, we're neutral. We're not going to tell you anything about what's right or wrong. They will just say sex is one more human activity among many. It can be very fulfilling. The important thing is to demystify it. Be responsible with it. Understand it's just a biological drive. Realize the consequences if you're not careful. Master it like any other skill and be responsible. And that's sexual realism. And it claims to be neutral, not terribly. Secondly, I'm going to call it sexual platonism. Sexual platonism says sex is an animal passion. And one of the most influential branches of Hellenistic philosophy, which is Plato, okay, and the stream. He didn't start it. It was part of a stream. Saw the body as bad and the spirit as good. The lower physical part of your body was the animal nature, chaotic, dark. And then there was a higher rational, more human spiritual nature, which is the civilized and the noble. Okay. This led to seeing sex as degrading, dirty, necessary evil. And I put down here, in many traditional cultures, the sex's dirty idea was attached to the traditional idea of the primacy of the family as the highest good and the main way to get an identity. See, in traditional societies, the family is everything. The individual is nothing. You follow your family. You invest in your family. You only have a name if you have a family. You're only a respectable person if you're married and have children. There's something wrong with you otherwise because identity comes from the family, not the individual. That fits in very well with the sort of platonic idea of sex because what it really says is sex is dirty but, as I put down here, it's all right for the higher good of having children. Did I say premarital sex? That's wrong. Sex period. That is a bad misprint. Sex period was forbidden. Oh, pardon me. Premarital sex was forbidden because it was dirty and sex was only allowable. See how I screwed up that sentence? Premarital sex was forbidden because it was dirty and sex itself was only allowable for the higher good of having children and building up the family name. Now, do you see? The way it's printed makes no sense. The way I said it does. Premarital sex was dirty but sex was okay in marriage because it was going for the higher good. Unfortunately, there's many places in the Christian church that this sex is dirty view has taken root. And the idea that truly spiritual people should refrain from sex, whether sex is only right to do if you were trying to have children, whether sexual pleasure was not appropriate for high-minded people or women, all these notions grow out of this view. Number three, I'm going to call it sexual romanticism. Now, sexual romanticism is a very, very important view, too. This is the idea of sex as a repressed creativity we need to release. Well, see, I think I mentioned this last time. The old Hellenistic worldview located the source of the old Hellenistic worldview and the old Hellenistic the physical. We need to get beyond it to the spiritual. But romanticism located the source of evil in the culture. The thought here was human beings in their pristine, unspoiled, original state were brimming with natural goodness and creativity in a society that stifles it. Goodness is achieved by liberating the basic primal instincts, which are in themselves pure. And romanticism fought a culture war in the 19th century with Victorianism, which believed that goodness is achieved only by suppressing the primal instincts, which are in themselves evil. Now, Victorianism is not particularly Christian. Romanticism isn't either. But romanticism is still with us. Romanticism certainly has sort of won the day now. And the idea then is, here's the comparison of the three and we can move on. The first view, the realistic view, sees sex as an inevitable biological drive. The second sees sex as a necessary evil. And the third way sees sex as a critical way of self-expression, a way to be yourself. For the biological realist, all sex is right, as long as you're being safe. For the platonic sexual platonists, all sex is wrong. But it's better in some situations. For romantics, sex is right or wrong as long as it's done in love. As long as there's interpersonal love as the primary touchstone that makes sex right or wrong. And just about everybody, I think, fits into one of these views. Biblical attitude is very different. It's in the popular mindset, the biblical Christian view of sex is what? The second one. That's how most people think of the biblical view of sex. But it's very different. Very quickly, number one, contrary to the Platonist view, the Bible teaches that sex is very, very, very good. I'll get back to this in a bit. You know, there's a lot of places in the Bible that a prudish person will be very uncomfortable with. There's nothing the Bible says that makes sex dirty. But number two, contrary to the realist view, sex is appetite. The Bible teaches that our sexual desires are broken and usually idolatrous. And what that means is, all by themselves, sexual appetites are no safe guide for practice. You can't just look at your sexual appetite and say, whatever you want would be good to have. C.S. Lewis illustrates that there's something wrong with our sexual appetites in a very famous place in mere Christianity, where he says, imagine a planet in which people pay money to go into a nightclub and watch someone slowly pull a sheet off of a hamburger, you know, inch by inch to bumping and grinding music. And everybody paid money to see it. Look at that. Look at that hamburger. Or what? He says, imagine a country in which all the freshman men, when they got to college, put up these pictures of banana splits on their wall. And steaks just, you know, oozing with succulent juices. And they went from room to room and they looked like, and look at that. He's got a steak in here. And they ran back and forth and all that. Now, C.S. Lewis says, if you found a planet like that, in which people treated food like that, you would say, these people must be utterly starved. And yet, then you find out that they're eating like crazy all the time. And then you say, something is wrong here. Well, he says, that's our human attitude towards sex. There's something wrong with this appetite. Sex does not operate like food. Sex does not operate like the appetite for food or for drink or for sleep. And he says, there is something very different. And he says, it's silly to imagine that your sexual appetite is like any other appetite. It's just not operating like that at all. There's something that's disordered it. And therefore, we can't just simply follow it. Number three, contra the romantics, and I'm going to show you this later, the Bible teaches that love and sex are not primarily for individual happiness. In fact, you really can't get out of the Bible the idea that, you know, you should be rapturously in love all the time. Otherwise, you shouldn't be married. There's some incredibly realistic stuff in the Bible that just, you know, if you have the romantic kind of mindset, you read it like the stuff that Paul says. He says, you know, if you really want to work for the kingdom of God, it'd be better to be single. But some of you just can't handle that. So find somebody to marry. And that's 1 Corinthians 7. You read that. He says, that's awful. But that's partly because, listen, a traditional society would not have a problem with that. It's those of us who have been kind of built, you know, have been marinated in the romanticism of our society and the individualism of our society that think that's just terrible. The Bible doesn't really fit into any of these three categories. What does the Bible teach? If you turn over, we'll find out. Now, unfortunately, though, some of this really I would love to go into more detail with. It's more important that I cover it all. I'm going to say that the Bible... of sex, and the ceremony of sex. The politics of sex, this is not something you heard me too much teaching about, but it's pretty important. Sex is sacred. It is because it co-creates a new soul. Now, a lot of what I'm going to give you right here is from Catholic teaching. Catholics are very, very smart about this. Catholics say, here's another reason why sex is not just like any other appetite. You don't sit down and eat a steak dinner, even with somebody you really like, and that produces a new human life into the world. There is something remarkable about the fact that out of sexual love can come another human being into the world. That's astounding. But now, it's not enough just to say that that all by itself is the purpose of sex. The reason I'm calling this the politics of sex is this. Most Americans, most modern people today say sex is a private matter. It's just, it's my business. You shouldn't be asking about that. This is a private matter of private reality, morality, and the answer to that is no, it's not. What you do with your sex life has a huge amount of impact. Now, most conservative theologians say on society, but I would like to say it has a huge impact on the church and the kingdom. Here's what I mean. The main purpose of sex in traditional society is to create families of, is to build up a family name. But the purpose of sex, I think, in the Bible, is to create families of disciples, new kingdom communities. And ironically, the main way we learn this is through the Bible's remarkable attitude towards singleness. Let me show you this. Christianity, unlike any other traditional religion or culture, holds out singleness as a viable and equally viable way of life. Jesus was a single person. St. Paul was a single person. By the way, one of the hard sayings I didn't get to, you know, I'm going to do, I'm going to do nine hard sayings of Jesus during the, or no, seven. Well, I'm going to do hard sayings of Jesus in my preaching this summer. One of the hard sayings of Jesus I decided not to preach on, though I'm going to tell you about it right now, is Matthew 19, 12, where he says, there are eunuchs that other, right, there are eunuchs that men have made, and there are eunuchs, what else? I forget the three reasons. But he says there are eunuchs for the kingdom of God. And a lot of people say, what in the world does that mean? And he's saying the very same thing that Paul is saying in 1 Corinthians 7. Jesus and Paul are saying that singleness can be the best way to minister as a sign of the coming kingdom. And that was absolutely unique. See, both Paul and Jesus are saying that you may find that the best way for you to show forth the world, to the world, the kingdom of God, it might be the best way for you to minister and to be active in the church and to do the various sorts of ministries you need to do in order to build the kingdom of God in this world. You might do that better as a single person than as a married person. And if you are called to be a single person, both Paul and Jesus are saying, that's a legitimate way of, that's a legitimate life. You might be a eunuch for the kingdom, is what Jesus says. And we've got to find a better way to translate that, otherwise I'm never going to preach on it. Because who's going to want to say that's what I am, a eunuch for the kingdom? Put a sign around your neck? But you see, look, Stanley Hauerwas, who was a professor of social ethics at Duke, a Christian man, says this. It's really kind of eye-opening. One clear difference between Christianity and Judaism and all other traditional religions is the former's entertainment of the idea of singleness as a paradigm way of life for its followers. In other words, Christianity was the first and maybe the only major religion that says singleness is a fine thing. You know, all other religions say that if you're a single person, you are not fulfilling what God wants for you. You're a freak. There's something wrong with you. Every other traditional culture treats singleness like that, long-term singleness. And let me go back here. He says, singleness was legitimated, though, not because sex was questionable, but because the mission of the church is between the times. It's the overlap of the ages. The kingdom of God is here, but it's not yet here. We must remember that the sacrifice made by Christian singles was not just in giving up sex, but in giving up heirs. See, he's giving up children, which to traditional society was, oh my goodness, who would do that? Why would you do that? And the answer is there could be no more radical act. This was a clear expression by staying single. It was a clear expression that one's future is not guaranteed by the family, but by the kingdom of God and the church. Or it was a way of saying, I know that we can people the kingdom of God not just through biological children, but by conversion. Are you following me? In other words, when the church looked at its single people and said, this is an okay way to be. We're singles and married together, and didn't just beat up every single person until they got married. a viable paradigm for life. And what that showed, the whole world must have considered that unbelievably radical. That's what Stanley Harawas is saying. Why? Because in the world, family was the idol. So, basically, the reason you had sex and got married was to have children so you could have a family. That's how you had a name. But the gospel says, no, your identity is in Jesus, and your identity is in the family of God, not just your own personal family. And the kingdom of God is the future for you, not your family, not living on through your heirs and your children and your grandchildren and your great-grandchildren. Isn't that interesting? But now, what that means is, if Christianity was the first religion to lift up singleness like this, what does it tell us that Christianity understood marriage to be, and therefore the purpose of sex? Let's keep going. What does that tell us about marriage? We are to choose between marriage and singleness, not on the basis, then, of whether we want personal happiness and status of a family, but on the basis of which state makes us most useful in the work of the kingdom of God. And so, Harawas says, now, that means, now, both singleness and marriage are symbolic institutions for the constitution of the church's witness of the kingdom. Neither can be valid without the other. However, if singleness is a symbol of the church's confidence in God's power to convert lives for the growth of the church, marriage and procreation, now, is the symbol of the church's hope for the world. Why? Well, look at this. This is beautiful. For Christians do not place their hope in their children, but rather their children are a sign of their hope that God has not abandoned this world. We're bringing children into the world because we know that God has a future for this world, and we're bringing children in this world to be disciples to the kingdom. We don't put our hope, our children are not our hope. We're having children because we have another hope. Therefore, the purpose of sex and family making is to create communities of the kingdom. What does that mean? That means that Christian prohibition of sex outside marriage is different than the traditional family one. In traditional religion and culture, premarital sex was totally taboo. That's the reason why in Muslim communities it's taboo. In Orthodox Judaism it's taboo. In every traditional society it's taboo. In Asian society, right, it's taboo to stay single forever. You need to get married. You need to get married, right? But singleness and premarital sex were both taboo, right? Premarital sex was taboo and singleness was taboo. Why? Because the family was an idol. That was the reason behind the premarital sex taboo. The family was our hope. It was the way to establish our name. The Christian taboo versus premarital sex is clearly different then in its inspiration because singleness is now considered a viable alternative. Now, notice I have a little footnote. Some of you are going to say, wait a minute. In most Christian churches I've been at, they do make single people feel like freaks. And therefore, in most Christian churches in this country, the reason that people really are against premarital sex is because they have the same idolatry of the family that traditional culture does. Yes, you're right. That's right. Well, then what would be a more biblical understanding of why we shouldn't have premarital sex? And here's the answer. A, we abstain from sex outside marriage because, sorry about that, it's a missing a word, because it undermines the character quality of faithfulness which builds community. Listen to Hauerwas again. As we will see below, sex outside marriage trains you to say, I want intimacy, but I don't want commitment. I want to have all kinds of things from you, but I want to keep control of my life. I don't want to give my life away to you. And that's why Stanley Hauerwas says, the issue is not just whether X or Y form of sexual activity is right or wrong in itself, as if such an activity could be separated from the whole way of life. See, that's what most people do. They say, if I want to sleep with my girlfriend or my boyfriend, that's a private matter. Hauerwas says, don't be ridiculous. He says, you cannot, you can't possibly separate that from a way of life. What kind of people are capable of supporting the mission of the church? Chastity, we forget, is not a state, but a form of the virtue of faithfulness that is necessary for a role in the community. As such, it is as crucial to the married life as to the single life. It's as crucial to the single life as the married life. Turnover. Another reason we abstain from sex side-side marriage is to witness to how God works in the gospel. God never gives himself to anyone in depth because they make an exclusive, unless they make an exclusive commitment to him, right? The gospel is, I have given myself utterly for you on the cross. The gospel is not religion. The gospel is not saying, God says, here's the rules, now come up to me. The gospel is, I've given myself utterly for you, now you give yourself utterly to me. And therefore, we abstain from sex side-side marriage because that's how God works. God would never say, I'll give you intimacy, but you don't have to be exclusively committed to me. You can worship other guys if you want. Why does God continue to say, no, I'm a jealous God? have to be exclusively committed to me or we have no intimacy at all. And therefore, the sexual exclusiveness traditionally associated with the Christian understanding of marriage witnesses to God's pledge that through his exclusive commitment to them, people will be brought into the kingdom. In other words, if you have sex and you're not completely giving yourself to the other person in marriage, but you still want sex, you're contradicting the way God operates. You're contradicting the gospel. C, we abstain from sex outside marriage because of our commitment to its use in kingdom building. If we are to have sex, we have it. This is the Catholic way of speaking, by the way. If we are to have sex, we need to have it in a place where it's open to new life, open to bringing life into the world, in a place where it's possible, at least. It doesn't mean you have to have children in order to be happily married or to be validly married, but what it does mean is you need to have sex in a place where it's even possible to bear and nurture children and disciples best within a permanent male-female covenant in a home. This is the reason why, see, first of all, sex outside marriage has huge political ramifications. It affects the community. It affects the future of the kingdom. It's not just a private thing. Secondly, the second thing we see is not only that sex procreates, but sex delights. Sex is sacred because it is an analogy of the joyous self-giving and pleasure of love within the very life of the Trinity. The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit live in a relationship of glorious devotion to each other, pouring love and joy into one another's bosom. That's, by the way, that's the literal word. They're in each other's bosom. They're laying against one another. They're pouring love and joy into one another over and over and over again. Sex between a man and a woman points to the love between the Father and the Son, as well as that between Christ and the believer. So, in spite of the realisticness of places in the Bible, like 1 Corinthians 7, which explodes the Romanticist's view of sex as strictly personal fulfillment, the Bible, on the other hand, celebrates sexuality. Sex is supposed to be recreational, wonderful. It mirrors the joy of relationship in the Trinity, and therefore it points to the eternal ecstasy of soul that we're going to have in heaven, not only in our relationships with God, but with each other. Now, what that means is, in the Bible, sex is actually lifted up. It's supposed to be very delightful. This is just like the first point is very anti-realistic. The second point is very anti-Platonistic. Here's a very interesting quote from Tremper Longman, my Old Testament professor friend. He looks at the Song of Solomon, which is in the Old Testament, and he says, the role of the woman throughout the Song of Solomon is absolutely astounding, especially in light of its ancient origins. It is the woman, not the man, who is the dominant voice throughout the poems that make up the song. She's the one who seeks, pursues, and initiates. In Song 5, 10 to 16, she boldly exclaims her physical attraction. At one point she says, his abdomen is like a polished ivory tusk decorated with sapphires. And Tremper goes on and says, almost every, well, every English translation just hesitates when they get to that. The Hebrew is very erotic. Most translators can't bring themselves to bring out the obvious meaning. It's a prelude to their lovemaking. There's no shy, shamed, mechanical movement under the sheets. Rather, the two are standing before each other, aroused, feeling no shame, only in joy, and each other's sexuality. That's the reason why there's a place where Lewis, C.S. Lewis, talks about sex as being one of the best places to see that God created reality not as a static thing, but as basically a dance. Have you ever read any of the Lewis's stuff at a dance? You know, Peter Kraft, who's a great writer, says that, you know, when Augustine was dying, he just wanted people to read him Psalm 51 over and over and over again. A little morbid. Peter Kraft, a great Catholic Christian writer, says that when he's dying, he wants the end of Paralandra read to him over and over and over and over again. And here's one of the things he says at the end of Paralandra. In the plan of the great dance, plans without numbers, without number interlock. And each movement becomes in its season the breaking into flower of the whole design to which all else had been directed. Thus, each is equally at the center, and yet none are thereby being equals. But some by giving place and some by receiving it, the small things by their smallness, the great by their greatness, and all the patterns linked and looped together by the unions of a kneeling with a separate love. Blessed be he. He said, what was that? I didn't, it went by too quick. Read it carefully. He's talking about sex. Then thirdly, sex not only procreates, it's sacred because it brings new disciples into the kingdom. Secondly, we said it delights because it's pointing to the joy of the Trinity. But thirdly, sex is a covenant renewal ceremony. And this is extremely important to understand when it comes to why, you know, the Bible forbids premarital sex. Look. Look. Bible, there are covenant renewal ceremonies. When God enters into a personal relationship with somebody, he's not so unrealistic as to think that emotion is going to serve as the basis for it. He always, he knows human emotions come and go, so there has to be something binding that will give us consistency and endurance. So what does he do? He always requires some kind of binding public legal covenant in order to create a support structure for intimacy. He never enters into a relationship with Abraham, with David, with Moses. He never does it without a covenant, never. There's always something, and it's got to be binding, and it's got to be legal, and it's got to be public. Public, it's far easier to be vulnerable to somebody who's bindingly promised to be exclusively faithful to you than to someone who's under no obligation to stay with you one more night. If you're going to be totally vulnerable and give yourself to somebody, it's a little easier. It's hard anyway. It's a little easier to do it to somebody who's gotten up before all of the authority structures of church and state and all of your families and sworn to be utterly faithful to you. It's still, by the way, pretty hard. But why in the world, God says, would you want to make yourself vulnerable and naked and open to somebody who doesn't actually have any obligations to you at all? And that's the reason why God himself always operates in covenant, always operates in covenant. He always gets, and then it's not enough just to make a covenant. Even that's not enough. He regularly gets his people together to reread the terms of the covenant, re-remember the history of his acts of grace in their life, and re-commit and renew the covenant. Now, I should have given you some other scripture references to look at, but Deuteronomy itself, the whole book of Deuteronomy, is what? If you read it, you'll see it's a renewal of the covenant God made at Sinai in Exodus 20. He gets people together and he says, let's renew it. Let's remember the terms of the covenant. Let's remember my acts of grace that got you into that covenant relationship. Let's renew our commitment to one another. Now, the most obvious example of this, by the way, is the Lord's Supper. And if you want to know, the Lord's Supper is a covenant renewal ceremony for baptism, basically. In the same way, sex is a covenant renewal ceremony for marriage. See? Next paragraph. Marriage is a covenant. Covenant is necessary for sex to create a place of security for vulnerability. But, though covenant is necessary for sex, sex is necessary for covenant. The covenant will grow stale unless you continue to revisit and reenact it. So, the ultimate covenant renewal ceremony, by the way, is the Lord's Supper. The Supper reenacts and renews the giving of Jesus to us in the breaking of the bread, the pouring out of the wine. And on the other hand, it reenacts the total self-giving of ourselves to Jesus in the receiving. We reenact the total commitment and the oneness we have in Christ. Sex is a covenant renewal ceremony for marriage, just like the Lord's Supper is a covenant renewal ceremony for salvation. Sex is an acting out physically of the one, you know, physically you become one. And that's acting out and mirroring the oneness in every other area of your life. You're one legally, you're one economically, you're one physically, you're one psychologically, you're one spiritually. And therefore, sex is a covenant renewal ceremony by physically, in the physical oneness, showing forth all the other oneness that you've got. What does that mean? It means you can't have premarital sex. Why? Because if your physical oneness is mirroring, sex was supposed to be reenacting a covenant of oneness. If you're not married, you're not one legally. You know, you're not one in every way. Now, let's get this down to brass tacks. And the way to do that is to turn over to page six. Let me, yeah, six. If somebody does come to you and say, I can do this pretty quickly. If somebody does come to you and say, where does it say in the Bible that you can't have sex before marriage? We know that thou shalt not commit adultery. Where does it say in the Bible you shouldn't have sex before marriage? Well, let's run down it. Number one, one of the problems we have, by the way, is the Bible assumes it. And so there's a whole lot of places it assumes it, even though it's not saying it, and you have to read a little more carefully. For example, look at the middle of this paragraph, number one, the pervasive understanding of the Bible. You know, in 1 Corinthians 7, Paul says that he wishes more Christians would choose a single life. And then down here it says, so he says that he wishes more people whereas he is. And yet he repeatedly says, it's good for them to stay unmarried, as I am, but if they can't control themselves, they should marry. It's better to marry than to burn. This is the middle of page six. Now, you know what that means? He's assuming if you're not married, you're not going to have sex. if you the whole paragraph the whole chapter assumes it and yet is there any one spot in that paragraph or that chapter that says oh by the way you must not have sex before you're married it assumes it that's one of the reasons why the bible uh even though it actually speaks to this constantly uh it's sometimes you can sympathize with people who say i can't find a chapter or verse but let me give you another the meaning of the word porne from which we got our word pornography uh it is a little hard for christians with modern translations to cite chapter and verse against premarital sex because one of the problems is the translation of the word porne or pornos porne means fornicate pornos means a fornicator in the older king james version this word was translated fornication but the word is archaic now or actually it's been it's actually been ridiculed into obsolescence uh therefore in modern translations usually this word is translated sexual immorality oh wow isn't that helpful but it's not it's too vague a term and yet it obviously has a specific meaning because look at these two places here's first corinthians 6 9 neither fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers will inherit the kingdom so fornicator and adulterer are two different things are they not why would they be distinguished or hebrews 13 4 marriage should be honored god will judge the adulterer and fornicators now what that means is go down to the uh the italicized words this is what most commentators will tell you pornoi has reference to those who engage in sexual relationships outside of marriage in general and the word moikoi adulterers denotes those who are specifically unfaithful to the vows of commitment expressed in marriage in other words the word porne means to ever have sex with anyone other than the person you're married to so it's a general term that means that adultery all adultery is fornication got it but there's a lot of fornication it's not adultery the word fornicate means to have sex with somebody you're not married to the word adultery means to have sex with somebody who's not the one that you are married to and that's the reason why the word fornicate if you turn over to page top page seven the fornication is constantly condemned the bible condemnation of fornication is just comprehensive and yet it's going to be hard for the average person to open a bible and point to one say there's where it says it that's one of the problems but here's the most one of the most interesting things and one of the most interesting places in the bible that talks about sex outside marriage is in first corinthians 6 17 look at where it says unity of the unities do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body for it is said the two will become one flesh this is very interesting clearly when paul says you've become one flesh with that prostitute he must mean something different than mere physical insertion because if he just meant physical insertion paul would be saying don't you know that when you have physical union with a prostitute you're having physical union with a prostitute i mean clearly he is saying that when you have sex it sets up some kind of relationship flesh in the bible can be what's called a synecdoche i think that's how i pronounce it that's the kind of word that's so seldom used that i can never hear pronounced i don't know how you pronounce it but uh in which a part represents a whole synecdoche is where you say i'm counting noses what you really mean i'm counting people okay but you say you know the nose represents the whole and therefore when the bible says talks about flesh sometimes it means your body but when when you know when god says i will pour out my spirit on all flesh he doesn't mean i will be pouring out spirit only on your bodies but what he means is i'm pouring out my spirit on all kinds of persons and what that means then is when it says sex makes you one flesh is sex makes you one person so what does paul mean when he says that pornos has become one flesh with a prostitute he can't mean you're automatically married in the eyes of god or something something kind of artificial like that he's decrying the monstrosity of physical oneness without all the other kinds of oneness that every sex act should mirror he says every time you become one with someone physically it's a monstrosity because that physical union is supposed to mirror a union in every other kind of part of your life in short look at the next paragraph sex with a prostitute is wrong because every sex act is supposed to reflect an absolute and complete covenant unity there has to be there should be paul is saying there must be no physical union unless there is also every other kind a legal economic personal emotional spiritual union unless you have one kind of unity you can't have all the other kinds of unity so now let's let's just go down the kind of questions you might get asked page eight here's a set of questions somebody says marriage? You see where we are? Just one down. Why can't you have any sex outside marriage? Here's what I say. The Bible sees physical oneness to be a monstrosity without social, emotional, economic, and personal oneness as well. To be physically naked with somebody, listen here, to be physically naked with somebody without making yourself legally, emotional, socially naked to them by marrying him or her is inconsistent, selfish, and unjust. Sex is only for a relationship in which each partner becomes totally vulnerable and committed to the other. If you will not marry, you have not really committed, you have not made yourself vulnerable to the other, you're trying to keep control of your life. What the Bible says is, you do not have sex with somebody unless you've lost control of your life and entered into a covenant with them, which means you are under obligation. There's a complete unity. Don't be physically naked unless you're personally naked and economically naked, you see. Naked means vulnerable. So, don't be physically vulnerable to somebody unless you become vulnerable in every other way. Otherwise, it's a lie. Well, somebody says, that's a negative view of sex. I think the Bible, the Christianity has a negative view of sex. Well, yeah, what I usually say is, there's piles of pure gold that are never left lying around. They're usually surrounded by bars and guards. Why? Not because we value gold so little, but because we value it so much. The only reason we have boundaries around sex is not because we have a dirty view of it, just like the reason we have boundaries and guards around gold is not because we have a low view of it, because we have a high view of it. Well, what's so harmful, people say, about premarital sex? This is the best I can go with, but I think it's on the basis of what Paul says about the prostitute in 1 Corinthians 6. The Christian view is that sex is a commitment apparatus. Sex literally makes you feel committed and vulnerable to the other person. It enables you to trust the other person and give yourself to the other person. It's a covenant renewal apparatus. So, when you use it outside marriage, you may find yourself very quickly feeling married and feeling completely given and obligated to someone emotionally. Even though that other person has no legal, social, or moral obligation to stay with you. Now, that creates a huge problem. It seems monstrously incongruent to sleep with somebody and have that person available to others. So, this incongruity leads to a lot of jealousy. It leads to hurt feelings. It leads to obsessiveness that otherwise would be true. One of the things I've discovered is that if you're sleeping with somebody you're not married to, you really don't, breaking up, you know, breaking up is hard enough. Breaking up becomes almost impossible. You stay in relationships longer than you should. You sort of feel obligated. You feel covenanted because, in a sense, that's what it was built for. You, people stay trapped in relationships. It makes, there's very often a terrific amount of jealousy because why should you trust the person? C.S. Lewis puts it from a diabolical point of view in Screwtape. You have to remember this is a devil talking. That's why you have to, you know, the trouble with giving Screwtape letters quotes is because you have to think inside out. But look, Screwtape says, the enemy, that's Jesus, has described it as one flesh. You can make humans forget that the man they call Paul did not confine one flesh to married couples. Mere copulation for Paul makes one flesh. Remember? That's 1 Corinthians 6. The truth is that wherever a man lies with a woman, there, whether they like it or not, a transcendental relation is set up between them which must be eternally enjoyed or eternally endured. The transcendental relation was intended to produce, and if obediently entered into, too often will produce. He's being, you know, too often. Affection and the family. What does he mean by a transcendental? I've been thinking about this for five or six years. I think he means something. I get it. He's not saying you're married in the eyes of God or something magical or artificial. What he's saying is there is a bond that is created that you either enter into and it becomes something great or you don't enter into and it becomes a bondage. I think he's right. It just makes it very, very difficult. Turn over. Therefore, if you do have sex outside marriage regularly, here's what you start doing. It won't be long until you'll have to fight against the natural tendency to feel closure and commitment. You'll have to harden yourself. You'll feel it, and you'll say, okay, I'm not going to do that. So you'll have to harden yourself against sex's power to soften your heart and make you more trusting. The problem is that eventually sex no longer will have a covenant-renewing power, and even after getting married, to some degree, it may not have as much power as it would have otherwise. Ironically, sex outside marriage eventually works backwards, making you less able to commit and trust another person. Number five, I don't think I have the self-control for this. This is too hard. Three things. Yeah, it's too hard. Number one, you need the spousal love of Jesus if you're going to live a life of sexual abstinence in a place like New York City. Sex cannot complete us anyway. Only Jesus can complete us. And therefore, you have to recognize that... ... remarkably existential relationship with Christ if you're going to stay abstinent sexually, as far as I can see. You can read that little section. Sex can't completely fill the cosmic need for closure that our soul seeks in sex anyway. Only the beatific vision will end all of our loneliness. Paul is realistic that not everybody has the gift for lifelong celibacy, but actually almost everybody that I know, unless you get married at the age of 14, is called to celibacy at some point. And you can be called to celibacy easily inside your marriage, very easily.
