TITLE: Sex – The Biblical Guidelines (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Sex, Singleness, and Marriage
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-the-biblical-guidelines/

============================================================

is not just simply a God who invented the spirit life, spirit world, but also invented the physical world. We thank you that you honored our flesh and our bodies forever by taking upon yourself a human nature, and thereby you showed that you are going to redeem both soul and body, even as you created both soul and body. We pray, therefore, that we might come to understand what it means to follow you and have a faith that embraces both a view, a God-centered view, not only of the soul, but also of the body. And we ask that you'd help us to get there tonight, because we've spent the time together looking at your word and stirring each other up to love and good works. Now we pray that we can really do that. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen. Let me tell you how we're going to do this little short course. There's three weeks to the course. I think, I forget, but I think the title actually gave you the title of this little series was given to you, and it really is an outline of the three weeks. I think it's a sex, singleness, and marriage. And that's what I want to do. I want to spend this week on the subject that in some ways I've spoken on most, but not enough for some of you, as you've been telling me. And that's sex. Biblical understanding of sex with some practical guidelines for how to actually live out the biblical view of sex. Right? That's the first week. Second week, we're going to be talking about singleness, which really, by that I mean what it means to live as a single person, and especially in regard to relationships. And I'll be talking about the, you know, the complications of relationships when you're single. And well, in many ways, there's going to be lots of overlap and bridges between the three weeks. Otherwise, they wouldn't be in a series. But so next week, we'll talk about singleness. And there's lots of stuff. Lots of stuff there. I'd like to talk about two opposite idolatries that tend to dominate the lives of singles as the idol of dependence and the idol of independence. You know, people who are dominated by the idea that I've got to get married, which is just about as bad as getting dominated by the idea that I can't get married. I mustn't get married. I don't want to get married. Both of those are idols. And of course, it complicates our relationships. I always thought it was really sweet. And listen, you're not going to tell me, you're not going to get this from me. Over the years, if you've been around evangelical church life, every so often you'll see seminars or hear somebody talk on a biblical view of dating. I want you to know something. You're not going to hear me say anything about that. There is no biblical view of dating. The Bible says nothing about dating. Nobody dated back then. You know, you're three years old and, you know, you're walking along with your parents and your parents notice, oh, there's another wonderful family that have a three-year-old child of the opposite gender. How convenient. What a coincidence. How about if we betrothed them to each other? Okay. And that was the way it was. My grandmother was betrothed. My grandmother was betrothed when she was 12 to my grandfather by her parents. And, you know, whenever I used to say to her, well, how was it? I mean, what did you, how did you feel about that? And she said, I had a great marriage. What are you talking about? Everything was fine. The Bible doesn't talk about dating, but it talks about plenty of other things that we can, that bear on dating, therefore. So don't worry. We'll talk about that next week. But you're not going to hear me talking about dating in a sense, saying here's what the Bible says. But that's next week. Then the third week, we'll talk about how do you know if you should marry somebody. Okay? So that's the three weeks. Tonight, now the biggest problem is that you're all in different places here. And I'm going to have to aim for a particular kind of person and figure that the rest of you, if you're not, if you're not right where I'm aiming, figure that even though you may not get everything, how do I say, you may not feel like I'm coming right up the center of your alley, but there's plenty of pins I think I can knock down on your alley anyway. And that is, there's a lot of folks who have been, the main reason I decided to do this was a lot of folks who say, look, I've heard you preach on what the Bible says about sex. I've only actually done that twice, last December and sometime in the spring. And a lot of you, you know, a lot of you are not from our church here, and so you didn't hear that. A lot of you are from the church, but you haven't been coming that long. So plenty of you haven't heard this. Some of you have, though. And those that have have said, you have trouble with it. It's wonderful. It's nice. I see what the biblical sex ethic is, but I really need a lot more details. I need a lot more details about how you actually live that thing out. How do you engage in what you might call sexual self-management? And so I wanted to give a few more details, but probably what I'm going to do is I'm going to go over a lot of the stuff that if you were in on those sermons you heard, then I'm going to go into some more detail, but then the real way to get detail from me is to ask me. So we'll have roughly a third of our time together. We're going to go to 9.30, and roughly a third of the time is going to be the questions and answers, which is really the best way for you to get details. So here's how I want to start. Let's take a look at what I still think is the locus classicus. On the subject, it's 1 Corinthians 6, and I'm going to read... Oh, let's see. What should I read out? 1 Corinthians 6. There we go. 1 Corinthians 6, and I'm going to read... Now from verse 12 to the end. Everything is permissible for me, but not everything is beneficial. Everything is permissible for me, but I will not be mastered by anything. Food for the stomach and the stomach for food, but God will destroy them both. The body is not meant for sexual immorality, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. By his power, God raised the Lord from the dead, and he will raise us also. Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ himself? Shall I then take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute? Never. Do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute is one with her in body? For it is said, the two will become one flesh. But he who unites himself with the Lord is one with him in spirit. Flee from sexual immorality. All other sins a man commits are outside his body, but he who sins sexually sins against his own body. Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have received from God? You are not your own. You were bought with a price. Therefore, honor God with your body. I'll go on a little further, because Paul says something about marriage, and I'll show you that this also has a great deal to do with the biblical view of sex. Now, for the matters you wrote about, it's good for a man not to marry. But, since there is very often much immorality, each man should have his own wife, and each woman her own husband. The husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife, and likewise the wife to her husband. The wife's body does not belong to her, but to her husband. The husband's body does not belong to him, but to his wife. Do not deprive each other except by mutual consent, and for a time, so that you may devote yourselves to prayer, and come together again, so Satan will not tempt you because of your lack of self-control. And we'll just end at that point. There's plenty more to talk about. All right. First, unfortunately, the best and easiest way to tell you what the biblical sex ethic is, is to say it negatively. Now, when I say the easiest way, it means it makes it very clear. And I'll explain why it's insufficient, but at least it's clear. The Bible says is that sexual intercourse is for a man and a woman in the context of marriage, period. It's always said that. Some people, just as an aside, there's people that say, you know, when is the Christian church going to wake up? Times have changed. People don't operate like that anymore. Or, sometimes, when I've said this or talked on this, I've heard people look at me and say, you know, period? It was all right up to that point, but period? And they say, you know, aren't you one of the, you must be one of the more conservative, rigid, sectarian pastors. And, you know, there's two things to say about this attitude real quickly. First of all, all Jewish religion, all Christian religions, both the Orthodox and the Catholic and the Protestant, every branch of Christianity, every branch of Judaism, Islam, virtually every major religion has always, always taught the same thing. You know, it's very hard to find something that all the religions have consensus on. I mean, to say that somebody that says that statement that I made, with a period on the end, is someone who is in a backwater sectarian cult group or something, just doesn't understand, really, the history of the world. It's silly to say that. It's as mainstream a statement as you can possibly say. And people say, well, but times have changed. You know, Christianity was for, that particular ethic was for another era. It was for another time. I've seen it in the New York Times. I've seen people say, well, you know, it developed in Europe. And in Europe, it was good to have just a few children, you see. And so you, you, you, and you didn't, therefore you wanted to control people's sexuality. Because there was a lot of people, theory. Because there's limited land in Europe, that's where Christianity developed this idea of only sex inside marriage and this kind of, this rigid view of sexuality because they didn't want a lot of people and they didn't want a lot of population. And that's where the Christian, the rigidity of the Christian ethic came from. And that is pretty silly. I'm glad you laughed at it because Christianity originally came up with this approach to sex in the midst of the Roman Empire. To say times have changed, Christians have to change, you're forgetting something. Christianity originally broke on the scene and swept through the remnant world because it believed in the sexual purity. Everybody looked at them and thought they were crazy. And yet as people moved on into the Christian faith and began to experience the power of the biblical sex ethic, it, it won, it won. It wasn't that, you know, Christianity, this, this ethic was born in an era or a culture or a time when people were repressed. And therefore now we see that that's not a healthy approach to things and people can't live like that and therefore it's not practical so we have to start to loosen up. That's just not true. Christians were people who had already been as loose as you could be. The whole culture was that way. And when Christians found out that what the scripture taught, what Christ taught about sexuality worked in an amazing way and they began to find that instead of destroying their ability to trust and relate to people, it renewed and strengthened and in a sense recreated their ability to commit and have integrity in relationships. The new approach to purity was part of the power of early Christianity. It's part of what really gave it its dynamic and absolutely transformed the culture in the city where it started. So it's silly, absolutely silly to say that kind of thing just won't work anymore. What do you mean anymore? It's always been out of step. And yet at the same time it's also transformed plenty of lives. It's as mainstream as possible. Now, the trouble is to say that sexual intercourse is for a man and a woman inside the context of marriage, period, in the context of marriage, period, is to say it negatively. And the reason it's insufficient is that it doesn't tell you anything about what sex is really for. It tells you only what sex is not for. And one of the things we've got to do a bit of work on is there's a number of you who already know this rule. It's been hanging over your head for years. A lot of you were raised in churches where you were taught this. You were never really converted people. You never experienced the new birth. You never knew God personally. Later on in adult years, you come back into Christianity because you find yourself actually changed and renewed. You enter into a personal relationship with a father through the son, and wham, lo and behold, you're confronted again with that same old sex ethic, which you pretty much abandoned for a number of years. And you say, well, I guess I've always seen this, but it's really hard to give myself to it because it still seems like such an unreasonable request. And you really can't give yourself to it, and you can't have the fruit in your life that adherence to this ethic will bear unless you understand not just what sex is not for, but what it's for. So what I want to do is I want to go through and explain a little bit more about what sex is for. But first, let's do it the right way. Let's start by way of negation. There are two views of sexuality that Paul knew when he was writing to his Christian friends he had to deal with. They were opposite views, and I would suggest that they're still to some degree here today. Now, in Paul's time, the one view was the view, it was what we call the platonic view. Now, please get out of your mind the way the word platonic is used today. I mean, there's a relationship. A platonic relationship means just a relationship without touching one another. I mean, there's a relationship here, but we're talking about literally the philosophy of Plato and the Platonists and Greek philosophy that Paul knew taught that sex is dirty because the body is bad. Plato basically said the body is bad, matter is bad, the soul is imprisoned in the body, and it needs to get free, and therefore sexuality is a dirty thing, it's a bad thing, it drags you down, and on the other hand, Paul also had to deal with the position of the mystery religions, and the mystery religions essentially had this further view. The mystery religion says sex is an appetite. When you get hungry, you eat. When you get sexy, you sex. You know, you just go ahead and fulfill it. What's the big deal? What are all the rules and the regulations about? Now Paul is very, very careful to distinguish the Christian view from both. And you are not going to know what Christianity says sex is for unless you first understand that neither of these views are the right one. Very important for you to understand that. In fact, let me summarize it to start with, then I'll go into it. We are neither to despise nor deify sex. To despise sex means to think of it as a dirty thing, to think of it as something that we shouldn't talk about, to think of it as something that's in some ways defiling. And I can show you this real quickly. The Bible doesn't act like that at all. On the other hand, we can't deify sex. And what I mean by deify is we can't simply let our instincts do what they want. We can't treat our instincts as if they're God. We can't say whatever you think is right. You can't just follow your instincts because they're disordered. Paul teaches that sex isn't dirty, but our sexual instinct is disordered. And unless you understand those two sides, you're not going to understand what Christianity says sex is for. Briefly, anyway. First of all, Paul very clearly tries to deal with the platonic side. Down in the section we read about marriage, we'll see that Paul says something very interesting. And he says sexuality is such a critical part of marriage that it belongs to both of you. The wife's body is not her own. It's her husband's. The husband's body is not his own. It's his wife's. Which is a way of saying that no one has rights over sexuality, but both of you owe sex. It's a big part of your marriage. And it's commanded. He says, go to it. That's a paraphrase. Right? He says, no, look. It says, do not deprive each other except by mutual consent. It says the husband should fulfill his marital duty to his wife and the wife the marital duty. And it's using a word. It's talking about conjugal rights. It's talking about sex. Is it possible that God would command through his apostle something that's defiling? Heck no. God invented sex. You know, and when he invented sex, he looked at everything and he says, it is good. He put the benediction, benedict, good word. He put the good word on it. You know, when Adam was alone, there was a malediction. It is not good that man should be alone. When he brought the man and the wife together, and when he brought the Adam and Eve together, it was good. God invented it. And the Bible is something, the Bible actually, is very embarrassing for people with a Platonic or Platonist view of sex. It's very embarrassing. If you go to the Song of Solomon, you know, for hundreds of years, people have been trying to figure out how we can read the Song of Solomon spiritually. You know, how do we read it in a way that's edifying? You read it as it is. It's unusually graphic love poetry. Unfortunately, if you don't know Hebrew, you don't know how graphic it is because the translators constantly wimp out on translating the thing the way it is. You know? I mean, it translates words caress. Hmm. I wonder what that word really means. It means a lot more than caress. There's plenty of stuff in the Song of Solomon. And it's in the Bible. Why? Because what's wrong with that? You know, God talks about married conjugal love without blushing at all. It says in Proverbs 5, 18, it says, it's a command, by the way, it says, in marriage, it says, a man must be ravished with his wife's breasts. Proverbs 5, 18, remember that. You might be one of your verses that you might want to memorize. You know? You know? Put it in your little blessing box verse. There's lots and lots of statements like that. And, you know, the only reason I'm telling you these things, knowing that I'll get a laugh out of you, is because you've got a layer of this view in you or you wouldn't even be laughing about it. You're laughing about it because you do, at a certain level, think sex is not the kind of thing that you can talk about in a very normal way. When you read the Bible, you'll see that the Bible just doesn't have that air at all to it. The biblical writers don't have that air at all to it. But there's no tittering in the back of the bus when you read the Bible. There's nothing about it except when it's wrong, they say it straightforwardly, and when it's great, they talk about it straightforwardly, too. And Paul talks about it that way. And, you know, he just knocks it down. In fact, we'll go even further. Here's why. In Romans chapter 7, 1 to 6, it tells us something really amazing. It talks about the fact that the relationship between a husband and a wife is like the relationship between Christ and the church. And it even goes so far as to talk about the fact that the husband bears fruit through the wife's body. The Old Testament talks about us, or Israel, as being the bride of Jehovah. The New Testament talks about us as being the bride of Jehovah. imagery goes like this. Just as when a woman puts herself literally in the arms of her husband, and fruit children are born then into the world through her body. In the same way, the Bible says, if you put yourself into the arms of God through Jesus Christ, through that intimacy, great things happen in the world. Fruit is born into the world through you. It's an amazingly intimate analogy. It's a daring thing. I know Jeff White was using it for helps in worship, in the evening worship, 6.30 worship, just a couple weeks ago. And what it's saying, what the Bible says so clearly, and if any of your jaws drop, it just shows you basically do believe that the Christian view of sex is the same as the Platonistic view of sex, and they're not the same at all. The Bible teaches us that the ecstasy and joy of sex was invented by God to give us a foretaste of the intimacy and closure that we will experience when we know God face to face, and when we see him on that day, and we enter into union with him, and into union with everyone else who loves him. What is sex for? Sex is an analog. It's an analogy. It's a signpost is another way to put it. It's the intimacy and closure that you hunger for in sex can only partially be given to you by sex. Actually, it's a way of trying to arouse in us and show us what we really are after. The Bible is constantly talking about sexuality and a relationship between a husband and a wife as an analogy for a relationship with God or with Christ. Now, when we meet him face to face, and when we enter into a relationship with him that's complete and full, and when we know that kind of intimacy, and we know that kind of union, and that kind of, I use the word closure, closure. Because all of us know at some incredibly deep level that we don't like standing alone. That's what sex is about. We want to be with someone. We want to be one. We want to be together. We want closure. And when we experience that closure with God, and we know the absolute bliss, and we know absolute ecstasy and joy and total fulfillment, will that be fun? Will that be joy? Will that be glorious? Of course. And therefore, sex is glorious and joyful. There's a glory about sex. You know, the Bible never looks at it as defiled. How could it possibly and turn around and use it as the analogy of our relationship with God? It's an amazing statement. People are constantly saying, when I say this, whenever I talk to this, they say, gosh. And it shows that they haven't ever really come to grips with what the Bible has to say about sex. The Bible's view of sex is higher than the view of any other book, any philosopher I've ever read. Far higher. It doesn't just go out and say sex isn't dirty. It doesn't just say sex is good, clean, fun. It doesn't just say that. It goes way beyond that. So far beyond it. Now, that shows that the Platonistic understanding of sex is not the biblical. But on the other hand, don't forget the mystery religions. Well, you see, with this incredibly high view of sex, we also see Paul saying these things. And when it comes to up here in verse 13, 14, 15, it says, the body is not meant for sexual immorality. Verse 18, flee from sexual immorality. And what is sexual immorality? It says, if you unite yourself to a prostitute. Now, it's not talking at all, as we can see. It's not talking about just the fact that a prostitute is somebody you take money with from. It's saying, for the two will become one flesh, but he unites himself with the Lord is one with him in spirit. The problem that he's talking about is sexual oneness with somebody, apart from every other kind of oneness, is a monstrosity. To have physical oneness without all the oneness that comes with marriage, that's what Paul's talking about. And he says, flee sexual immorality. Now, kind of quickly before we move on, why? Why would he say that? If sex is so great, if it's got the foretaste of glory in it, if it's this glorious thing, why in the world is Paul so concerned about it? Why does he talk about how serious it is? And he goes so far as to say that sexual sin, whereas it's not more unforgivable than other kinds of sin, really can disorder you in a pretty deep way, because he talks about this. He says, I don't know where it is. He says, do you not know that your body is a member of Christ himself? Shall I take the members of Christ and unite them with a prostitute? He says, all other sins a man commits are outside his body, but he who sins sexually sins against his own body. He's talking about something pretty fundamental. Pretty fundamental. Now, sex is so important, it's not just an appetite, because it's a whole lot closer to the center of reality than that, because it's a whole lot closer to the center of your being than that. Therefore, sin has hurt it in a way that it hasn't hurt your physical appetite for food, let's say, because it's so close. Now, what is sin? Sin, in the Bible, is the bent of the whole person to want to be God instead of be under God. That's what sin is. Sin's the bent of the whole person to want to live for yourself and to be your own God and to live for your own glory, to do things your own way. It's sin that makes us use people. It's sin that makes us always want to put ourselves in the center. Now, of course, sin can hurt the appetite for food, but you see, when you're dealing with food, you're dealing with an inanimate object, an object that can make no claims on you, makes no demands on you, but when you're talking about sex, you're talking about a relationship with another person, and that's different. What's happened is because sex is so close to the center of who we are, sin, something that I don't think anybody can really deny. If anybody says, I don't believe in sin, okay, what are those keys doing in your pocket? Stop locking your door. Stop locking your car. Just get rid of your keys for a while, and then I'll believe you don't believe in sin. Now, everybody knows about sin, and sin has disordered us, and we know it has, but because sex is so critical and so glorious and so wonderful and so close to who we are, therefore it's been disordered in a more deep way. Now, the way, the far and away, the best analogy, and some of you have read this or heard this, that it drives that home is the hilarious analogy that Lewis uses in one of his radio talks over the BBC that he did in the 1940s, and when he talked on sexuality, he says, just imagine if you could go to a country like this. Imagine going to a country where you've noticed that when young men go off to college and get out of town for the first time, and they go off to college, the first thing they do when they go into their dorm rooms is they put up on the walls these great big color posters, life-size, full color, you know, pictures of food, hot dogs, hamburgers, you know, just dripping with juices, ice cream sundaes, and what the guys do is they go, you know, from room to room saying, oh, wow, look at this one, and then they go, and they go, oh, wow, like that, and everybody sits around, and they think that you're doing something really cool, and you look at them, and you say, what's going on? Then you find out some of these guys on Saturday nights go and drive off to some places and lay down a lot of money to come into a club, and in the club, there's low lights, and there's bumping and grinding music, and everybody's sitting around on a stage with their tongues hanging out, and up on the stage is something that's covered, and slowly, bit by bit, the cover is pulled off, you know, bit by bit, in, in, in a, you know, in rhythm with the music, and as it's pulled off, inch by inch, you can see underneath is a roast turkey, and everybody goes, everybody whistles and screams and yells and says, look at that, and then they come back the next night, and somebody pulls it off a hot dog, and everybody goes, and you say, what is the matter with these people? Now, what would your conclusion be? They're added, what would your conclusion be about their appetite for food? You'd say, first of all, these people must be starving. They must be starving. Why else would people walk around like this, and look at these things up on the wall, and pay money to watch somebody pull, you know, the cover off of a hot dog, you see, in rhythm? Why would they do that? And the answer is, well, they must be starving, but then you say, you find out, no, no, that's not true. As a matter of fact, a man came along 40 years ago, you know, Dr. Sigmund somebody, and he said, our biggest problem is we don't eat enough, and we're repressed about food, so the last 40 years, everybody's been eating everything we possibly can, and looking at food, and putting posters up about food, everything, and you know what? You know, we've been eating like crazy. Then you look around and say, but why are you still acting like this, then? And the only conclusion would be that there's something unbelievably perverted about, or something deeply and profoundly disordered about your appetite for food. Well, this is the way we act towards sex, and what Lewis is trying to say, can you really, really believe that our appetite for food and our appetite for sex is the same thing? Not at all. Because we're, because sexuality, more awry. We can't deify sex, and I'll say this again. Deifying sex means to let your instincts have their head, in a sense. You know, like you let the horse have their head, you just throw the reins down, you say, I'm not going to take the horse where I want it to go. The horse knows the way to carry the sleigh, you know? And so I'm just going to let the horse go. And that's to let the horse be the driver. That's to let the horse be in charge. And what the Bible says again and again is if you understand anything about sin, if you understand anything about your own heart, if you even could look at it objectively, the way Lewis said, was giving you this great illustration, look at the way you act about sex. There's something deeply wrong with the way in which you act. You can't follow your instincts. Something's gone wrong with them, okay? And essentially, if you make sex central, if you give it, in a sense, its way, it will try to fulfill all the desires for intimacy and closure that you have for God, and it'll try to fulfill it through relationships with human beings, if you give it its way. And what will happen, as you'll see, you're not going to get much out of it at all. Well, sex is a signpost to God. And as J.I. Packer says, a signpost. Now, if you camp under the signpost, you're going to get nowhere. When you see the signpost that says 50 miles to New York, you don't say, we're here. We're here, honey. The Empire State Building must be here somewhere. Get the kids out of the car. Unpack everything. I'm sure our hotel's around here somewhere. It doesn't work. And yet, that's what we're doing. We see the signpost, and we say, we're here. Get the kids out of the car. All right. Now, look. If it's true that sex is not something that we're going to use properly if we just follow our instincts, but on the other hand, if we see it as a glorious, incredibly important, wonderful thing, not to be despised, not to be looked at as something defiling, then where are we left? Where we're left is to follow what the Scripture says, which is what we should have done to start with. Now, what the Scripture tells you, here and elsewhere, I'll give you a quickie, actually. There's three biblical purposes for sex, three. The first one is procreation, which means that one of the things the Bible tells us that sex was invented for, we learned this back in Genesis, is that God invented sex as the way through which we propagate the race. We can't stop there. One of the reasons the Roman Catholic Church doesn't believe in birth control is because they do see that as the purpose of sex. They got that from St. Augustine. And Augustine had some real problems, I think, and he's never getting rid of his own Platonistic understanding of sex because he was a Platonist, he was into Greek philosophy, never really got rid of that and pulled it right on in. And so you'll find that the Roman Catholic Church doesn't believe in birth control. Here's the reason why. If the purpose of sex is always to have babies, then to ever use birth control would mean you're frustrating the reason that God invented sex. You see? It's fairly simple. If that is the biblical purpose for sex, then you must never use birth control under any circumstances. Because if you're ever using birth control, you're frustrating God's purpose. However, if there's more than one purpose for sex, then there's no problem with birth control. And Protestants have always seen that there's more than one. That's a big difference in Catholic theology of sexuality and Protestant theology. There's a second and third view. The second view is for fun. If you read Song of Solomon, if you read Proverbs 5.18, it brings joy. A man must be ravished with his wife's breast. What's ravished mean? Joy. You see? It's recreational. And Protestants have always said, look, you know, that's what the Bible says. And therefore, there are reasons for sexuality besides procreation. But if we stop there, we're in trouble, too. Because, you see, if you believe only the first view is the biblical purpose of sex, then you're really going to have a Platonistic approach, which is what the Roman Catholic Church officially has. And you're going to be against birth control and so on. And if you actually only believe in the second, first and the second, then you're really in the position of the mystery religions, aren't you? Where you're saying, well, yeah, sex is fun as well as a way to procreate, and therefore let's go out and do it wherever we want and wherever we should. There's a third purpose of sex. And it's alluded to here, and it's mentioned in a number of other places. The purpose of sex is sex is a unitive act. I think I wrote this down somewhere. Sex is only for fully, permanently, completely committed relationships because sex is a way of cementing and enabling relationships. is a non-verbal communication. It's God's appointed way to say to another person, I belong completely and exclusively to you. Therefore, it's a unitive act. Now, I'm going to say this four times in different ways until you get it, all right? I mean, the next four points are all the same point. I'm just going to keep trying to say this again and again. What Paul's saying here is to have sexual union, physical union, with this woman, who would be a prostitute, without having all the other kinds of union is ridiculous. It's a monstrosity. It is frustrating the purpose of sex. Look, another way to put it. This is another way to put it. What happens physically has got to have for its context the same unification at every other level. In other words, physical unification has got to have as its context social unification and legal unification and moral unification and psychological and emotional and spiritual and every other kind of unification. For example, when you have sex, to one degree or another, you become naked. In the Bible, sex and nakedness are put together, and rightly so. When you're naked, you make yourself physically very vulnerable. But if you say, I want to have sex with you, but I don't want to marry you, what you're saying is, I want to physically be naked, but I don't want to be naked to you in any other way. I refuse to be vulnerable to you in any other way. I don't want to have any strings attached. I don't want to be committed to you. If I would marry you, then I'm at your mercy. That's right. If I marry you, then I'm committed to you. I have to make decisions with you. I can't make my own decisions. If I marry you, then if something goes wrong, you know, what's wrong in your life ends up becoming wrong in my life. I don't want to make myself vulnerable to you. I don't want to commit myself to you. I want us to be physically vulnerable, and I want us to be physically one, but not in any other way. And you know darn well that that's what sex was built for, because when you first started having sex, that's how you felt. When you first had sex with that first person, you felt married. It seemed like a monstrosity to that person the next day in school, or the next day you saw him, or her, didn't have to have any. There was no obligation there. No real obligation. You see, early on you know, down deep, that this is what God invented sex for. Even if you don't believe in God, you know that this is what it's for. It's just a monstrosity to have one kind of unity and not every other kind of unity. And you see, if this is the third purpose of sex biblically, now you begin to see why to say no sex outside of marriage is not just the way my algebra teacher used to give me homework. It was just to keep me off the street. It was just to keep me in. That's not when we say, thou shalt not commit adultery, no sex outside of marriage. We're not just saying because we don't want you to have too much fun. That's not what the Bible's saying. The Bible's saying because you'll break it if you use it any other way. Don't put unleaded gas in the car, because if you do, you'll break it. Not just because we like to have rules for people like you. Thou shalt not commit adultery if you do it any other way. It's built for you to say to one other person, I belong completely to you. And if you use it to say anything else, you'll destroy it. One of my favorite illustrations at this point in this, whenever I give this talk, is the Star Trek, you know, the famous Star Trek episode, not the movie, but in TV, The Trouble with Tribbles. Do you remember The Trouble with Tribbles? The big problem in the very beginning is that there's some governor of some, you know, wimpy little asteroid somewhere, and he's got a shipment that he's trying to guard of some kind of hybrid grain called what? Come on, Trekkies. Doesn't everybody remember the kind of grain with the name? Quadro Triticali. Who said that? That's great. Do you want to finish up here? Quadro Triticali. I don't know. It's The Trouble with Tribbles. And so what happens is the governor of the satellite puts out a priority one distress call because he feels that he needs to get a starship to guard his grain in case somebody might steal it. And he puts out a priority one distress call, and it's some kind of signal, you know, beep, some kind of signal that comes out through space. And it always means something incredible like invasion or our planet's about to be destroyed. And so Commander Kirk shows up and says, well, where's the invasion? You know. you know a whole hour you know show to deal with anything less than that because it's uninteresting unless you're unless you're trying to save some planet from utter destruction. So when he finds out that the governor says no it wasn't really a major disaster I just called called you because I wanted you to come and I wanted you to guard this and that's this way I knew you would come and of course they get very angry because if you use a non-verbal communication signal that has been legislated for a one particular situation if you ever use it for another situation you've destroyed it it's completely useless nobody knows anymore it's just like the boy who cried wolf remember the Aesop's fable because he kept on crying wolf when there was no wolf when you have sex with somebody and you don't mean I want to marry you I am married to you I belong completely to you then essentially what you're doing is you're destroying your ability to entrust yourself to somebody else because what sex is I'll say it again it's another way sex is a way of cementing continually putting cement in a covenant sex is a covenant renewal ceremony a covenant is a binding legal contract a public contract when you get a job if you have to sign a contract that's a covenant it's legal it's not just two people on the street corner saying something privately we're talking about something legal and it's public marriage is not two people in the backseat of a car saying I'm committed to you that's not a covenant any more than somebody says yeah I'll pay you sixty thousand dollars a year in the back of a car and say well you have my word on it they said well I'd like a contract well what's wrong with you I'd like a covenant that's something public that's something done out in the open that's something done with witnesses that's something done that makes it hard for you to break your word sex is supposed to be a regular covenant renewal ceremony you build the covenant only in the context of marriage do you really really really have the security with which to be completely naked and vulnerable to somebody else marriage isn't perfectly secure everybody knows that lots of your divorce probably but it's a lot more secure than hey I love you honey in the backseat of a car and once that covenant's made what sex is supposed to do is a way of constantly renewing it if you use sex the way God invented it to be used to say I belong completely to you inside of a context where you do belong completely to each other then what will happen is every time you do it you use it properly it continually strengthens and renews that covenant it renews your ability to trust yourself completely it renews your ability to make yourself vulnerable in other ways besides physical but if on the other hand you use it outside of marriage it actually operates backwards it destroys your ability to be vulnerable to somebody apart from physically makes it harder and harder and harder for you to be totally committed and some of you see the fruit of that in your own life it doesn't mean anything anymore you don't have a way to say to somebody I belong completely and exclusively to you you don't have a way of doing that and it makes it harder and harder for you to trust and when what happens especially you know it's fascinating I know I remember uh hearing a minister once say that when he was counseling a woman who just was incredibly jealous of her husband and constantly jealous of her and he didn't know what what she didn't know what to do about it and she was going to her minister for some kind of help and suddenly one day the minister got this brainstorming said wait a minute wait a minute have you ever been unfaithful to your husband sexually in the last few years and she suddenly face went down she said well yeah yeah I have it was very wrong very bad I've cut it off I'm very sorry for it and and the pastor said well okay fine that's right I'm not going to rake over the coals for that I'm glad you've reconciled and repented and so on but do you see what you did to yourself and this is the reason you can't trust your husband you've lost to some degree you've hurt your ability to trust it's your commitment apparatus is what sex is and what you've done is you you've really undermined it you don't know what you mean now when you do it and it'll take time to heal you have to go to god for it and and that helped her helped her a great deal sex is a unit of act in the old testament you know there's two words for having sex one of them is a word that just means to physically get together the other word is yada to know ever notice in the old king james bible have you ever taken the old king james it says and and adam knew his wife and she begat seth and seth
