TITLE: Sex and the End of Loneliness (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Sexuality
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-and-the-end-of-loneliness-an-open-forum/

============================================================

A good, articulate, young, 20-something woman wrote an article in the New York Times magazine called Safe Sex Lies. And as a result, there has been an avalanche of letters every week, and some of them have been published, but there's been this enormous response. And essentially, the bottom line of the controversy is this, that there's a division between the baby boomers and the 20-something generation. And it goes like this. Essentially, what the 20-sums are saying, some of the letters in the article are saying this. It says, you know, the message coming through MTV, the message coming through the government, the message coming from all over the place is that now, in an age of disease, casual sex is over. Casual, spontaneous sex, that's gone. You have to be absolutely deliberate. You have to know who you're having sex with. You have to think it out. You have to be cautious. You can't just have sex anytime with anyone. Those days are over. It has to be cautious, deliberate. In fact, abstinence is a good idea. And you know what the author of this article said, and many of the people who wrote in to support her? What they said is, we resent that message. Casual sex is our right. We believe that the message of safe sex is exaggerated, and even if the danger is not exaggerated, we don't care. We'll take our chances, because this is our right. That's not an appetite. I have some friends who are diabetics. You know, I'm in my mid-40s, and a lot of people, a lot of men in particular, I guess women too, a lot of people are diagnosed as diabetics in their 40s. And those of us who really, really, really love sweet things, really love sugar, really love those sorts of things, when somebody comes and says, no more sugar, that's hard. Of course it's hard. That's a tremendous, that's an appetite. It's a deep appetite. But what do you say? You say, it's not worth dying over. And yet here's a group of people, and by the way, the diabetics are not picketing, saying we have a right to sugar. But, I know that's funny, but I'm trying to, listen, here's what's so serious. This is a very serious thing here. It is serious. It's really serious. And that is, here you have a bunch of articulate young people in the New York Magazine, New York Times Magazine, saying something, they're articulating what's really happening out there, and what's really happening out there is people cannot stop having casual sex, even if it means saving their life. They can't do it. That's not an appetite. There's something deeper going on than that. It's beyond emotion. It's beyond an appetite. Some people say, well, sex is really just another part of life. That's all it is. It's just another part of life. It's nothing special, nothing big. You're making too big a deal about it. It's just part of life. I mean, you shouldn't explain it all. You shouldn't try to understand it all. You're overanalyzing it. You know, give it a break. I don't believe that either. Take a look at popular music. Why is it that all parts of life aren't represented equally in popular music? Why aren't there more popular songs like, Hi-ho, hi-ho, off to work we go. Why aren't there more songs, whistle while you work? Walt Disney tried, you know. He tried very hard and nobody picked it up. And why is it, as I've been saying, why is it that work and recreation, the other areas of life, do not make you start to say things like, Like, my love is, you know, warmer than the warmest sunshine, softer than a sigh. See, some of you, you're laughing. It means you're at least in your mid-40s. This is Petula Clark. My love is warmer than the warmest sunshine, softer than a sigh. My love is deeper than the deepest oceans, wider than the sky. My love is brighter than the brightest star that shines every night above, and there's nothing in the world that can ever change my love. Now, that's a lie. That's a lie. You know, what we just sang, Luther Andross saying, you know, I'll love you forever. I love you more than the moon and the stars. You do not sing like that about your work. You do not sing like that about recreation. Why is it that people who don't believe any of that have to say it? It's not like any other thing. Christianity gives you an understanding of sex that alone can count for its glory. See, as Sting said, if you don't believe in God, then sex is just an emotion, or it's just a chemical, or it's just like any other part of life. Which means you've got a theory of life that leads you to expect different things than what you actually see in sexual experience. You can't account for its glory. Rationally and intuitively, you know it's not just that. What does the Bible tell us? What does Christianity tell us? Let me just give you three things that Christianity says about sex. And if you look at sex through this, it makes perfect sense. And if you don't look at sex through this, it doesn't make sense. Well, Christianity... you the basic outline then go back through it christianity says god made sex for joy god made sex for loneliness and god made sex for heaven now you got to understand all three or you're not going to be able to account for what how sex really works god made sex for joy god made sex for uh loneliness and god made sex for heaven first of all god made sex for joy the bible tells us the bible gives us an understanding of sex that as far as i can tell is unparalleled in any other religious book in any other philosophy in any other religious resource and this is what the bible says if you go back into genesis 1 and 2 you will see god bringing a naked man and a naked woman together and inspiring the naked man to say this at last is flesh of my flesh in genesis 2 he inspires adam into an erotic hymn of joy and delight and he brings them together physically as he brings them together spiritually therefore we're told we are to leave all others and cleave to our spouse and the two become one flesh now here's what the bible is saying the bible is saying that god intended sexual physical union to be a towering joy that carries the freight of a spiritual union as well in other words the bible says soul oneness and body oneness all come to a climax in sexual commitment so for example let me show you how how odd this is the greco-roman world was dominated by the philosophy of platonism plato from which we get our word platonic relationship and platonism said soul oneness is more important than bodily oneness that the important thing is to have soul oneness to have a union of of minds and a union of hearts and and platonism saw the body and sexuality as rather degrading that a platonic relationship was on a higher level on the other hand you had the mystery religions and the mystical religions and mystical religions very often wrote these wonderful wonderful books of of love manuals on how to have wonderful sex and very often sex was part of the mystical uh the mystery religions ritual but those books had nothing to say about soul oneness all they talked about is how to get the biggest sexual charge when you go to the bible you see something else let me give you two examples the one example is in the book of proverbs in the book of proverbs in chapter two uh there's a place where uh the wife is referred to in this case the husband is being uh addressed by the book by the author and the author says your wife needs to be your halup which is a hebrew word that means your counselor your best friend your most trusted advisor your wife has to be the person you respect most in the whole world your wife has got to be the person that you uh you that is your very best friend your most trusted counselor now this is an incredible statement in the context of the near east the ancient near east where women and wives in particular were property they were baby factories and here's a command that says you can't use that woman you don't just marry her she's not just a sex object she's not just a uh a uh a baby factory she's got to be your very best friend then in proverbs chapter five what you get to is where the same husband is commanded and you must be ravished with your wife's breasts ravished with her breasts in other words it's not enough to be her friend she's also got to be your lover you've got to have ecstatic sex as a necessity in your marriage can't be one without the other then when you go to the song of solomon which is this long extended love poem you've got some pretty astonishing stuff the first thing that happens in the in the song of solomon you have the the wife saying make me a seal on your arm you read this place me as a seal on your heart set me as a seal on your arm for love is as strong as death unyielding as the grave now a seal was something in ancient times that you put on something that belonged exclusively to you and she says i want you to belong exclusively to me and me to belong exclusively to you i want us to be absolutely one i want us to be utterly committed to each other but then when they actually get into the love poetry the love poetry of the song of solomon in the bible inspired by god as far as i can see is so red hot that there has not been yet a modern translator who's willing to tell you what it really says you you you Thank you. I have to, you know, be careful, just for example, in chapter 5 of the Song of Solomon, you have the place where the, I think it's not, okay, nope, pardon me, yes, okay, so here's where the, here's the husband, and he's looking at his wife, and he begins to actually do a prelude, a song of prelude to lovemaking, a song of foreplay, and he looks at her and says, how beautiful you are and how pleasing, oh my love with your delights, your stature is like that of the palm, and your breasts like clusters of fruit, I will climb the palm tree, I will take hold of the fruit, your breasts will be like clusters of the vine, the fragrance of your breath like apples, and your mouth like the best of wine. She then turns around and sings a song of foreplay to him, and she turns around and begins to talk to him about how great and how beautiful her lover is. And he says, my lover, my, the neck is ruddy, no, pardon me, I've got the wrong gender here, and this is what I was looking for when I ran off the stage to the right, and I never found it, my, my references, so, yeah, my lover is, this is the wife talking to the husband as she sees him coming to her, she says, my lover is radiant and ruddy, outstanding among ten thousand, his head is purest gold, his hair is wavy and black as a raven, his eyes are like doves by the water streams, his cheeks are like a bed of spice, his lips are like lilies dripping with myrrh, his arms are rods of gold, his body is like a polished ivory tusk, his legs are pillars of marble, his mouth is sweetness itself, this is my lover, oh daughters of Jerusalem, and this is my friend. Now, all the Hebrew translators I know will tell you that they just can't bring themselves to say, she's looking at him and she sees everything about him beautiful, and what it translates, it says his body is like an ivory tusk, but it's talking about his erect male organ. And she sees him and she sings a song of praise at the beauty of his sexually aroused body. And at the end of her hymn, she says, this is my lover and, oh daughters of Jerusalem, this is my friend. This, that is biblical sexuality. This cannot be my lover, I am not going to, let's see, first of all, this is my friend. This is the person I love the most in the world, this is the person who I respect the most, this is a soul oneness. I would not give myself physically to him unless I'd already give myself in every other way to him. There's a soul oneness before there's a bodily oneness. There's a soul oneness that is a context for a bodily oneness. But then she turns around and says, he's not just my friend, he's my lover. No prudishness here, no shyness, no mechanicalness about sex, exuberance, barefest rejoicing in eroticism. What have you got here? See? Oh the palm clusters, oh the tusks of ivory, oh daughters of Jerusalem. If this seems unusual to you, if you say, I've never heard this kind of language in a church of any sort, I'm not here to defend what churches have told you about sex. I'm not here to defend what any church has ever said to you about sex. My dear friends, the average church of a conservative nature splits soul from body by saying, well sex is kind of degrading, the important thing is spiritual oneness, right? The soul above the body. But the average liberal church splits soul and body in another way. It says, well you know, as long as you love each other, as long as you really care for each other, you can have sex, which means you can be physically one but without being spiritually one. See this woman says, this is not just my lover, he's my friend. And he has no right to his own life and I don't have a right to my own life either. We can't go to bed together and him walk off and have his own life. That would be physical oneness. That would be splitting body and soul. His body is one with me but his soul belongs to him. No. But on the other hand, not this platonic prudishness, not saying, oh the important thing is the soul. Heck no. Chase each other around naked. This is a biblical view of sexuality. God made sexuality for joy. What does that mean about God? It means it's a God who adores joy. It means this is a God who loves joy of the most exuberant and explosive kind. See? God is the one who brings them together. Adam and Eve. wow, look at this. This is God. This is God. But he refuses, you see, to split body and soul. Sex is to bring a joy that comes through the consummation of an absolute union of body and soul, and soul with soul, and body with body. Now, secondly, the second thing the Bible tells us is that God invented sex to respond to loneliness. If you go back to the Old Testament, you'll see that the way the story goes, and I'm not trying to get on into the various creation narratives, but the important thing is the teaching here. The way the story goes is that Adam is created, and he's lonely. That means, the Bible's teaching, that God created us with a deep need for connection. We were not meant to be islands. We have a relational, there's a relational nature, and we need a very deep connection. And as a response to that loneliness, God creates sexuality. And therefore, the joy of sex, contrary to what the books say, the joy of sex is not a joy in sex, but it is a joy in the condition of our loneliness being healed. There's a deep longing in the heart for deep connection with another self, deep oneness with another self. And the joy of sex is not the joy of sex. The joy in sex is the joy you get when you anticipate the alleviation of that loneliness, and when you experience to any degree at all, even the anticipation of, that deep connection with another self. Let me show you what I mean. Look at masturbation for a moment. Masturbation, you say, well, you can get pleasure out of masturbation, and there's no relationship. Let me ask you something. Even guys, even guys, when you masturbate, you've got to think of something. You don't just masturbate. There's no joy. It's not the joy of sex. There's joy in sex, because you have to, at least, to some degree, fantasize a connection with another self. God created sex to deal with loneliness. And here's, if you look at the Genesis narrative, you'll see that when God created sex, he created sex to deal with that loneliness by giving us a deep connection. And that deep connection has these characteristics. We want deep down to be naked. That means we want to be known. We want to be vulnerable to someone. We want another self to see us all the way to the bottom. We want to be naked and vulnerable to somebody. That's only part of what cures the need for connection. Secondly, we don't just want to be known. We want to be known by someone awesomely different, awesomely mysterious. The Bible tells us that God made the husband and the wife, the male and female, fit for each other. That means that they are different. The wife is concave where the husband is convex. And here's what's so interesting. Because they're different, they fit. There is something mysterious and actually very confusing about the other gender. And that, at the same time, is the very thing that attracts. This is true psychologically and spiritually just the way it is true physically. It's the difference that enables them to fit physically. It's the difference that creates this mystery. Three, we need to not just be known by anybody, but to be known by someone awesomely different than us. And then, lastly, the only way we get this need, this need for connection, this need for closure, to be completely met, is we need someone to know us to the bottom. Someone who is awesomely different. Someone mysterious. Someone who is awesome. And then, thirdly, we need to have that person promise. We need to have this person totally commit to us. We need to have this person say, I see you to the bottom, and I love you forever. You and you alone. You and you exclusively. That's why the love poems have all that. Forever. Only you. Only you. Forever. We need that. And we need to have someone know us to the bottom, who is awesomely different, and say, I am completely and utterly and permanently committed to you. And that can only happen when there's a union of soul and body. Together. Casual sex doesn't do that. Masturbation, I just tried to show you, doesn't really do it. And, by the way, self-esteem doesn't do it. But you can spend all of your life saying, all that matters is that I care about me. I know myself, and I like myself. And that gets hollower and hollower as you get older. I don't know. I'm older. So God invented sex for joy. God invented sex to deal with loneliness. But lastly. Here's the genius, right here, of the biblical understanding of sex. God also made sex for heaven. This is different than Eastern religions. Eastern religions believe that sex is for now. The physical is for now. Sex is just, you know, an accident for a while. But eventually we go into the all soul and sex is gone. The Greco-Roman idea was that once we get into the netherworld, we get rid of the whole idea of sex is degrading. This is totally different. What we have in the Bible, in Romans 7 and Ephesians 5, I don't have time to mention it, but this is basically what Paul says. Paul says this is a great mystery. But when you see a husband and wife experience oneness of soul and body in the most rapturous sex between two utterly committed people, utterly naked to each other, utterly known, utterly loved, mysteriously awesome to each other. For one brief shining moment, it's not Camelot that you feel. For one brief shining moment, Paul says, you're getting a foretaste of what it will be like to be utterly known and utterly loved and utterly united to the real mysteriously awesome different source of your souls, God himself. Sex is a foretaste of what it's going to be like to know God in heaven. That's what the Bible says. Now, you know why this is the genius? Here's what's the genius. This view, on the one hand, keeps you from degrading sex. This view, on the one hand, gets rid of prudishness forever. This is the reason why we can read the Song of Solomon. This is the reason why Christians can have this barefaced rejoicing and eroticism. It's the most glorious view of sex that any religion's ever come up with or any philosophy could possibly come up with. Sex is a participation, a foretaste of that. But on the other hand, here's what's so wonderful. If it's true that sex is a foretaste of heaven and a pointer to heaven, that means you don't have to have sex. That means the Christian view of sex is, on the one hand, it's more glorious than the people who wrote for New York Magazine can possibly imagine. But on the other hand, it is not something you've got to have. It's not something critical. It's not something crucial. Jesus Christ was a single man. He did not have sex. And he was a perfect human being. How could that be? Because, you see, the Bible tells us that what we really want and what we really need, ultimately, is the wedding supper of the Lamb. We need to stand on that day before the ultimate beautiful face, the face that we've been looking for all of our lives in all the other beautiful faces that we have surveyed. And on that day, we'll be naked to that face. No clothing, no armor can keep it out. And it will be utterly beautiful. And what we want more than anything else is that face, that awesomely mysterious other, to look at us and say, this is my lover, this is my beloved, and this is my friend. Now, the fact of the matter is that for someone to say to you, I want you to be naked and vulnerable to me, but if that person isn't naked and vulnerable to you, that's rape. And there won't be anything like that in heaven. Here's why. Well, you say, well, if I'm going to be naked before God, and I'm going to be open before God, that's awful. You know, Jean-Paul Sartre said, I can't believe in God because I can't believe that, I don't want to believe in a God before whom I'm always naked. Poor Jean-Paul. You have to read the New Testament, in which it says that God became a human being and he was so utterly committed to you that he became vulnerable, he was stripped naked on the cross. He became totally vulnerable to you so that you could see him face to face. He paid for your sins. Now, the great wedding supper of the Lamb, what does that mean in conclusion? If you're a single person, some people are going to say here, wait a minute, and you're telling me that the Christian view of sex is that I can't have sex outside marriage. Is that what this is all coming down to? This has really been interesting, but is that what you're trying to tell me? I mean, did you really have to take, you know, 25 minutes to do that? I mean, you suckered me. I'm just saying, be reasonable. Would God say, I'm going to pour all of my love into your heart, but I don't really care who you worship? I mean, you might want to worship other gods if you want to. You don't have to be completely and permanently exclusively committed to me. That's ridiculous. And when you first started having sex, in the very beginning, before you corrupted your own heart by telling it all sorts of things, you felt committed to that person and you wanted that person to be utterly committed to you because sex makes you feel married because that's the only place where God designed it for it to work. If you're a single person, it means on the one hand, make sure that you seek someone who can be both your lover and your friend. Don't do the things I used to do. Kathy and I will be quite honest to say that the way I used to operate is I used to look at women and I say, hey, these people could be my lovers and then afterwards I find out very often they were lousy friends. Then I looked at other women and said, oh, these people can be my friends, but I wasn't attracted. that's not what the Bible says, that's splitting soul and body. Single people, find someone who can be your lover and your friend. Find someone who can be your very best friend, and you'll see that there's nothing more sexy than to feel understood. Someone with whom you can have utter spiritual and soul oneness. But, on the other hand, if you're a single person, you have to realize that even now by faith, you can begin to taste the connection with God that really satisfies that itch that even the best human sex can only scratch a little bit. The wedding supper of the Lamb, the great dance. Do not, like Esau, sell your place at that great dance for a bowl of oatmeal. Do not sell your place at that dance for any dance here on earth. It's much, much better to be alone with God than to be lonely with all kinds of lovers who really aren't your friends, because they're refusing to make the ultimate commitment. This view of sex is the greatest view of all. You know, Joan Osborne has that hit song right now that goes, it's called One of Us. It's so ironic. What if God were one of us, she says. Just a slob like one of us. Just a stranger on the bus. No one coming out, no one phoning. Don't you know, Joan? He was. And nobody wanted him. And he was a stranger. Then she asked a line, I was reading an interview with her, and she says, the second line of that song really stabs me, because she says, if God had a face, would you want to see it, even if it meant you had to believe in Jesus and the saints and all the apostles? And she says, you know, I struggle with that. She said, in the interview. She says, if I knew that God had a face, but to see it meant I had to believe and I had to start to obey. See, even she knows instinctively you can't have intimacy without commitment. If God was going to show me his face, I'd have to be utterly committed to him. And she doesn't know whether she ought to be or not. And you know what that means? The only thing I can tell you is that means she has no concept of what it must be like to see the face of God. She has no concept. If she had any concept, if she had any idea that that is the face that you're looking for in all the beautiful faces of the world, she would say, I could give everything to get that, and it would be such a deal. I could give my whole life over, and I would be, of course, the gainer. And that's the only thing. Look at the one who was stripped naked for you on the cross so he could say, this is my lover, and this is my friend. Seek him first, and all the other things that you need will be added unto you. Let's pray for a second. Our Father, I ask that you'd help us as we conclude tonight to consider your truth. If I've said anything here tonight that's not a good idea, that's not true and consonant with who you are and your heart, I pray that you would enable us to forget it. And if I've said anything here that is true, I pray that no one here will be able to forget it until it bears fruit and brings us to give ourselves to you. Your service is perfect freedom. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
