TITLE: Sex – The Biblical Guidelines (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Sex, Singleness, and Marriage
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-the-biblical-guidelines-cont/

============================================================

Seth knew his wife, and he begat so-and-so, and you said, well, that's, man, they must have really, what does that mean? They knew each other, and they're having babies? You know, that must have been a pretty powerful kind of knowledge. It was. Because, you see, the Hebrew word for married sex and the Hebrew word for knowing someone else was the same word. Because sex was a relationship of utter commitment, of knowing somebody. Now, if you get all that together, and you think about all that, now, you put all that together, and you say, all right, how do I actually start to practice that? And let me give you some guidelines, and then we've got time for questions. And here are the guidelines. One of the guidelines is this. The Bible continually talks about, the Bible keeps talking about lust, and about being careful about lust. Jesus says, you know, he says, pluck it out. Deal with it. Don't let it take your heart away. Now, when Jimmy Carter said something about lust, everybody laughed at it. Remember that? He talked about, yes, sometimes I experience lust in my heart for women, and people ridiculed him. And that's, the main reason for that is because, if you don't have the Christian view of sex, you're completely, you might say, you're not nuanced when it comes to sexuality. You don't see any differences between real sexual passion and lust. Real biblical, holy sexual passion and lust. There's a big difference. What's the difference, you say? Well, lust is for something, but sexual passion is always for a person. You know, have you ever heard somebody talk about, you know, somebody on the prowl? And, you know, they say, you know, she needs a man tonight, he needs a woman tonight. Or I've heard people say to me, I need a woman tonight. And what you really need to say, if you have the presence of mind, is you say, my dear friend, you don't need a woman, you need a sexual thrill. And a woman is just a necessary piece of apparatus. You're not after a particular woman. You're after a sexual thrill. That's lust. If you're able to have sexual attraction for somebody, you have no idea who that person is. That's lust. Because, you see, real sexual passion and real sexual desire is not for a woman or a man in general, but for a particular person. And the more you get to know them, the more committed you are to them. And that's very sexual. That's very, very sensual. They're two different things. Frankly, oh boy. Another way to put this is, see, lust comes from that part of you that just, well, let me keep going. Let me keep going. You may ask me about that and I can get back into it. How then do you go ahead and deal with that part? Some people have come to me and said, I'm just eating up with it. Now that I'm a Christian, I realize now I can't deify my sex instincts like I used to. I realize sex is good on the other hand. What do I do about my galloping fantasies? What do I do about them? It's eating me up. Here's a couple suggestions. Just a couple. First of all, make a big distinction between the thought and the fantasy. You can't stop thoughts happening, but you can, you have a bit of time when a thought occurs to you. There's no reason to feel guilty about the thought at all. Remember, to admire, to admire sexual beauty, remember this? Since we're not platonistic about this, to admire sexual beauty is not wrong. To admire the beauty of somebody is not wrong. But then to sit and begin to entertain and start to actually put two and two together and to begin to think of yourself in relationship to that person who you don't know at all, at that point you're getting into a fantasy. One of the big problems, I think, is people don't know how to distinguish those two things. You either feel terribly guilty because of the thought, which is wrong, or else you move it right on into the fantasy, which takes some energy and which you do have control over. You see, you can't stop somebody from knocking at the door. You can go to the door and say, I'm sorry, I'm not interested, please go. But if you stand at the door and the person, you know, and the person says, I like to come in, and you say, well, I don't know, should I have you in or not? I don't know, it really isn't the right thing to do. I don't think I should have you in. Well, maybe, I'll tell you what, let me bring you on in and we'll sit down and talk about whether you should come in. See, that's completely under your control, and that's a lot of the ways in which you work with your thoughts, isn't it? See, some of you, just because it's knocking on the door, you say, oh, there I go again. You know, what's wrong with me? That's one thing. Instead, what you should do is, when someone's knocking on the door, you say, well, I'm going to have to get my mind somewhere else. Sorry, just don't answer the door. You don't get in and sit down and talk with the thing. You don't stand at the door and say, well, maybe I should come in and sit down, and we'll think about maybe whether you should stay or not. You really shouldn't, but let's talk about it. The first thing is make a distinction between the thought and the fantasy. Secondly, you need to fast. you can't get something to eat and you want to, you know, you're having a real busy day at work and you just can't get something to eat and you keep thinking, you know, I feel a little bit faint, I need to get something to eat, but I can't even get away. And you think about it and then you say, gosh, I'm hungry. And you can really, because you don't want to be going without food. You need food and you don't want to be going without food. And because it's been sort of thrust upon you, you find it excruciating. But if you, for example, you say, I'm going on a diet. And I like what happens when I diet. I like the way I feel better without all that sugar in me. I like the way I feel better because, you know, my clothes fit me. I like it, you see. And do you still not feel the same hunger when you're on a diet? Or if you're fasting for some reason? Do you not still feel the same hunger? Yeah, but you're also saying, but I like where this is getting me. And this is my decision. And essentially, the difference between a diet and being starved is self-pity. In a diet, you don't feel sorry for yourself, supposedly, because you've made this decision. You know where you're going to go. Now, a lot of us have trouble with diets. And I know the analogy falls short. Do you understand the difference here? I mean, I know it's not a perfect analogy. The idea is you get rid of the self-pity. You say, I'm going to not feel sorry for myself because I know I'm being deprived here. But if I don't deprive myself, the problems are going to be even worse. And therefore, I like where this voluntary deprivation is getting me. And therefore, when it comes to fast sexually, diet sexually, but don't starve. Then thirdly, the third thing, is you have to use, well, maybe somebody asked me about this. You have to use the gospel to overcome guilt for the past. Sometimes the reason a lot of us have got problems with our thought life is because of what we've done in the past. A lot of us have trouble with our thought life because we used to have trouble with our behavior life. And we've done things. You know, it's astonishing to me. The only reason I like to use the illustration, you know, the C.S. Lewis illustration, I like to talk about freshman dormitories. I remember, I remember the pictures of naked women in four or five rooms down the hall in my freshman dorm. That's, how long ago is that? It's 1968. I can still remember exactly what those pictures look like. I remember it. There was the first room, the second, third, fourth room. I can remember virtually every dirty picture on the hall. Why? There's so many more useful things that I could have in my mind than that. Now, what I'm trying to say, and that's just those pictures. The point is, because of our past behavior, because of things we've done, very often our minds can go crazy at certain times. And the only way to turn those things off is if you don't feel guilty about them anymore. It's the nagging guilt for the past, very often, in many ways, I think, aggravates the present. And you have to use the gospel on that. You have to say, hey, look, look at the people in the Bible who had far more lurid sexual past than me. Look at Tamar, who was guilty of incest. Look at Rahab, the prostitute. Look at these people that Jesus healed, that Jesus cleansed, that Jesus accepted, who he put into his genealogy, he put into his family, he turned into his closest associates. And unless you were able to use the gospel on your past like that, you might be really, really bothered by the thoughts. And then, the last thing. You know what's funny? I talk to people about this all the time, and they just, they blush, and they say, you know, I'm a Christian now. And for years and years and years and years, if I wanted to have sex with somebody, I just had sex with somebody. And now here I am, 45 years old, successful person, I got my own house in the country, and I'm asking a pastor, how far can you go? Because I feel like a jerk. And I've had several people ask me that or talk to me in that way. But instead of feeling like a jerk, you have to realize, it's just that Christianity makes you see distinctions. It gives you a much more nuanced understanding of sexuality. When you start to study and read and think, you begin to see a great difference between real, biblical, godly sexual passion and lust. It's easy for me to see that in myself at this point. And yet, before being a Christian, or if I never had been a Christian, I could never have told the difference between those things. Never. So now that you're a Christian, you begin to realize there's distinctions here. Distinctions. You see? You're a connoisseur now. Actually, whenever I, see, for example, my wife likes ballet and I like basketball. And, you know, what will happen is, when I used to be, I used to say, oh, Kathy, come here, look. Dr. J did this incredible slam dunk. She says, all right, all right. And so they show it on instant replay. And I said, what do you think of that? She says, they all do that, don't they? See, I say, but not like that. See, I can make distinctions. She can. I can see nuances. I can see. you see that? She'll do the same thing with me. She's like, come here and watch Baryshnikov jump. All right, so I'll walk on it, and I'll watch... Okay, now watch this, and I'll watch... Look at that. I said, but they all do that. If you're a Christian, the fact that here you are, a grown person, with in many cases a heck of a sexual history, and here you're asking me, how far can you go? Say, I feel like I'm a 16-year-old kid again. No, no. What's happened is you now begin to see that there's distinctions here. You can see fine distinctions. You can notice fine shades. You're nuanced again. Now, here's what I'm going to tell you. Because a lot of you may have been to seminars that tell you this is exactly what you can do and what you can't do. All right, I'm not going to quite do that, but I'll give you three guidelines at least. We're not talking about general relationships between people. We'll talk about that next week. We're talking about just the sexual aspect. One, all right, one, don't forget that, yes, sexual intercourse, if you define it as penetration, which is one way to define it, is something only for marriage. But we all know that it's made up of more than that, isn't it? There's a lot more to it. There's all sorts of intimacy. There's all sorts of things that lead up to it. And you have to figure it out, in a sense. You've got to figure out when you know that to stop what your body has started to do and is trying to get to penetration, there's a place where you have to realize, if I don't stop here, I'm going to be mighty frustrated. My body's going to be incredibly frustrated if I go any further and refuse to go through to penetration. Now, I believe people are so different that that is a rule, but I'm not going to tell you where that is. Now, Jeff White heard me say this six, seven years ago. You've got to think of sex very much like an escalator, which means you're coming on up the escalator and virtually everything you do physically has put you on that escalator to some degree. And at a certain point, now, if you've gone up the escalator three or four steps, you can almost always say, I don't want to do this. I don't want to go up there. That's right. I think I can find my shoes on this floor. I don't need to go up to that floor. So you turn around, take two or three steps off, and it's virtually no problem at all. But on the other hand, if you get almost to the top, and if you're not married, if you're Christian, you suddenly realize that there's no opening up there. You're going up to the top, and you suddenly realize the escalator is going to smash you against the ceiling. So what happens is, some people say, hey, as long as I don't do penetration, I'm still handling the biblical sex ethic. Well, what it means is, you come this close to having your brain, you know, your skull crushed, and you turn around, and you rush as fast as you possibly can to get down. It's very hard, because the escalator is going this way, and you're trying to get down, and you finally get to the bottom, like this, and you say, didn't break any commandments tonight. But, I don't know. Now, I want you to tell me, don't tell me, I want you to deal with that yourself. At what point? Essentially, you've gone on the escalator when you started to kiss. It's silly to think that you can't turn around and step off, but the point is, at some point, it's problematic whether you're going to get to the bottom before you get yourself killed. All right? So, the first thing you have to say is, since sex is a hole, not just penetration, you have to look at your own body and say, where have I passed the point of no return? It doesn't mean that you can't stop, but your body's going to be frustrated. You're all physically ready. You see? And so, the point is, do you always want to do that? Is that good for your body? And at what point do you realize you've really gone past the point of no return so that you're really going to be frustrated when you stop? That's the first thing. And you notice, I can't say, well, stop here, stop here. You have to figure that out. Surely, you know that. But, you're going to have to aim just a little bit under, just a little bit under where you think you can make it to the bottom without working up any kind of sweat. Secondly, here's another guideline. The second guideline is, commitment and contact go together. Intimacy and commitment go together. Now, I'll tell you why. I'll be as frank as I possibly can. The first time I held my wife's hand, I got sexually aroused. And some of you will probably say, yep, that's right. Now, women are saying, what? But, yeah, that's what happens. And I'll tell you why that happened. It's because your ego kicks in, I think, fellas. I think that's it. You say, oh my gosh, she's squeezing it back. You say, well, at the very beginning, that's quite a bit, you know, the big, somebody, my history professor used to say, the greatest possible difference is the least possible difference. You know, there's, when you're standing absolutely still, it doesn't matter whether you're going 60 miles an hour from zero or one mile an hour from zero, just moving is the big shift. It's the big change. Moving from where you are to moving is the big change. It doesn't matter how fast you're going. Just moving is the big change. In the same way, just moving is the big change. squeezing a hand or something like that, that's where your ego kicks in. And therefore, sometimes the most obvious, the most basic, the most gentle kinds of contact are sexually stimulating and arousing. That doesn't happen anymore, I'll tell you that. Does that mean, oh, the marriage, you know, the honeymoon's over? No, I think anybody, surely, a lot of you know how that works. It means as time goes on, the sexual arousal isn't there, you know, when you just hug or you just kiss, you see? Or you just have any kind of intimate contact with each other, it doesn't happen. And the reason for that is because the more committed you get, the less your, you might say, less your sexual stimulation is engaged with your ego. And the more it has to do with whether this other person is opening to you or not. And there's a communication, there's understanding. The thing that, eventually in marriage, the thing that is sexually arousing is to feel understood. And the thing that is sexually strangling is to not feel understood. It doesn't really matter about the candlelight, it doesn't matter what kind of underwear you're wearing, eventually. In the early stages it does, yeah. But eventually, does this person understand me? Does this person understand me? That's what makes a person a good lover. What this means is that as time goes on, there shouldn't be a whole lot of intimacy when there's no commitment. When somebody starts to say, I think there's a future for us, the intimacy moves up. And it can move up without you finding yourself getting as hot and heavy in some ways. And then when it moves up to engagement, it can move on up. In other words, as the commitment grows, intimacy can grow. It's natural. It's right. That's the whole idea of sexuality, remember? Sex is a unit of act. And therefore, the kinds of preliminary intimacy can happen the closer you are getting to that oneness. Thirdly, anybody ever hear of Reed Carpenter? Reed Carpenter used to say, when it comes to sexual and physical intimacy before you're married, just use the golden rule. What's the golden rule? It's fairly simple. Here's a person that you're in a car with. Here's a person you're at the theater with. Here's a person you're walking around with. This person may end up being your spouse, but may not. In that case, somebody's got your spouse tonight somewhere else. Hmm. You know how the golden rule works? Just treat this person the way you want that other person to be treating your future spouse. It's fairly simple. Don't do anything with her, guys, that you wouldn't want some guy out there who's got your real wife. And, you know, he used to use that. And actually, it's not such a bad idea. It's not such a bad idea. It's the golden rule. Now, I didn't go... If you're asking for something more specific, maybe, maybe, maybe I can give you some more specifics. But I might try to give you principles. Because people are so incredibly different. Their bodies are different. Their backgrounds are different. Their experiences are different. And therefore, it's mighty hard to give you the hard and fast rules. Other than the hard and fast rule, and that is sexual intercourse, is only for a man and woman within the context of marriage. Period. Okay, now, are you ready for some more questions? If you want to get more details out of me than you have gotten so far, it's time to stick a hand up right there. Sure. Go ahead. You just say it to me and I'll repeat it. Right. The years. The years, yeah. And what happens now, to some degree, I'd say two-thirds of the... Well, I'll just make a brief response, but it's not going to be completely satisfying because two-thirds, three-quarters of the answer to your concern, which should be talking more about relationships, which I want to get to the other two weeks. I know, though, that a big part of it is just simply a lack of sexual fulfillment. I think, though, the main problem with being a Christian is not so much that you have to sexually fast, but that it narrows down your options for marriage so badly. And I think that's the main problem behind your concern, and I think I'll have to talk more about that later. Now, the short answer is this. In a way, you're stuck, yeah, but you've got to find somebody who understands you. I'll go back to that again. What really makes sex great and what really makes love great, what makes a marriage great, is that somebody else is looking all the way into your insides, because you've opened up to them, and sees what... about and likes that, loves that, is excited about that, accepts that and loves you for that. That's incredible to be able to open up and to let people know really who you are, everything about you, and to have that person look and say, I admire that, I love you for that. See, that's love, that's romance, that's what makes a marriage, that's the motor for everything. When you become a Christian, you say, ah, the trouble now is look at all these great people that are out of bounds for me. But, you know, listen, even if there was no rule written down in the book about that, even if there wasn't a little verse that talks about being unequally yoked on believers, you would find after five or six divorces, which is what would happen, which is a lot lonelier than going ten years without being married, you'd go through divorces. If you get married to somebody who looks inside and says, oh, this Christianity thing, hmm, well, if that's okay, it's okay with me if you're into that. What that means is a person's looking inside and doesn't understand you, doesn't understand what you're really like, does not admire that aspect of you. And what happens is, as a Christian, that becomes such a big part of you, that means essentially the person likes, oh, they like your body and they like a little bit of your personality, they don't know who you are. They don't know who you are at all. And so what happens is when you become a Christian and you start to grow in that, even if there wasn't a rule, you'd find that it just means that there's fewer people that can really understand you and there's fewer people that you can really open up to. So I'm trying to say, even if you go a long period of time without finding somebody like that, the alternative, because now that the life of God is growing in you, the alternative would be generally a whole string of broken marriages and divorces. Now, you want to respond, you started to respond to that. Yeah. That's right. Well, yeah, well, look, listen, there's people who are in wheelchairs and they say, I look at everybody getting up and running around and they're walking and they're moving around and I want to do that and it's unrealistic for me to live a life like this. And what would you say if you have a friend like that? You'd sit down and say, well, there's no alternatives. And ultimately, in the end, when God puts a, you might say, a handicap in your life, what looks like a limitation, if you put it back in his hand, it'll mean something. It'll turn into an opportunity. It'll turn into an opening. What looks like a dead end, if you put it in his hand, turns into some kind of opening. Yeah, and, right. Now, listen, remember, so is the person in the wheelchair. See, we live in a fallen, we live in a fallen world and that means that there are, there are situations, being single isn't as bad as being in a wheelchair. But there's plenty of people who've been called to live in a wheelchair, all right? Being single is not as bad, I don't think, no matter what you say. It's not as bad. But people are called to live in a wheelchair. What are they supposed to do? Are they supposed to say, well, my life is over? No. Instead, they're supposed to say, I've got an opportunity. It looks like a disability from the outside. It looks like a disability from the human side. There's going to be a lot of lack of fulfillment, but I'm going to have to find ways to grow in ways in the wheelchair that I never would have grown otherwise. If you stay single for a long time, your challenge is to say, if I stop griping about it, and if I start to say, this is what you've called me to, I'm going to put it in your arms, I'm going to put it in your hands, Lord. Therefore, you're going to do things in my life that wouldn't have happened to me otherwise. That's what the person in the wheelchair has to say. It's what the person who's single has to say. But let me tell you one other thing. I mentioned this, when was it? It must have been, I guess, on Sunday. I have a great marriage. It's not enough. It's just not enough. My wife heard me say that three times on Sunday. She's not offended because I'm not enough for her either. Whenever you think, boy, if only I could be happily married finally. What it does, this sounds very strange. Being happily married, it's a little bit like whenever you see a rug with dirt under it or pockets under it, you push down the bubble here and it shows up somewhere else. It's great when you get married because there's a bubble that's been there in your life for a long time that does get fulfilled. I don't want to, I'm certainly willing to agree that there was hurts in my life and loneliness in my life that when I became married, went away. somewhere else that I have just as, as far as I know, is just as difficult for me to work on. The point is that marriage doesn't fulfill you. Nothing fulfills you but God. Your career success doesn't fulfill you. It's hard for those of you who have not had the career success you wanted to look at the people who have and hear them say, well, it's not good enough, I'm still discontent. And you say, yeah, I'd rather have your problem. Well, that's, be very careful. That's not the problem God gave you. You don't want that problem because the problem God gave you is the problem you're supposed to have if you're to be all God can make you be. So I have to say that whatever situation you're in, if you're smart enough, you'll see you're in a handicap. People who are rich, and I've known a few, have tremendous temptations and have all kinds of spiritual problems because of people who are always treading water financially have very different ones. And so I think that's the only thing I'd have to say. But the main thing is if you stay single for a long time, the alternative, well, I already mentioned it. Next week we'll talk about it. That's the biggest problem. I've had people immediately even say, I see what you're saying, but I don't want to convert because if I convert, it means a lot, there's a lot of people that would suddenly stop being marriageable for me. I've had people say that right to me. And I would say, but they're already not marriageable. You're already so close to Christianity. And these folks, if these people cannot see who you really are and understand you, you don't want to marry them. Wait till you see what happens. Okay, back there, yeah. Some people have done that both ways, and I think it has a ring of truth to it. I haven't. Go ahead. Go ahead. Yeah. We have a biological need for sex. Yeah, you have a biological need for sex. Yeah, it's not. No, that's different. That's different. But you see, there's. I'm afraid there's just too many people who have been happily celibate for a long time, even with the struggles. I don't think you say, well, they're just wired differently. I just, I think they have, I think they're thinking more clearly than you are. No, really. There's plenty of folks that have been able to exercise self-control. It's just, I remember when I go back to the diet idea. I know the analogy falls short because you eat something. Usually the stuff you're allowed to eat when you're on the diet isn't worth it anyway. But it doesn't count as food. But to say there's a biological need is not the same thing as to say it's a biological need to breathe. You have to breathe or you die. It's just not true that you have to have sex or you die. And there's an awful, you know, I did mention, my grandmother, she was betrothed to my grandfather when she was 12. You know, I would sit down and say, well, Grandma, why, why, I mean, didn't you, didn't, but you didn't love him, did you? She says, well, I learned to love him. And she learned partly because of expectations. They had no problem with expectations. If she had been raised with expectations like you can only be happy with somebody who's perfectly compatible with you. My grandfather wasn't compatible with her, but she said, this is going to be my husband. I'm going to learn to get along with him because that's what we do. And because of her expectations, she had a really wonderful marriage. I think one of the reasons why we have so much trouble, you know, controlling ourselves sexually is because of the expectations that our society throws on us, I think. Yeah, Ellen? Okay. Yeah. It is next week, but I'll, real, real, no, it's, it's fairly simple. Real, real briefly, there's a spiritual gift of evangelism and there's a, there's a duty of evangelism, right? The Bible says some people have a gift. That means they're real good at talking to people about Christ and seeing people come to fruit. And it's just, it just goes so beautifully and so well. All right. Some people say, you know, I do a lot of public teaching. Everything else about the ministry is draining to me, but generally speaking, teaching four times on Sunday and four or five times during the week isn't a problem. I mean, eventually, of course, physically I can just get too pooped, but I mean, I'm saying because it's a gift, it kind of comes... of evangelism, which means that when you're called upon, when somebody turns to you at work, you always hate this, don't you? Those of us without the gifts of evangelism, somebody turns to us at work and says, well, how do you get saved? I mean, it doesn't happen too often. Hey, I remember when I was working for a printing company and when I was 20 years old, somebody turned to me and said that she'd heard Billy Graham last night and she says, well, I don't really understand that safe stuff. How do you get saved? And I didn't know what to do about it. I didn't do a good job. When you're called upon to do evangelism, you should be ready to do it. You should train yourself, you should do everything you can to get yourself in the position that when you're called upon, you do it. If it's not your gift, you might want to be working in some other area. If you have the gift of singleness, it comes rather naturally. Anybody ever hear of John Stott, for example? He was a pretty well-known teacher. He's never been married. And he spends eight hours a day studying the Bible, and he has for years. He's taken his singleness, and in his case, without really much of a need, that he didn't find a panting in his heart or his life. And he's really using it, taking the singleness with all the advantages of it, and really using it for God. However, I would say that if you are single and you say, this is not easy, this is hard, then you have the duty of single living without the gift. And the duty of single living is hard for you, and you have to do everything you can to prepare yourself so that you do it well as you're called to do it. So you do it without sin, so you do it without grumbling, you do it with all those things. And it means... But to be honest with you, most people that say to me, I don't think I got this gift, this is very hard for me, then I say, you'll probably get married. Because ordinarily God gives you desires that eventually are fulfilled. Now, I can't promise, and I can't give you a Bible reference on that, but that's the difference. Yeah, if you're called to be single, sure you know it. Just like you're called to any kind of mystery, you know it. It becomes kind of natural. Okay? I'll go in the back. Yeah. I'll bet you it is. No, I'm somebody here who knows more about demographics than I do, but I'm almost positive it's unprecedented. Right. That's right. Oh! Oh, you know, it... Yeah. Well... Right. Sure Absolutely By the way It would be a little hard To prove one way or the other Whether there are more people With homosexual inclinations Now than there used to be I mean it's very clear That ours is What's very clear Is there's never been Even Greco-Roman There's never really been A society quite as Open to homosexuality As ours In spite of the propaganda That says that this is Homosexual bias is recent It's not But it would be kind of Hard to prove that As far as proving That there's more singles Than ever Yeah And it's partly because Of the Part of it's the Divorce revolution Which means now People are realizing Divorce probably shouldn't Be as easy as it is And especially it hurts women And I just read a good book Called The Equality Trap Anybody see that book That basically Easy divorce hurts women And also the expectations On career You know the career expectations Are unprecedented too So yeah we do I would agree with you completely Thank you That wasn't a question I can just agree with it Yeah okay It is good not to Touch a woman Right Yeah well you see The Right Now the translation You heard me read And most modern translations Don't say Touch They say It's good not to marry Why The answer is Yeah the Greek word Says touch But you see If you take it literally It proves too much If you We have a lot of words That we use Idiomatically And a lot of words We use literally And every so often You know like If you turn to your kid And say Don't you What do you think I am made of money And the kid Looks up at you And thinks Ha ha What do you mean You're made of money You know And that's an idiom The point is Is it an idiomatic expression That means It's better not get in a relationship or get married, or is it talking about literally, and I'll tell you, a lot of fundamentalist churches have taken that verse and said, see, it means that you should never ever touch before you're married. A lot of people have gone to that, but it can't mean that, because if it literally says it's good for a man not to touch a woman, it goes way, it doesn't say before marriage, it says it's good for a man not to touch a woman, so you have to be very, very, I've seen places where, haven't you seen Christian colleges where there's a, where there isn't there, haven't you heard of those? I don't want to scare anybody, but there are Christian colleges where there's what, 12 inches, 16 inches, you've got to stay away from the other sex and so on, but most translators are wise in saying that's got to be an idiomatic expression. It just proves to, if you're going to take it literally, it would go way beyond, really, what anybody could possibly want or expect it to say rationally. So it's just a way of saying you're not supposed to get married or be involved at all. And actually, you must also remember that Paul was talking about the fact that he was a single man. He had, he had the gift and he was, he was not begrudging. He wasn't saying sex is dirty or marriage is bad. What he's trying to say is, man, I know the advantages of being a single missionary. And I have seen friends of mine who've done what I've done, come here to start a church and there's plenty of advantages to being single when you're trying to work the hours that you need to work and so on. The Bible simply defines marriage as a public covenant, a public contract. You see, if two people say, I'm committed to you, but don't let anybody else know about it, then the commitments between the two of you, it's not, it's too easy to break because no one else knows. The more public a covenant, the more important, the more public the commitment, the more it takes on legal and social ramifications, and it's hard to break. You can break any contract, but it gets harder to break. So as far as the Bible would be concerned, you know, what I've seen is that when slaves got married, they jumped over the broomstick. Did you see that old, they did it in public. They jumped over the broomstick. You say, well, that's not a real wedding. Why not? The Bible doesn't define a real wedding as signing a piece of paper. I mean, every culture, every sub-community, every, there's never been so far, and I've read this a few, the anthropologists have never come up with any kind of culture or society, no matter how removed and remote the society was without some kind of marriage right. And the right is always a public right, and it's always something that everybody knows about. So as long as it's a public promise that everybody knows about that makes it very hard, therefore, to break, it's a marriage. Marriage has got a covenantal, legal, social ramification. It's not simply personal. Okay, time for a couple others if I'm real, if I'm quick, and you're quick. Yes. Jill. Yeah. Yeah. You know, the only thing I can tell you is what you already know. Intellectually, you know that that's not the case. It's emotionally that you feel that way, and that'll be the struggle. The only way to deal with your heart on that is to come back and say what John Newton, John Newton, the guy who wrote Amazing Grace, how sweet the sound, John Newton has a great little line in one of his letters in which he says, I've studied the Bible, I see the places where it says all things work together for good to them that love God, and so on. What the Bible says is, and he summarizes it in his own words, everything is necessary that he sends. Nothing is necessary that he withholds. Everything that he sends is necessary. Anything he withholds is not necessary, regardless of how you feel about it. You have to say, you know, it says in Ephesians 2 and Ephesians 1, it says, He has blessed us in the heavenly places with every spiritual blessing, which means that if you belong to him, every real reward, every lasting reward is already in your account. Everything that you possibly can really need, everything of lasting value will belong to you. It's already vouchsafe for you, the Bible says. If marriage might be in your account, but it's not the most important thing. So you have to come... have to say that. All the punishment that God could possibly give to you has fallen into the heart of Christ, if you're a Christian. All of God's anger has fallen into the heart of Christ. There is nothing left for you. And whenever you feel that maybe God's punishing me, and therefore I'm not married, it's probably because of a bad conscience in some area. And you've got to turn on those kinds of accusing thoughts and say, that's not true. Well may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all in thousands more. Jehovah knoweth none. In Christ, I'm free. He's not punishing me this way. But, I know exactly how you feel. You're still probably going to have to talk to your heart. You have to preach to your heart. I'm going to take one more, because I saw Jill's hand, and then we're going to have to stop. Go ahead. You have to talk about sexual issues. What about emotional issues with people? I think that when you're not sexual, and you start getting to know someone, there's real tendency to really step up an emotional state, because they're very little sexual. And maybe it's not that anybody else's experience, but I felt emotionally great. In what I mean, especially with relationships with men, where the emotional issues turned up. And then, you know, when the relationship sours, or the lesson, or whatever, there's a real sense of loss. You're getting into next week again. I don't know if you're going to also say, well, I don't know if I'll be here next week. But, the short answer is, you're running into a gender difference, to some degree. Now, gender differences are not, you know, we're not talking about all men are like this, and all women are like this. We're talking about, you know, the bar, you know, the bell-shaped curves. You know, that more women tend to be like this, and more men tend to be like this. But, what happens is, and this is what we'll have to talk about next week in detail. I'll just give you the capsule of it. I think of women as a one-room efficiency apartment, and men as a, you know, a one-bedroom apartment. See, in an efficiency apartment, whatever's happening in the kitchen is happening in the bedroom. You know, in other words, whatever's happening on the sofa, you can see from the kitchen. Everything, it's all of a piece. It's, what happens in one is not happening in another. Whereas, in a one-room apartment, you know, what's happening in the kitchen might not be affecting what's happening in the bedroom. Men are a lot more able to go and say, hey, I can get sexually involved and not be emotionally involved. I can be emotionally involved and not sexually involved. They're two different rooms. Now, there's a door between them. You know, one eventually pulls the other along, if they're willing. But, it's amazing how long they can go without pulling them together. And, women are more like an efficiency apartment. It's extremely, it's very difficult for them to do that. And, that's one of the places where women very often feel like, hey, I have opened myself to you completely. And, there hasn't been hardly any physical intimacy here. And, so, I'm ready. Listen, at this one point, you look at the guy and, essentially, you say, Fisher cut bait. And, the guy looks at you and says, I thought we were just friends. What's going on here? And, that's something I'd like to go into a lot more next week. But, you need to, look, you know, you need to be aware of those kinds of gender differences. After it's happened about 20 times, right, you start to say, wait a minute here. The only thing I can say is, be forewarned. And, realize those things start to happen. And, when, as soon as you see them start to happen, you probably need to surface them and say, it's starting to happen. It gets very hard later on, when you're really about ready to strangle the other person, to say, I'd like to surface a few feelings here. And, when they come up, they come up like Mount Vesuvius surfaces lava. So, it helps if you, it helps if you know those problems are coming ahead. And, I want to talk in greater detail next week about them. Okay? Alrighty. Let me close in prayer. Our Father, we thank you that, we thank you that sex is something that you invented. It's a very big part of us. We run back and forth. So many of us have spent half of our lives thinking it's dirty, and half of our lives deifying it, and believing we've got to have it. We let it be God, or else we try to act as if we're not sexual creatures at all. Help us to see what the Scripture teaches. That neither of those are right. Help us to see the glory of sex. Help us to see, also, how important it is for us to deal with our own hearts and emotions. We pray, Father, that you would also show us that it is a signpost, which means those of us who you are leading into marriages and sexuality, help us to see that we have to go beyond this. And those of us who... face a sexless existence, help us to see it's a signpost as well. Because unless we see intimacy and closure with you is the only thing that fills up the deepest parts of those empty recesses in our hearts and souls, then we're going to always find sex haunting us instead of leading us to you. Father, right now our unfulfilled sexual desires can lead us to you or else we can turn around and just let us, they could lead us to look at ourselves instead of you. We pray that everyone here will let them point to you and go to you and say, Lord, fill me with yourself, with your spirit, with your love. And we ask that you'll continue to be with us as we talk about these matters and seek your will. And we want to give your spirit scriptural freedom to have its way, have his way in our lives. And so we pray that you'll continue to help us to those ends. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
