TITLE: Sex and the End of Loneliness (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sex-and-the-end-of-loneliness-an-open-forum-2/

============================================================

What we're going to do for a second is think about how Christianity actually can make some sense out of what we just heard, believe it or not. In other words, when we do an open forum, I'm not here to defend Christianity, but I would like to use it. I'm really glad that happened early in the talk. Later on, I might be trying to build up some tension or something. But what I'd like to do, when we do an open forum, what we'd like to do is like to say, look, not here's why you should be a Christian or here's why you should believe Christianity, but let's try Christianity on like a pair of spectacles and see perhaps how Christianity can bring some wisdom, make sense of something we have to deal with in life in this world. And sexuality, romantic love, is a major issue in our world today. Now, what do we learn from all those interesting songs? What do we learn? Of course, we learn a lot. But I reflected on them and I listened to them and I saw that they were very typical of what musical theater tells us about sex and romance. And I think I'd like to look tonight at this fact, that these songs show us the addictive nature. I guess you could say that the addictive nature of sex in our society, the addictive nature of it. Now, this isn't an idea that I've come up with because social commentators from across the spectrum, from left to right, have pointed out that sex and romantic love is outsized in our culture, that there's never been a culture, there's never been a society in which it was more important, it was more in your face, it was more up there, it was more lifted up as the end all and be all. Now, when I talk about addictive nature of sex, I'm not actually thinking of literal sexual addictions, compulsive sexual behaviors that people get locked into, though, of course, what I say here now could certainly apply to that. But I'm speaking more broadly. I'm speaking more broadly about the fact that sex and romantic love has become, in a sense, an obsession in our culture. But why? Why? Well, first of all, it's true. If you take a look at all those songs, for example, the first song, which it comes up, you know, is that I'm just a girl that can't say no. You know, I shouldn't do this, she says, and I shouldn't do that, she says, and I shouldn't do that, but I can't help it. And as cute as the presentation is, if you read through that thing, it's the language of addiction. Every addict will say like that. I know I shouldn't, I know I shouldn't, but I can't help it. And, of course, the minimizing of it. But if you go to say, Bewitched, Bothered, and Bewildered, which is a terrific piece of music, by the way, it is a remarkable piece of music, the same stuff is laid out, but it's much more realistic, and, of course, it's much darker. She talks about the fact that she likens falling in love to a whole quart of brandy. She says love makes her into a whimpering child again. She knows he's a fool. She knows there's something wrong with him. She knows he's not good for her in some ways, but she can't help it. Now, she fights against it at the very end. She sort of says, no, I'm not going to let this rule me. But she's taught, in fact, at one point, she even uses the word worship. She even uses the language of worship. She feels herself being drawn in. And to me, perhaps the most remarkable of the pieces we saw that speak to this is the one that Ken Primus sang, Being Alive. And there, it's very, very realistic about the fact that almost all romantic relationships have, especially in our culture, have these aspects of addiction. So, when he sings about it, he says, you'll hold me too close. You'll need me too much. You'll love me. You'll hurt me too deep. You'll put me through hell. And yet, in spite of the fact that he acknowledges, the singer acknowledges, that whenever you get into these romantic relationships, there's this over-needing. There's this over-dependence. There's all the conflicts that come from it. This is addictive language. It's addictive behavior. I can't help it. I've got to have it. Because he says, I wouldn't feel alive without it. In other words, intimacy, in our culture, seems to bring all of this, even says you'll put me through hell, but I have to have it. Because without intimacy, I don't even feel alive. Now, why is it that, particularly in our culture, this love and romance and sex has such addictive features to them? Well, I would say, I'd like to remind you of the two pieces that we heard, the duets that you heard tonight, from the newer musical about five or six years ago called The Last Five Years. And I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, I'll tell you, the two pieces that we heard, the duets that you heard tonight from the newer musical about five or six years ago called The Last Five Years. It is not a feel-good musical. It's one of the reasons why most of you haven't heard of it. It's about a man and a woman who get married and it's a story of their marriage falling apart, which it does. It's painful. It's realistic. But what's intriguing about it is that when they get married, their career is at the same place. He's a writer. She's an actor. But then as time goes on, his career takes off. He becomes pretty well-known and her career just dies. And as he starts to move up the social status ladder, he finds it more and more difficult to find her love affirming. And he starts to look at other women. And of course, he wanders and he's not faithful to her. And then the marriage falls apart. But what does that tell you? Now, in Hollywood, they'd say, oh, he outgrew her. But I think what it tells you is that powerful attraction isn't necessarily love, but a hunger to be loved by someone who makes you feel important. Love, the definition of love is giving. On the cross, Jesus Christ was loving us, but he didn't feel very compassionate or goopy toward us at the moment. He was giving. That's what love is. Love is seeing what the good is of the loved one and doing whatever it takes to give that person that good, even if it means sacrificing. But most of us, when we think of falling in love, we call it falling in love, but what it really is, is the hunger to be loved. It's the opposite of giving. It's the hunger to take this person who we say, boy, if this person loved me, then I'd feel great about myself. And you're taking that person into your emotional resume, as it were. You're taking that person in. You're trying to use that person to build up your self-image, to build up your sense of value, to feel like, finally, I guess I'm okay, because this person loves me. And that's using the person, see? That's using the person. And when the love is made of that kind of thing, that's when it gets into addiction. That's when it gets into addictive behavior. Why? Ernest Becker wrote a book many years ago now called The Denial of Death. And in the book, because he's a secular man, in the book he tries to come to grips with the fact that in our culture, we've in a sense lost God. That doesn't mean that everybody in our culture is an atheist. He was, by the way. But what he means in the book is that our culture has lost God because many, many, many people are secular. And even the people who aren't secular, their religiosity, their religion is rather thin. And he deals with the fact, he asks the question, why is sex and romantic love so important in our society? Why is it so outsized? Why has there never been a society in which it was lifted up like in our society? And here's what he says. And it's pretty provocative. Remember, this is not a believer in God saying this. This is a secular person. Here's what he says. Referring to us, modern secular humanity, he says this. We need to feel heroic. We need to know our life matters in the grand scheme of things. We still want to merge ourselves with some higher self-absorbing meaning in trust and gratitude. But if you don't have God, how do you do this? One of the first ways that occurred to the modern person, as Otto Rank saw, was the romantic solution. The self-glorification that he needed, that we need in our innermost being, we now look for in the love partner. We want to be rid of our faults, of our feeling of nothingness. We want to be justified. We want to know our existence has not been in vain. We want redemption, nothing less. Now he is being incredibly provocative. Here's what he means. Throughout history, ancient times, all the way up to modern times, how did you know you had value? How did you know your purpose? How did you know what you were here for? You would bring your sacrifice to the gods. You'd come to the temple. You would come to the temple with your sacrifice and you would lay the sacrifice before the God. And if it was a pleasing sacrifice, and if it was received, you know, the priest would say, thank you, good. When you got a word from outside of you, from God or the gods, when you knew the gods were pleased with you, then you knew who you were. Now, what I just said was, when you got a word from outside of you, you cannot create a self. No matter how hard you try, you can't say, I know I'm great, I know I'm great. I know there's people that think that that's how it's done. But if everybody around you is telling you you're stupid, and you say, I'm smart, I'm smart, I'm smart, you can't convince yourself you're smart. If everybody around you says you're ugly, and you say, no, I'm beautiful, I'm beautiful, I'm beautiful, and everybody else says you're ugly, you have to have someone from outside. that you consider incredibly great, look at you and say, with you I am well pleased, well done, see, you are my beloved. And Ernest Becker says throughout history, people went to God to get that. Throughout history, you knew your place in the universe, you knew who you were, you knew what your role in life was, you knew your value, you knew your identity, because you would come to the gods and you would lay your sacrifice out, and if it was a pleasing sacrifice and you got the verdict of the gods, then you knew who you were. And Becker has the audacity, and this is pretty remarkable, and he's not the only one. He mentions Otto Rank and a number of other people. He says, here's what we do today. We go to the beloved, and we take off our clothes. And we want the beloved to look at us and say, wow. And that's actually what we're doing. We are looking to romance, we are looking to love. We are looking to, we're looking for someone from outside, someone that we are in awe of, see. I mean, the other day I heard a couple of young guys saying, oh wait, did you see her? A goddess. But that's exactly what Becker is talking about. And you know, of course, in Manhattan especially, that's what we're looking for. We're looking for gods and goddesses. They've got to really look great, they've got to be smart, they've got to make a lot of money. And if one of those people love us, then we know we're okay. Is Becker wrong? Is this too far-fetched? I don't think so. It's pretty scary. And this would be the reason why sex and romance has actually been elevated. See, in alcoholism, the problem is alcohol, what's wrong with wine? Wine's great, tastes great. It's a food stuff. But when it becomes the way in which you get your happiness and the way in which you deal with your problems, the way in which you face life, in other words, when alcohol becomes God. When you look to alcohol to get the things that God should be giving you, you're an addict. And when you look to a lover, when you look to a loved one, or even the prospect of romance, and say, oh, if I have that, if that person loves me, then I'll know I'm okay. You're in trouble. You're in enormous trouble. Because what this means, Becker says so, what it means is your relationship becomes an addictive relationship. When the other person is up, you're like this. When the other person is down, you're like this. When the other person doesn't like you, it destroys you. You're up and you're down and you can't handle it. And Becker actually puts it this way a little later in the same chapter. He says, no human relationship can bear the burden of Godhood. However much we may idealize and idolize him. Your lover inevitably reflects earthly decay and imperfection. And if your partner is your all, quote unquote, then any shortcoming in him becomes a major threat to you. And therefore, what he's trying to say is, then the relationship is not about the other person. It's about you. It's about you getting, not giving. It's about you getting what you need in order to feel decent about yourself. After all, what is it that we want when we elevate the love partner to this position? We want to be rid of our faults, of our feeling of nothingness. We want to be justified to know our existence is not to be in vain. We want redemption, nothing less. Needless to say, human partners cannot give this. That's pretty powerful. And so now, if that's true, and by the way, I'm just posing this. I'm trying to say, you know, here's a situation that the music gives witness to. And that is this outsized place of romance and love in our culture and in our lives. How do we understand it? And here we have a kind of theological explanation. I think it makes a great deal of sense of where we are today. Now, let's not end there. Here's what. Since we've said it's an addiction in our society, it's always been pleasurable. It's always been a joy, romance, love. We've always had it, every culture. But in our culture, it's got this addictive outsized role. What do we do about it? Okay. So if that's the case, and I hope I explained that it is and why it is, what do we do about it? And I would like to, the last part of the lecture here, I'd just like to say, let's keep going with this heuristic device of addiction for a minute. And let's say, okay, if we're sex addicts, broadly speaking, if we're romance addicts, broadly speaking, in our culture, how can we break the addiction? How can we break it? And I would suggest we go to AA and look at their 12 steps. Now, recently, I've been getting a refresher course on this because a friend, I've been walking through the 12 steps with a friend. and actually a kind of new appreciation for it. But there's two things I'd like to suggest that if you're going to keep sex from becoming an ultimate thing and an addictive thing in your life, sex and romance, then I would suggest we take two pages from the AA and suggest that there's two ways to heal your addiction. Number one, the power of community and number two, turning to a higher power. The power of community and turning to the higher power. First, what do I mean by the power of community? Well, if you know anything about 12 steps and I'm sure I know a lot of you do, if you know anything about 12 steps, you'll know that the language of addiction, you are still in denial when you say, I can handle it, this is my business. See, when someone says, look, this is my business, you don't look into this, I can handle it, I can handle it. You know, that person is still in denial because you can't handle things like this. These things that dominate our lives without accountability and without community. When you say it belongs to me, it's mine. It's, this is my business and nobody else's. That's the language of addiction. Now we live in a society in which everybody says sex is my business. It's my private business. We had, there was a whole song about it. You heard it tonight? Roz said to me, I never thought I'd be singing this in church. And I said, you know, no, you didn't really sing it in church, honestly. But you know what that's all about? What is that? It's a, it's a powerful statement, powerful piece of art. But what it's saying is sex belongs to me. My sexuality belongs to me and it's nobody's business but mine. Because sex, therefore, is, what is it? That's the modern contemporary understanding. And that is, sex is for my individual self-fulfillment. And I can use it the way I want. I would suggest that's the language of addiction. Because I would tell you that at least, again, let's go to the theology, let's go to the Bible. The Bible says, no, sex is not about your individual self-fulfillment. It's about building human community. You go back to Genesis chapter two, go back to the very beginning of the book of Genesis when it talks about the origins of things. And we have a place where Adam is in paradise and he's got, everything's perfect, right? He's got perfect health. He's obviously got perfect food. He's got a perfect relationship with God. He's in paradise. Everything's fine. And yet God looks at him and says, you're lonely. It is not good that man should be alone. We were made so much for deep human community that paradise wasn't enough. In fact, you know that one line in Being Alive? There's one line in Being Alive where it says, alone is not alive. And that's exactly what Adam would have said. Maybe he sang that song. He says, I've got everything perfect, but I'm alone, see? And so what we're told is that the next thing we see is that God presents Adam to Eve and Eve to Adam. And this is what we read. It's in, it's famous and it's in Genesis 2, 24. It says, for this reason, a man will leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife and they will become one flesh. The man and the woman were naked and they felt no shame. Would you notice two words there? Cleaving and nakedness. First of all, cleaving. The word cleave is a Hebrew word that means absolute unity, total union, deep, profound solidarity. Not just a physical union, but an emotional union. Not just that, but a personal union, an economic union, a social union, complete. To cleave to somebody is to say, I belong exclusively to you permanently. And everything I have is yours. See? I'm yours. And the other person says the same thing back to you. That's marriage. See? Cleaving is not just physical union or even emotional union, but it's personal union, cultural union, relational union, social union, economic union, complete. And it's cleaving. It's for the purpose of cleaving, which satisfies this deep need for community in our soul. That is the reason why God creates nakedness. The man and the woman were naked. That's sex. Why? For cleaving. Sex is a cleaving apparatus. Everybody, do you know what that means? God made sex, according to the Bible, to say to one other human being, I belong completely and exclusively and permanently to you. All of me. Permanently. Everything. Okay? God made sex to be, nakedness to be, a cleaving apparatus. A way to say to one other person, I belong completely and exclusively to you. Right? If you use sex to say something else. If you give sex to say something without the cultural, the economic, the social union, you've actually held on to yourself. You've kept control. You're using sex for self-fulfillment and pleasure, and you're not actually using sex to open yourself to the other person completely. See, physical nakedness embodies and strengthens, it can, cleaving, the absolute giving of yourself to someone else and them giving themselves to you. If you use sex for, if you have sex outside marriage, in other words, if you do physical union without every other kind of union, it's an inconsistency at least and a monstrosity at worst. You know, one of the songs, did you read it? Did you hear it? One of the songs, the woman was singing, I Will Be Loved Tonight, and she sang, Tonight I Will Have a Soul Entangled in Mine. Well, the ancient Hebrews would never agree to that. They would say, wait a minute, your soul is you. And if you have sex with somebody, but you don't marry them, you're holding on to yourself. You're keeping control of your life. See, you want the goodies. You want the aesthetics. You want the affirmation that, no, this person likes me and loves me. You want the thrill, but you're holding on to yourself. You're not cleaving. You're not giving yourself. And nakedness, sex, is a way of giving. And it must not be used for anything else. And you say, well, now, how does this thing, how does this actually have to do with addiction? I'll tell you why. Because if it's true, let's do a thought experiment. You know, you may not agree with this, but for a moment. Here's a thought experiment. If it's true that God made sex to be a cleaving apparatus, which is a trust apparatus, it's a way of giving yourself so totally to someone, you make yourself so vulnerable to someone, that you can absolutely open yourself, become interdependent, and trust. If you use this commitment apparatus where that commitment doesn't exist, only two things can happen. The first thing that can happen is, you have sex, you're not married, and the commitment apparatus works anyway. And even though you're actually not married to the person, and you don't have obligations to each other, you feel married. You feel incredibly married. You feel utterly united because your commitment apparatus is working. And you're not really completely united. You're holding on to yourself. You're holding on to control of your life. And that means breakups are absolutely devastating. They're utterly devastating. They're horrible. In fact, you can develop a fatal attraction where you just can't get over the other person. And by the way, in spite of the movie, men get that just as much as women do. There's no difference on that. So one possibility is, if you have sex outside marriage, the commitment apparatus just keeps working anyway. And that's what creates all those addictive behaviors. On the other hand, the worst thing that happens is you have sex outside marriage and the commitment apparatus just breaks. Sex, you totally detach sex from utter giving and cleaving. And you'll find later on, when you do get married, if you get married, and you start to have sex, it doesn't have anything like the commitment gluing power and welding power that it should have. Community. Is sex, here's the question, is sex about you or is it about us? Is sex about you fulfilling your goals or is it about you subordinating your goals to a greater whole? Is sex about personal fulfillment or is sex about creating permanent, stable human community, which the research tells us is the only place that children can grow and thrive? Do you see sex as a nurturing discipline that creates human community or do you just see it as a way of actually enhancing and maximizing your self-image? So the first thing you have to do, I think, to break the addiction, number one, is see the power of community and the importance of using sex and thinking and understanding sex as a way of building community. But last of all, you have to turn to a higher power. Now, you know what I'm going to say. I'm a minister, but let's put it like this. In John chapter 4, Jesus is talking to a woman at the well. And they're talking about, he starts to talk about water because she's at the well getting water. And he says, you know, I can give you water that if you drink it, you'll never thirst again. And, you know, the woman's saying, great, I don't want to have to keep coming back to this well. Give me this water. And, of course, Jesus is talking about the water of eternal life. He's talking about the water of meaning and purpose. He's talking about the thirst of your soul for a radical word from the outside. Someone saying to you, I love you, you are great, I delight in you. And a word from the outside that's so strong that if your heart hears it, it finally shuts up. Your ego need more input. I need more compliments, I need more affirmation. You know, your ego is just like a black hole. It's always this giant sucking sound. What is that? That's your ego, needing, needing. What you really want is you want someone from the outside so glorious, so great, so beautiful that when he looks at you and says, you are my beloved in whom I'm well pleased, it shuts that ego up. So he says, I can give you that water. I can give you the water of eternal life. I can finally quench the thirst of your soul for significance, for love, for purpose, for meaning. And she still doesn't get it. She says, you can give me that water. Give it to me. I want it so I don't have to come back to the well. And he says, well, go get your husband. She says, what do you mean? I don't have a husband. And he says, I know. You have had five husbands, and the man you're living with right now isn't your husband. Well, what is Jesus being? Just rude? Is he saying, hey, you know, I'm the son of God, so I know things. I'm just going to show you. Now, why does he say, I can give you, I can quench the deepest thirst of your soul. And then when she says, well, give it to me, he says, well, go to your husband. What is he saying to her? He says, you've been looking for the water of life in men and in love and in romance and in sex. But unless you hear me say to you, you are my beloved in whom I'm well pleased, you are never really going to be able to make it with men. We need to demote men in your life. We need to demote romance. It's a good thing, but it's become an alcoholic. See, you become an alcoholic. Well, how do we get that? You know, we really need to be known and loved. Known and loved. You know, if my wife, if one of you come up to me tonight and says, you're a really generous person, I'll feel good. But if my wife comes to me and says, you're the most generous man I know, I'll feel a lot better. Do you know why? Because she knows me. She knows me. You don't know me, you know. You know me a little. Some of you know me more. But you don't know me. And so if you compliment me, if you love me, but you don't really know me, that doesn't really, that's not all I need. I want to be known to the bottom and yet love. But guess what? When someone knows you to the bottom, they see all the gunk. So what are we going to do? Jesus Christ, on the cross, looked down and he saw us denying him and falling asleep on him in the Garden of Gethsemane and betraying him and forsaking him. And in the greatest act of love in the history of the world, he stayed. He just stayed. And now when I start to pull near to someone I love and I see the gunk, I can say, I know you, but I love you. Because Jesus Christ saw me to the bottom but loved me to the skies. He looked at me down to the depths. He saw all this stuff and he covered it. He died for me. And he has said, you are my child. With you I'm well pleased. He covered everything. He covered my sins. He covered everything. And because he's done that for me and because he's loved me like that, because in a sense I have the spousal love of Jesus Christ, I'm ready to be a spouse. And only then. In fact, there's this fascinating little place where C.S. Lewis puts it like this. And unfortunately, you need to know a little bit about opera to really get the full gist of it. But even without a knowledge of opera, you understand what he's saying. When he says, we must not attempt to find a divine absolute in sex. We must not try to find in sexuality and romance what you can only find in God. He says, we must not attempt to find a divine absolute in sex. That will banish play and laughter from your bed. We should not, therefore, sing our love duets in the throbbing world without end, heartbreaking manner of Tristan and Isolda. But the gospel will free us to sing about our love like Papageno and Papagena instead. Like I said, you have to be an opera lover to completely get that. But you know what he's trying to say? Let's turn sex and love into what it really is. Sex and love. Fun. Joy. You see. Love. And then it won't be about you. It'll be about itself. It'll be about love. It'll be about the lover. It'll be about the community you're creating with the other person that you're giving yourself to completely. Oh my. If you understand the addictive nature, look to the power of community and turn to a higher power and it'll break the power in your life. And maybe, if enough of us do it, break the power in the culture.
