TITLE: Shame and Grace – Scenes of Forgiveness (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Race Forgiveness
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/shame-and-grace-scenes-of-forgiveness-an-open-forum/

============================================================

There's a lot of them that we don't even know about. You know, you can always say, look at the Serbs and the Croatians and the Bosnians. Look at the Ulster Scots and the IRA people. Look at the Jews and the Israelis and the Palestinians. Look at these places. And those are just the ones you've heard of. There's an inability to forgive. People do not just wage war, ethnic group against ethnic group, race against race, because, hey, let's do something wicked and violent. No, there's vast reservoirs of anger and resentment, and there's an inability to forgive. That's what's going on there. Or on the individual level, if you read Time magazine, newspaper, and you take a look at all the very awful, sometimes bizarre, sometimes very, very ordinary, crime stories. The stories of a boyfriend shooting and killing his girlfriend and her daughter. The stories of, do you read last month, of a man in a little New Hampshire town, not far from the Canadian border, came on into town and shot the lawyer who years ago had prosecuted him and shot everybody around her and killed him. Do you remember reading about that? From the bizarre to the ordinary, What you have, if you read those and say, why? What's going on? People can't forgive. One of the biggest problems we've got in the world, then. One of the reasons for the racial strife. One of the reasons for so much crime. One of the reasons for so much violence. One of the reasons for so many wars. Basically, people can't forgive. And therefore, we'd have to say, if that's true, then the ability to forgive would be, finding out how to forgive would be one of the most important things before the human race. One of the most important issues. Now, I'd like to give you a couple of propositions, a couple of theses on how we could proceed to try to figure out how we can do it. We're not very good at all. And here's what I would like to propose. If we have to find it, if it's imperative for us to find a way to be able to get most people, most places, to forgive, how would we go about it? First, my first thesis is, we have to see that the reason we can't forgive is there's something wrong inside of us. Appeals won't work. Instruction won't work. There's something wrong inside of us. Now, you know, if you're totally away from a situation, when you read about the tit-for-tat, the terrorists, the bombings, the killings, they sound so awful. And we say to these groups, these places far away, we say to the Christians and the Muslims in Lebanon, we say to the people in Bosnia, we say, why can't you just get by it? Why can't you just get past it? Why can't you just forget it? And, of course, politicians and ministers and artists and educators for years have been saying to people who have a lot of resentment toward each other, why can't we just all live together? Why can't we get past it? But if you yourself have been hurt, you know something about this. Divorce is very, very common. Many of you have been divorced, or certainly everybody knows, a pretty close friend who's been divorced, and you know that on the way out of a divorce, usually at least one, if not both of you, have hurt the other one terribly. See, when you're married to somebody, you know what the other person's greatest nightmare is. You know what words just go right through them. And so on the way out of a marriage or a divorce, you usually use them. And if you've been wronged like that, if you've been robbed of dignity, robbed of self-respect, you've been doubting yourself ever since, there's resentment there. There's a lot of anger. And you may have friends that come by, and they see that your anger is affecting your attitude toward yourself. Your anger is affecting your attitude toward the opposite sex now. Your anger is affecting maybe your attitude toward your own children. And so your friends sit down and say, come on, get past it, get by it, just forgive, come on. And what do you feel? You say, I can't. I'd like to. I can't. You don't understand. You don't understand. Forgiveness is not something that you can do just because people come and appeal to you. And here's why. I would suggest it's because there's something wrong inside of us. That's the thesis. Now, here's a good way to try to explore that. What is forgiveness? Let's think of it for a moment like this. Forgiveness is the willingness to assume a debt instead of exact a debt. Forgiveness is the willingness to assume a debt instead of exact a debt. What do I mean? Well, let's think about it only on the financial level for a second. And I try to think of an example that would fit across the genders. Let's imagine you've got a very expensive... I don't think of it only on the financial level. I don't think of it only on the financial level. I don't think of it only on the financial level. What do I mean? Well, let's think about it only on the financial level for a second. And I tried to think of an example that would fit across the genders. Let's imagine you've got a very expensive business suit. See? True whether you're a man or a woman. And what, for some reason, a friend of yours needs to borrow it who's your size, and you give your suit, and your friend comes back, and it's ruined, it's ripped, it's burned, it's hydrochloric acid's fallen, I don't know. Come on, it's an illustration. So, it's ruined, hundreds of dollars, maybe thousands of dollars, it depends. Will you forgive or not? Let's only think for a minute, not of the emotion, we're talking about the finance. Will you say, forget it? And then you're the one who has to restore it. You're the one who has to show out the hundreds and thousands of dollars to get another suit. Do you say, forget it? In which case, you assume the debt, which means you pay it. Or, do you forgive, as forgiving, excuse me, or do you say, no, I won't forgive, I want you to pay it. It costs this amount of money, when can I see it? You see, forgiving is either saying, I will pay it, I'll assume the debt, or a lack of forgiveness is to say, no, I will exact the debt. I need that money, I want that money, please give it to me. What will determine, what's the main thing will determine whether you forgive or not? For a minute, we're still thinking financially. You know what the main thing is? Your net worth. What if you have hundreds and hundreds and hundreds? What if you're a millionaire? What if you're a gazillionaire? What if you've just got just tons and, there's plenty more where that came from. An Armani suit? You see. One more Armani suit? I don't even know if I'll get a new one until next spring anyway. You see, there's more where that came from. In which case, you'll just say, forget it. But what if you're out of work, it's your only suit, you've got all sorts of job interviews next week, incredibly important job interviews, you'll be totally out of money if you don't get one of those jobs. And what do you say? You say, I'd like to forgive you, I can't. You've got to pay for this, I need a suit. I can't. There is no more where that came from. It's as simple as that. All right, now, now let's apply what we just learned. When you think about the things that people have done to you that take forgiveness on your part. You know what they are? They're debts. You know, it's not foolish that when Jesus Christ taught people to pray, he said, forgive us our debts. That's what a sin is. And, I'm going to push it a little further, when people wrong you, what they've actually done is robbed you. They've taken things from you. Sure. For example, if someone gossips about you, they've stolen from your reputation. If someone has, on the way out of a divorce, said some things about you that you've never been able to forget, they've ruined your respect for yourself, your own dignity, your dignity, your self-respect, it's gone. You're doubting yourself for years after. Respect has been stolen. Reputation's been stolen. Joy has been stolen. Hope has been stolen. You know, somebody dates you and you get your hopes up and then the person drops you and shows they were never interested at all. Why did you lead me on? You've stolen years from me. I mean, everything that people have done to you, it's robbery. They've stolen. They've taken things from you. Okay? They've taken honor, respect, joy, love. And when they do it, what is the main reason that you'll be able to forgive or not? What is the main determining factor? I'll tell you what it is. If when somebody takes away love and joy and honor and respect, if you are awash in it, if you are absolutely awash in it, if you've got all kinds of confidence, if you've got more respect, more confidence, more poise, more honor, more dignity, more worth, if you've got so much of that that a person gossips about you, a person says this or that, you say, hey, forget it. There's plenty more where that came from. Can you do that? Most of us can't. And what does that mean? Let's face it. The history of the human race shows that most people can't forgive. It is extremely hard to forgive. It is very difficult to forgive. And therefore, on the basis of what we've been just doing, here's what we have to conclude. The reason people can't forgive is not because they're just being stubborn. It's because they don't have enough emotional wealth to do it. There's a poverty inside. See, if somebody criticizes you and you can't forgive, it's because there are no more suits. You don't have any more self-worth. They've taken something and it's the last one you've got. You can't say, I've gotten a lot more where that came from. You don't have the emotional wealth. We don't. There's a poverty. There's something inside of us. There's something wrong inside. All the politicians' speeches, why can't we just live together? All the legislation, there's something wrong inside. That's why we can't forgive. we could do it. Okay, second thesis. What is that, inner poverty? And the answer is, shame and guilt. Here's my second thesis, and right away I'm going to take an objection. I'm going to pose one that smart people today would immediately put. I'm going to pose it. But the second thesis is, the reason we can't give forgiveness is because we have not experienced forgiveness. The reason that we can't just lavish people with love and eat those debts, the reason we have to take back, we have to exact from them, they owe us, we've got to pay them back, we've got to get it out of their hide, the reason we can't give forgiveness is we haven't experienced it ourselves. We are loaded down with guilt ourselves. We're loaded down with a sense of that we don't measure up, that we're basically fakes, that we haven't made it, that there's something wrong with us, that there's something contemptible about us, that basically we're all wracked with guilt. Otherwise, we could forgive, and we don't. We can't. So that's the reason why. That's what's wrong with us. Now, as soon as I say what's wrong with us is we're filled with shame and filled with guilt, far more than we want to admit to ourselves, but it only shows up when somebody wrongs us, and even little things, and we can't forgive. That's the only thing that really shows our poverty. Right away, people say, you know, living in the past. Especially those of you who are Gen X types. A lot of you have said to me, you know what, you know, your generation, and maybe your parents' generation and all that, yeah, guilt was a big thing, but you know what, my friends, they're not struggling with guilt. You know, we really have a different way of looking at things. We believe that you have to decide what's right or wrong for you, so we're not all wracked with guilt. We've figured out what's right or wrong for us, and we're following our heart. We might be bored, for example. We might be cynical. We may have all sorts of other problems. But we're not wracked with guilt the way you are, and the way they were. In fact, people will say, look, back when the church was sort of dominant in society, people talked about this all the time. Everybody felt like, I've got to do this, I've got to do that. I can't do this, I can't have... And that, you know, Jimmy Carter, I sometimes experience lust in my heart toward women. You know, can you imagine a Gen X person getting all wracked over that? Oh, goodness, lust in my heart toward women. I mean, my goodness, you couldn't look at a bus in New York City. With, you know, I mean, what would Jimmy do? He has to live where he lives. And so Gen X people say, oh, yeah, but that's back when everybody was wracked with guilt. It's not true. Go into Barnes & Noble. You're not going to find any books on guilt. You're not going to find any books on forgiveness. No, there's not there. I know, I looked. You're not going to find any books on guilt and forgiveness and sin? No way. But wait a minute. Let's go back to Barnes & Noble. You're not, there is a whole wall. A very, very long wall. In a very, very, very big Barnes & Noble store. In fact, there's a huge wall in every store where the books are popular and they're flying off the shelves. And no, there's no books on guilt, but the books are flying off the shelf on shame. Not guilt, shame. And they're not talking about forgiveness. They're talking about healing. And they're not talking about sin. They're talking about your shadow. One of the big bestsellers is by John Bradshaw. Ten years old, but still sells. And the name of his book that was a big seller was Healing the Shame that Binds Us. Now, listen carefully. He doesn't say, let's find forgiveness. He says, let's find healing. That's pretty much the same thing. He doesn't say, let's heal guilt. He says, the shame. And he doesn't say, let's heal the shame or, you know, get forgiveness for guilt so that we can be good, but so that we can be free. It binds. And yet, this is what's remarkable. There is still whole shelves of these books in every bookstore in New York City flying off the shelves. Why? Why don't they say guilt? Why don't they say forgiveness? Why don't they say the word sin? Why are they talking about healing and shadow and eating the shadow and owning the shadow and healing the shame? Why? Here's the reason why. In a nutshell, 100 to 150 years ago, Western culture went through a revolution and made it different than any other culture in history. Every other culture in the history of the world, and other cultures that are still there in the world, have always had consensus that there is a moral transcendent order of divinely ordered virtues and standards of right and wrong. And the whole society has always been based on, these things are true for any virtuous person. There are moral obligations. We've got to agree with them. We've got to obey them. And the Western society made a huge change 150 years ago or so. And first of all, they said, psychologically, there's no reason to feel guilty about what other people have said is right and wrong. You have to follow your own heart. And for the last 80 years, or even more, in the area of psych... First of all, for the last 80 years, amongst intelligent, educated people, both in Europe and in America, it has been almost taboo to talk about sin and certainly not to talk about guilt. Guilt is now seen as a bad thing. We don't talk about guilt. We talk about guilt feelings, but we don't talk about guilt. It's basically pathological, basically crippling. And what's so intriguing, for 80 years, smart people on both sides of the Atlantic, it's been pushed into us that there's no reason to feel guilty. Nobody can tell you what's right or wrong. You have to decide what's right or wrong for yourself. You do not have to feel guilty. You must not feel guilty. We're not going to talk about guilt anymore. We're not going to talk about forgiveness. We're not going to talk about sin anymore. We're going to lift...we're going to take the screws off. We're going to lift all these moral strictures on you. We're going to take the screws off. And now, 80 years later, they are forced to write books, hundreds of books, thousands of books, because people are still wrestling like crazy with something they don't have a word for anymore. Now, listen, in the old days, we talked about guilt, and guilt is like fire. You can always see where a fire is coming from. But shame is like smoke. You can't tell where the smoke is coming from. Now, they'll both kill you. But you see, in the old days, when you felt guilty, you knew where it was coming from, because you had a set of laws, and when you felt unworthy, and you weren't measuring up, and you felt incompetent, and you felt condemned, and you felt, you know, weighed down by all this, you could always...you knew where you were...you're guilty. It was like fire. You said, well, I did this wrong, I did this wrong, and this wrong. I'm going to deal with it. But today, there are no rules. And yet, we can't get rid of this sense of shame. It's like smoke. We can't tell where it's coming from. Now, there is nobody in the art, in literature, who's done a more incredible job of getting this across than Kafka. And in one book in particular, that is just...is just the 20th century book, is called The Trial. It's about Joseph K. And what Joseph K. does, is he's living a nice life...not what Joseph K. does. Joseph K. is living a sort of normal life, and on his 30th birthday, he's arrested. And the book takes us over the next few days, and weeks, and months, and years. And even though Joseph K. is indicted, and he's put under house arrest, and then he's arrested again, and again, and he's brought up before hearings, and then other hearings, and he's talking to this bureaucrat, and that bureaucrat, and he's always under arrest, but he's never told what for. He keeps trying to find out, what is the charge? Well, you'll have to talk to my superior. And you get to the superior. What's the charge? Well, I can't answer that. You're going to have to talk to the council. Well, what is the charge? Well, you can't talk to...it's the committee that has to tell you about this. Days, weeks, months, years. And at first, he says, I can clear this up, but he can't. And as time goes on, Joseph K. begins to say...begins to look at his own life. And when you start looking at your life, trying to find what maybe it was that you did wrong, he starts to see all kinds of stuff. He says, it could have been that, it could have been that, it could have been that, but I don't know what it could be, because I don't know the rules. No fire. See, smoke. Shame. No guilt. And at the very, very end... You know how the book ends? He never finds out. At the very end, his jail warder, the guy who's his guard, brings him outside, and in a complete surprise, lifts up a dagger and stabs him to death. And that's how the book ends. And Kafka, in his diaries, put it perfectly. In one of his diaries, he explained what he was trying to get at, and I've never gotten over it. He says, the state in which we find ourselves today... I'm going to read this twice, so you can get it. The state in which we find ourselves today is sinful, but independent of guilt. The state in which we find ourselves today is sinful, yet independent of guilt. Now, this is exactly, exactly what you see going in the Barnes and Nobles. We're not allowed to talk about guilt anymore. We don't. We've gotten rid of vocabulary. And yet, as Kafka says, in a society in which we've gotten rid of the guilt, we still feel like sinners. We've done everything we possibly can to say, we don't believe in God. We don't believe in heaven. We don't believe in hell. We don't believe in moral categories. We don't believe in guilt anymore. And Kafka says, it hasn't helped. there is no guilt, we still feel like sinners. We say, I don't believe in sin, I don't believe in guilt, and yet there's a voice in us that calls us a coward, calls us fools, makes us ashamed. Makes us say we're not living up. Makes us feel like a fake. There's something going on, what is it? We are so weighted down with guilt and shame, and it is so indelible, and it is so powerful, that at the end of a century in which we've done everything we can to even get rid of the vocabulary, we still have to write books about it, people are still gobbling those books up because they can't get rid of this. We feel guilty, we feel there's something wrong with us, we feel ashamed, we feel naked. Hmm. Now, you know what we try to do? We really love guys like John Quincy Adams. John Quincy Adams was very successful, you know. He was very, very successful, and yet he hated himself. I actually put in the Reflections a quote. He says, I feel like my whole life hasn't amounted to anything. There's a biography of his reviewed in the New York Times book review today, and when we read it, we see why. We see why he feels so inadequate. His father, at one point, said this to him as a young man, if you do not rise to the head, not only of your profession, but of your entire country, it will be all owing only to your own laziness, slovenliness, and obstinacy. Okay, so here's a guy who says, if you don't become president of the United States, you're an absolute failure. It'll be totally your fault. There's no reason in the world why not. Ah, of course, then he spent all of his life flagellating himself and never feeling he wrote the right book. It tells us that when he was 10 years old, he read Paradise Lost by Milton, and he didn't get it. And he wept in his room because he was afraid to tell his parents that he didn't understand it. He couldn't do it. So, ah, we say, that's it. That's the reason why we feel shame and guilt. Really? Listen. A. How many of us have had parents who said, if you're not president of the United States, you're a failure? And yet we still feel this. And John Quincy Adams made it. He was president of the United States. Now, here's what I mean. I remember reading about, I remember reading a young man who years afterwards said, I hate my father, I hate my parents, they made me feel like dirt. And wrote down this. One day I brought home four A's and a B. And I put it in front of my father. And all my father said is, he put it to the B and said, what's that? You can't please that man. And I've been crippled with a sense of inadequacy. Now, let me ask you something. Listen, ever since I read that, I was always very careful when my sons brought my reports on his own. And I can sort of see it, but here's what I want to know. There is something wrong with us that we're that fragile. Yes, of course, it would be good for us to be celebrating the A's. There is something already wrong. There is a sense of shame. There is a sense that there's something wrong with us. There's a sense of nakedness. When somebody tells you something good about yourself, a hundred times you don't believe it. And when they tell you something bad about you once, you believe it. What is wrong with you? There is something wrong with us. We can't forgive. We feel guilty. Well, what's the answer? My third proposition is the Bible gives us about, for what I can tell, the only good explanation. The Bible says something that, well, I mean, you know what? I'm not sure this explanation would have sounded so credible at the beginning of the 20th century because it would have been very easy to say we're going to change society and people aren't going to feel this anymore. We're going to tell parents not to beat their kids. We're going to tell parents not to condemn them. We're going to do all these things. We're going to get rid of the vocabulary of guilt. And we have and we can't get rid of the sense of shame. And there's something wrong with us and this incredible fragility. Here's what the Bible says. Back in the Garden of Eden, when Adam and Eve decided they wanted to rule their own lives without God, they immediately felt naked. They had been naked and weren't ashamed. They didn't care that God could see them and that they could see each other. They had nothing to hide. The minute that they decided to be their own master, the minute they decided to be their own boss, they had to hide. Now, I'll tell you, here's my suggestion. If you're a real policeman and you're walking around in a policeman's outfit and somebody comes up to talk to you, you don't mind. But if you're a fake policeman and you know you don't know anything about police work, but you're impersonating as an officer and you see somebody coming, you get away. Why? They might ask you something and show that you're a fake. You know you're a fake. You're ashamed. You're vulnerable. You're naked. You've got to get away. says, who says, I'm going to lead my own life. I'm going to decide what's right and wrong for me. I'm going to determine what is right or wrong for me. In our heart of hearts, we know we're fakes. We are highly, highly, highly unqualified for that job. If you've ever been in a job in which you were incredibly unqualified for, you're always ashamed. You're always vulnerable. You're always afraid. You're always looking over your back. You didn't want anybody to really examine the books. Didn't want anyone to look too close. We feel that way toward God. And we feel naked. And we feel ashamed. And bad parenting can aggravate that. But the real cause of it is because we know that we're out of sorts with our heavenly parent. Why do some of you, and by the way, Adam and Eve, as soon as they decided to be their own bosses, they couldn't stand to be seen. They hid. They got in the trees and they sewed fig leaves together to cover their nakedness. Why do some of you work and work and work and you say, if I can just, you overwork, you kill yourself with work, and you say, if I can just get to this place and then I can let up and you never can. Why is it that some of you you lay yourself off for people and you can't ever disappoint them, and so there's no boundaries. No boundaries. You have to let people take advantage of you. You can never disappoint anybody. Why are some of you absolutely unwilling to let anybody look inside and see your own private self? You don't want anybody to really see what you're feeling. You keep everybody out. Nobody knows who you are. Why are you that scared of that? Why do you overwork? Why do you have to never disappoint? Why do you do... These are fig leaves. These are fig leaves. Under the anger, under the bitterness, under the shyness, under the depression, there's a sense there's something wrong with me. I'm guilty. And I'm out of sorts not just with my father and not just with the people around me. These things can aggravate it, but there's one with whom I have to do. It says in the book of Hebrews, all things are naked and open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do. Now what do we need if we're going to heal that? In fact, for common sense, some of you certainly say, well, I don't know why I buy all that. That's an awful lot of religious stuff. Well, here's what I would like to suggest. The first thesis is something's wrong with us. This is why we can't forgive. Second thesis is because of a sense of inadequacy and guilt and worthlessness and contempt for ourselves that we feel. And the third thesis is it's because we're cut off from God. Well, you say, well, I don't know if I can accept that. All right, here's your fourth thesis. Here's what you're going to do about it. Here's how you're going to deal with your own shame. Number one, you've got to make a distinction between true and false shame. You've got to make a distinction between true and false guilt. Let's face it. You see, if somebody says, oh, my father didn't really want me to be, he wanted me to be a musician and I've never been able to make it. I feel so inadequate. Is that true guilt or false guilt? Somebody says, well, you know, I've been trampling on people and I've ruined their careers in order to get to the top of my corporation. And I'm feeling guilty about it. Is that true guilt or false guilt? Listen, if it's true guilt, if it's false guilt, you just kick it. You just say, who cares? I don't care what your father said. Kick it. It's not true guilt. You're not really doing anything wrong. If it's false guilt, you just kick it. But if it's true guilt, you have to deal with it. And there is no way to deal with guilt. There is no way to deal with shame. There is no way to deal with inadequacy unless you admit, unless you have a way of judging between whether it's true or false. And you know what? You can go to psychologists, you can go to therapists about that. There is no way to deal with guilt unless you can make that distinction. And there's no way they can help you without getting into religion. Science cannot tell you what you ought to do. Science can tell you what is normal, but not what is normal. The strong eat the weak. That's normal and we think that's bad. You can't go by normalcy. You can't say, well, I'm going to find out what's right by looking at my own heart. Which heart? You know, there's that little poem that I stuck in there if you want to look at it someday. Within my earthly temple, there's a crowd. There's one of us that's humble, one that's proud. There's one that's brokenhearted for his sins. There's one that's unrepentant, sits and grins. There's one that loves his neighbor as himself and one that cares for naught but fame and self. From such perplexing care I would be free if I could once determine which is me. Now, I think he's being generous. There's more than two of me. And if I look down inside to say, well, the way I'll find out what's true and false guilt is to thine own self be true. Which self? To thine own inner sense be true. Which inner sense? You can't go and you can't go to the scientists and say what's normal because a lot of things that are normal are bad. You can't look in your own heart because you're not going to look deal with right and wrong without a moral code? And you know what? The moral code's not that hard. We all know deep down in our hearts that there is one. We all know deep down in our hearts there is one. And do you know that if you look at every religion in the world essentially they believe the Ten Commandments? That if you have lied, if you have stolen, if you have committed adultery, if you have coveted, if you have done these various things, those are wrong. That's true guilt. You need to confess it. You need to deal with it. See, you have to turn your shame into guilt so you can see where it's coming from so you can put it out. That's the first thing you need. You need a moral standard. And there's no way to do that without religion. No way. Sorry, you can't do it through psychology. Psychology is very important, but it's science. And science cannot tell you what ought to be, only what is. And then the second thing you need is a person. You don't just need a law. You need a person. See, the weird thing about the sense we have that there really is an absolute moral law and that we really ought to be honest and we really ought to be good is moral obligation does not come from inanimate objects. You never feel an obligation to a stone. You only feel an obligation to the persons. And the only way you will ever get forgiven and get enough emotional wealth to forgive is if there is an absolute person behind that absolute moral law who will forgive you. At the very end of the Kafka thing, at the very end, it's just amazing. At the very end, before he dies, I didn't tell you this, but this is what he sees. He's brought out. The water's about to kill him. He doesn't know it. He says his glance fell on the top story of the house adjoining the quarry. With a flicker of a light going up, the casements of a window flew open and one human figure, faint and insubstantial at that distance and at that height, leaned forward and stretched both arms still further. Who was it? A friend? A good man? Someone who sympathized? Someone who wanted help? Was help at hand? And then he was killed. Kafka says, if there's hope, it's got to be a person. An intercessor. Someone who finally, see Joseph K. finally said, somebody who will intercede for me. Somebody who will stand in for me. Somebody who will help me. Somebody who will help me. You have to have a figure. You have to have a person. The Bible tells us the reason we feel naked and are trying to cover up fig leaves is because we know we owe. We owe. And that absolute figure came down in Jesus Christ and became a human being and he was stripped naked on the cross. You know why he was stripped naked? He took our nakedness on himself. He took our shame. He was despised and rejected. He was stripped so we could be clothed. And the Bible said, blessed is the man whose sins are covered. Blessed is the one whose sins are covered. When Jesus Christ says, come unto me, all ye who are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. He's not talking about physical, he's not talking about burnout. What kind of, what kind of burden is he talking about? He's talking about the burden of guilt and the burden of shame. And he says, take my yoke upon you and learn of me for I am meek and gentle of heart and you will find rest for your souls. If you try to deal with your guilt with any other yoke, if you say, I'm going to be really good, I'm going to atone for my sin, I'm going to live a little humanitarian life, you'll always fall short. I read a John Bradshaw article on what do you do when you feel ashamed. And you know what he says? He says, now listen to your shaming voice. What does it say? Does it say you're selfish? You're selfish. Well, what he should, and you know what he says to do? He doesn't say find a moral standard. He doesn't say find, you know, it's silly for him not to say that because, you know, if you knew what the moral standard was, then you could decide whether this was a fair complaint. He says, when that inner voice says, I'm selfish, you know what you do? Contradict it. Say, I am not. Now, try. Just try it. Next time, you're doing something and that voice, that shaming voice, comes and says, you're so selfish, you're so self-centered. If people just knew, what do you turn around and say, no, I'm not. You know what's going to happen? Don't you dare get into an argument with that voice. That voice will, you're duck soup. Because, you know what the voice is going to say? They're going to say, oh, okay. No. The voice will say, what about Tuesday at 8.30? What about Thursday at 9 p.m.? You'll never win that way. my yoke, I'm the only one that will really forgive, and I do forgive. Go find out what this means when Jesus Christ, they sing about Jesus Christ this way. They say, lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet. Stand in him and him alone, gloriously complete. He was stripped naked of all of his righteousness so that we could be clothed with his perfect record. Blessed is the one whose sins are covered. No way without religion. No way without an absolute person. Otherwise, we're going to be stuck. Now, here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to tell you exactly what we're going to do. I'm going to pray, because even though this isn't a worship service, I've just told you that I think there's no way to deal with this issue just through psychology. You have to come to God, and I'm going to pray that God would help us see whether this is right or not. Then after that, Cassandra Riddle is going to sing one more piece, a very beautiful piece by Gounod, who of course was another opera famous writer, wrote Faust and some others, though this is not from one of his operas. When that is done, during the music, we take up an offering, and the offering is not for you who are guests or visitors. This is for members and friends of Redeemer who regularly come, and this is the way that they support the ministry. So you should not feel like any obligation. And when that is done, I'm also suggesting that you think about questions you want to ask during the question and answer time, which will begin right after that. So let's close in prayer. Our Father, if there's anything that I've said that isn't fair, isn't right, isn't true, anything that is even distracting or misleading or misrepresenting, I pray that those of us who are here listening would forget it. Those things, I pray those things wouldn't have a hold in our minds, but if I've said anything that is true, that is consonant with your wisdom and with your being, and with your truth, even if we don't like it, I pray that those things would come in like seeds and be planted in our hearts, and they would grow there and bear fruit. I pray that we might all know the freedom that comes from knowing the one who was stripped naked for us so that we could be clothed with glory and honor and joy. I pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
