TITLE: Sight for the Blind
SCRIPTURE: 2 Kings 6:8-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Faith in an Age of Unbelief: Elijah and Elisha
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sight-for-the-blind/

============================================================

The scripture reading this morning is from 2 Kings 6, verses 8 through 23. Now the king of Aram was at war with Israel. After conferring with his officers, he said, I will set up my camp in such and such a place. The man of God sent word to the king of Israel, beware of passing that place because the Arameans are going down there. So the king of Israel checked on the place indicated by the man of God. Time and again, Elisha warned the king so that he was on his guard in such places. This enraged the king of Aram. He summoned his officers and demanded of them, Tell me, which of us is on the side of the king of Israel? None of us, my lord the king, said one of the officers. But Elisha, the prophet who was in Israel, tells the king of Israel the very words you speak in your bedroom. Go, find out where he is, the king ordered, so I can send men and capture him. The report came back. He is in Dothan. Then he sent horses and chariots and a strong force there. They went by night and surrounded the city. When the servant of the man of God got up and went out early the next morning, an army with horses and chariots had surrounded the city. Oh no, my lord, what shall we do? The servant asked. Don't be afraid, the prophet answered. Those who are with us are more than those who are with them. And Elisha prayed. Open his eyes, lord, so that he may see. Then the lord opened the servant's eyes, and he looked and saw the hills full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha. As the enemy came down towards him, Elisha prayed to the lord, strike this army with blindness. So he struck them with blindness as Elisha had asked. Elisha told them, this is not the road and this is not the city. Follow me and I will lead you to the man you were looking for. And he led them to Samaria. After they had entered the city, Elisha said, Lord, open the eyes of these men so they can see. Then the lord opened their eyes and they looked, and there they were inside Samaria. When the king of Israel saw them, he asked Elisha, shall I kill them, my father? Shall I kill them? Do not kill them, he answered. Would you kill those who you have captured with your own sword or bow? Set food and water before them, so that they may eat and drink and then go back to their master. So he prepared a great feast for them, and after they had finished eating and drinking, he sent them away, and they returned to their master. So the bands from Aram stopped raiding Israel's territory. The word of the lord. So during the summer in these last few weeks, we've been looking at the lives of the Old Testament prophets, Elijah and Elisha. And one of the reasons to do that comes from this fascinating exchange between John the Baptist and Jesus in Matthew chapter 11. John the Baptist is in prison, and he's hearing about the Christ. He's hearing about the things Jesus is doing. So he sends word to Jesus through his disciples. And it says, when John heard in prison about the deeds Jesus did, he sent word by his disciples, and he asked them this. Are you the one who is to come? Or should we look for another? And Jesus answered them, go and tell John what you hear and see. The blind receive their sight and the lame walk. Lepers are cleansed and the deaf hear. The dead are raised up and the poor have good news preached to them. Now it's notable that Jesus would point to these miracles like that and say, these are the signs that I am the savior of the world. Because first of all, that list is almost a summary of the careers of Elijah and Elisha. They did every single one of them. And what Jesus is saying, of course Jesus did those too. He also healed the blind, raised the dead, helped the poor. But what he's saying is, not only are these great supernatural actions, which they are, but they're also signs, they're representations of how God's salvation works. So while Jesus came to heal the physically blind, he also came to heal the spiritually blind. He not only came to raise the dead, the physically dead, but to raise the spiritually dead. He not only came to help the poor, but to restore the spiritually poor. And that's the reason why we should always look at it. those two levels, as we can see right here. Let's take a look at this really interesting story, extraordinarily interesting story, about sightedness and blindness and what we learn from it. So let's see how this story teaches us about the gift of spiritual sight, the condition of spiritual blindness, and how it can be healed. The gift of spiritual sight, the condition of spiritual blindness, and how it can be healed. Now, we learn about the gift of spiritual sight from the first two scenes in the story. The king of Aram, which is Syria, by the way, I'm just going to call it Syria from here on, was at war with Israel. In fact, if you've been here for other sessions, we were looking at other parts of the history of Elijah and Elisha. The Syrian king and the Syrian army has been going into Israel and invading and pillaging and enslaving people and all that for a while. But here we're told that Elisha is given spiritual insight, spiritual sight, as it were, from God, so that every time the king of Syria tries to make a move, the king of Israel knows all about it. And there's almost a comedic scene here. Down here at verse 11, this enraged the king of Syria, he summoned his officers and demanded them, tell me which of us is on the side of the king of Israel? You know, which of us is on the side? He's just enraged. And they say, none of us. It's that Elisha. It's that prophet. And so when the king of Syria finds out where he is, which is Dothan, he sends an army to sack the city, probably kill a lot of people, and capture Elisha. But in the second scene, Elisha and his servant are in the city. They're surrounded by the Syrians. And the servant is petrified. And we have the first of the two prayers that Elisha prays. In verse 17, it says, Elisha prays, O Lord, open his eyes so that he may see. Open his eyes, Lord, so he may see. And when the Lord opened the servant's eyes, he looked and saw hills full of horses and chariots of fire all around Elisha, which were the legions of angels, the hosts, the Lord of hosts he is. In other words, the servant of Elijah could see the physical reality, but couldn't see the spiritual reality. He could see the physical forces, but not the spiritual forces. He could not see that those who are with us are more than those who are with them. So, point. Blindness is impaired ability to recognize the truth. Blindness in the Bible, and actually the way we use the word at several levels, blindness is an impaired ability to recognize the truth. So, physical blindness is an impaired ability to recognize the truth of what's actually in your physical environment. There might be things out there coming at you you can't see because you're blind. So, spiritual blindness is an impaired ability to see what is spiritually around us. And so, that's why in the Bible, it's obvious why in the Bible, therefore, that physical blindness represents spiritual blindness, and physical sightedness, getting physical sight, represents getting spiritual sight. So, for example, when Saul, who becomes Paul, is on the road to Damascus, he's blinded, literally, physically blinded by a light, and he meets Jesus Christ. So, he's spiritually blinded. Why? It's God's way of saying, pardon me, he's physically blinded, and it's God's way of saying, it's because you're spiritually blind. And when he gets his physical sight back, it's as he gets his spiritual sight, he comes to see who Jesus Christ is. In John chapter 9, Jesus heals a man born blind. But he doesn't just leave it at physical healing, of course. He not only heals him physically, but then he leads him to faith, and in a sense, gives him spiritual sight. And the Pharisees are upset with the whole thing. And when Jesus, in this is John chapter 9, when Jesus confronts them, this is what he says, For judgment I have come into this world, so that the blind will see, and those who see be blind. And the Pharisees heard him saying this and said, What? Are you saying we're blind too? And Jesus said, Since you claim you can see, your guilt remains. Which is Jesus' way of saying, Yep. But he's actually saying more than that. What he's saying is, If you think you're spiritually sighted, it's a sign that you're spiritually blind. And if you know something of your spiritual blindness, it's a sign that you're becoming spiritually sighted. So, how does that, what do we learn from this story? first two scenes, first of all, tell us that spiritual sight, the ability to see your spiritual surroundings, to know spiritual realities, which we'll get to what those are in a minute, is a gift of God. Because it's not natural. Spiritual sight's not natural for anybody. And the way that gets across in the story is, you've got bad guys, right? Who are the bad guys? The soldiers. They've been marauding and pillaging and raping and killing and enslaving. And now they're coming to destroy this city and capture the prophet of God. These are the bad guys. And, of course, as we will see, they're struck with physical blindness to show them they're spiritually blind. But here's the good guy, Elisha's servant, who knows God. God knows, he's a monotheist, he's not a polytheist. He knows God, and yet he can't see spiritual reality unless, so it's intriguing that both the bad guys, later on, Elisha's going to have to pray in verse 20, Lord, open the eyes of these men. And the good guy, Elisha has to pray, Lord, open the eyes that he may see. In other words, we're all naturally blind. There's nice people and there's nasty people. There's moral people and there's immoral people. And we're all spiritually blind. Ephesians 4 says our foolish hearts are darkened. We're all insensitive to spiritual realities. We repress them. We don't like them. You know, John chapter 3 is about Nicodemus, a moral Bible-believing person. John chapter 4 is about the woman at the Samaritan, the woman at the well of Samaria, and she's a pagan, non-moral person, and yet they both need to be born again. They both need the regenerating power of the Holy Spirit. They both need the illuminating power of the Holy Spirit. So we're all spiritually blind, good and bad, no matter who you are. That's why spiritual sight is a gift. It's got to be a gift. But here's one other thing while we're in this first couple of scenes that I want to get across. It's not as easy, I don't think, to grasp as what I just said. And that is, becoming a Christian is not like turning over a new leaf. It's not like just working harder. It's not an extension of the things you're already doing. It's not like just finally saying, I'm going to get on a stick and I'm going to live the way I ought to live. A lot of people think that's what it means to become a Christian. No, no, it's much more like getting a new faculty and being ushered into a whole realm of reality you never even knew existed. It's much more radical than just becoming a good person. So for imagine, this is the value of all these divinely ordained metaphors. Let's think about this one. Imagine a person is not just legally blind, but born without any visual ability at all. No concept of light and darkness or color, anything. Totally, absolutely blind. So they grow up and they're talking to you. And what if the person says, I've been hearing people talk about red and blue and yellow, so I've been trying to think about this. Is red like the sound of a trumpet? Or like the feel of wool? And the only right answer, I don't know what you're going to say because you're trying to be kind and all that, but the only right answer is to say not really because sight is not an extension of hearing or feeling. It's just not. Sight is not an extension of hearing and feeling. Sight enables you to perceive realities that hearing and touching cannot perceive. And therefore, there is no way for you to even imagine what color and light and darkness is light until you have that faculty. Now, lots and lots of people think becoming a Christian is basically an extension of what you already are doing. We ought to obey the golden rules. So as a Christian, I'm really going to ask God's help to really live as I should. We believe in God. You can do that without spiritual sight. I believe in God, so I'm going to pray. I'm going to pray more often. That's not becoming a Christian. Jesus said, I came that the blind might see. I came to bring the new birth. I came not just to make people nicer, but new. And what does that mean then? Okay, here's what it means. Spiritual sight means that ideas that were either silly to you or just abstract to you become so compelling and so amazing and so thrilling and so real to you that they change you permanently. So, for example, Elisha's servant would have known a lot about God. He would have had right theology, right doctrine. He knew. He knew. see it. And because he knew it with his head, it didn't affect his heart, it didn't affect the way in which he lived. But when he saw it, when the spiritual reality of something, an idea that was just an abstraction, gripped his heart, it changed him. Look, I know plenty of people who believe in a God of forgiveness, and yet they're wracked with shame and guilt. Or they believe that God said, thou shalt not commit adultery, but they're having affairs. See, what is it to say, well, I know God says this is wrong, but I'm having an affair. What is that? It's to say that you know something, but you don't see it. You may know it in the abstract, but you don't see it. Because if you saw it, it would change you. And that's the reason why one of the marks of somebody who is not just becoming a nicer person or a more moral person, but is getting spiritual sight, is they may listen to a sermon or they may read the Bible, and they may say, I've heard this before, but now it's so, it's like the Bible's become alive. It's like there's light on every page. It's like stuff that I knew before, and now it's just so wonderful and so thrilling, this. What's going on there? The gift of spiritual sight. The gift of spiritual sight. Okay, so there, first thing we learn is that spiritual sight is a gift. But secondly, we're talking about spiritual realities. What are we talking about? What does that mean, that you become alive to spiritual realities? So the second thing I'd like to look at as we go down into the story is the conditions of spiritual blindness. What is it that we're blind to? What are these realities that we're blind to? When the soldiers are struck with blindness, it says, you know, when they, Elisha has to pray, and he says in verse 18, strike this army with blindness. This is like Paul on the road to Damascus. This is like the, by the way, the guys who were trying to attack the angels in Sodom. They're struck with blindness. In other words, in the Bible, very often, spiritual blindness is shown by striking them with physical blindness. And so these guys are now physically blind to show off their spiritual blindness. Well, what is the condition of spiritual blindness? Well, there's three things. Spiritual blindness means to be blind to three things. The depth of your sin, the beauty of grace, and to blindness itself. The depth of your sin, the beauty of grace, and the blindness itself. First of all, the depth of your sin. These guys thought they were just following orders. They did not know they were fighting God. And in the same way, until you get spiritual sight, you really, you may say, I'm not, oh, I'm flawed. I have, I'm not perfect. I, I do bad things. No, I really can be a really bad person. You may have some concept that you're not perfect, or you may, but you do not understand until you get spiritually sighted the depth of your sin. You can't see your sin in the true light any more than they could see what they were doing in the true light. How so? Well, like this. Until you get spiritual, before spiritual sight comes, you understand sin as discrete violations of rules. You're violating the rules. You understand sin as breaking the rules, and you regret sin only when it messes up your life. You understand sin as breaking the rules, and you regret sin as just messing up your life, basically. But when spiritual sight is given to you, when your heart is regenerated by the Holy Spirit, when the faculty comes, then both those things change. First of all, you start to see your sin not just as, of course it is, breaking rules. If God says don't do this and you do it, that's a sin, of course. But you see it as much more of a pervasive attitude of heart. Something that goes extraordinarily deep, and that affects every single part of you. So if you ask a person without spiritual sight, are you a good person, they'll say, well, I have done a lot of bad things, but I've done a lot of good things, too. But if you ask a person with spiritual sight, are you a good person, here's what they'll say. And only a Christian who's gotten spiritual sight will say this. They'll say, well, I've done bad things, but even the good things I've done, I've done for bad reasons. I do good things, yeah, but to control God so he has to bless me, to control other people's thinking of me so I can control my image with them, so I can command their respect, so I can have my own self-respect. I mean, I help people, but I don't help them for their sake, I help them for my sake. I've even obeyed God, but I haven't obeyed God for his sake, I've obeyed God for my sake. that. C.S. Lewis, in his famous book, Mere Christianity, you get to his great chapter called The Great Sin, where it's about pride. Basically, he says, I've heard people who are not Christians, people who have not had spiritual sight. In other words, I've had people admit all kinds of things that they've done wrong, discreet individual things. I lied, I cheated, I did this wrong, I did that wrong. I've never heard somebody who wasn't a converted Christian say, I am the most self-centered, curved in on myself, self-absorbed person. Or if they do say it, it's in passing because they're having a bad day. Okay. So only with spiritual sight do you see the depth of your, you know, sin is not just this and that bad thing, but a whole attitude of the heart. But then secondly, and I get this from John Newton, the guy who wrote Amazing Grace and wrote a bunch of other letters. The second thing is, without spiritual sight, you only regret sin when it gets you into trouble. You do things wrong, but you only get really upset when it screws up your life. That's the reason why when you repent and you think, I'm going to change, as soon as things get better, you go back. Why? Because your only real motive was to have a happy life. But as John Newton says, only with spiritual sight do you see what's, you start to regret sin because it grieves God, because it dishonors the one who's given you everything. And see, that never goes away. And that's the reason why people without spiritual sight rue the fact that they're this or that, and they try to change their behavior and they can't. And people with spiritual sight try to change their behavior and they can. So first of all, we're blind to the depth of sin. Secondly, though, we're blind to the beauty of grace. These soldiers had no idea that the enemy, the Elisha, they thought that the public enemy, number one, if you're Syrian, public enemy number one, was their greatest friend they had in the world. Because, you see, when they are, what Elisha does, they're struck with blindness and Elisha meets them on the road and says, you're not going to the right place and leads them to where? Samaria. You know what Samaria is? That's the stronghold of the king of Israel. That's the that's the capital. Okay. And so here's the army that has been ravaging Israel and they're led into the, into Samaria and they can't see straight. And the king of Israel, I mean, it's a little comic again, but the king of Israel is really excited. You know, he's, he's almost like a kid in a candy shop. He says, Oh my God, I've got the enemy army. And you notice when he says, he doesn't just say, shall I kill him? He says, shall I kill them? My father? Shall I kill them? You know, the doubling in is a Hebrew idiom that shows great emotional excitement. He's really excited. Can I kill? Can I kill? Can I kill? And Elisha says, no. See, Elisha stands as their advocate. He stands as their mediator. He stands as their savior. And this kind of grace where this army that does deserve to die by the rules of war, who's captured and completely helpless. And he makes them a feast. This is radical grace that by the way, changes their lives. They go off and say, the bands from Aaron, from Syria stopped raiding Israel after that. This was shocking. It was stunning. They couldn't believe it. They couldn't believe it. And that's, that's the, that's, that's the fact. It takes the Holy Spirit to help, have you understand and love the gospel of sheer grace. Let me give you my four favorite examples of this. The most favorite example, of course, is Paul. Paul was a Pharisee and Paul understood that you have to obey the law, which is true. He understood that God is holy and you need to be holy. That's true. And God, that God was righteous and you need to be righteous. That's absolutely right. But he couldn't, he had no concept of salvation by grace alone. And that's the reason why he says in Philippians three, this famous place, Philippians three, he says, um, as to legal righteousness, I was faultless, but I count it now, now I counted all loss that I might be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from keeping the law, but the righteousness that comes from God and is through faith in Christ Jesus. He understood with, without the Holy Spirit, you can understand, I need to be a good person and, or God wants me to be a good person, but only the Holy Spirit gives you, it was astounding salvation by grace. I remember when I was a very young minister, 24 years old, trying to visit, uh, some of the very poor, uh, homes in the neighborhood around our building in a small town in Virginia. And I went with another guy from the church and we went in and we, I had found a welfare mom, uh, welfare by herself in this home. And in that small town, in that time and place, she was disgraced. She was on the outs of society. And we sat down, and we explained the gospel. She said, well, I understand the gospel. I was raised in church. And I said, what's the gospel? And she says, if you really, really, really live a good life, you'll be saved. And I said, no, you're saved, and then you get to really live a good life. She says, well, that doesn't make sense. So I explained it to her, and she couldn't believe it. I mean, you can be saved before. I said, of course, because, you know, let's understand goodness. And we worked on this a little bit. And then she said, you're saved by grace. You're saved now. God loves you now because of what Jesus did. It's not based on my works or my goodness at all. She said, well, I have to think about this. So during the week we were away, we came back the next week, she called her sister. Now, her sister was in a completely different place in that society. She was married. She was married to a prominent person in the community. They went to a prominent church in the community. And when she told her sister what I had told her, her sister said, that is stupid. That is ridiculous. You have to live a good life. You have to go to church. I've worked hard for my salvation. You can't, you know, you've got to get going here. I mean, you know, he can't just come in and say, oh, it doesn't matter. You've got five children out of wedlock and all that. Come on. So we came back the next week and, you know, the sister, I didn't say, I could have said, your sister's spiritually blind. But I didn't do that. But she was. But this woman, her eyes were starting to get open. And she said, well, am I supposed to obey your sister or you? And I mean, listen to me, sister or you? And I said, well, let's not do it that way. Let's put up your sister against the Bible. So we studied the Bible, read the Bible. And she and her heart was opened. And her eyes were opened. David Martin Lloyd-Jones, great British preacher, used to say this. He says, one of the ways you know your heart, your eyes have been opened, is that when somebody, whenever you hear about the gospel of the doctrine of justification by faith alone, the doctrine of justification by faith alone means that we're justified before God just by what Jesus Christ did for us on the cross and our faith in that. We're not justified by our works. We're not justified by our moral record. He says one of the ways he knows a person is not just a nice person or, you know, but a person whose eyes have been opened is they can't get enough of that doctrine. All they want to do is hear about it. It's an endless source of joy. It's an endless source of fascination. But my main, my favorite illustration is this. Years ago, again, when I was pretty young, I was in a committee. And this committee was a group of ministers who were listening to candidates who were other ministers, generally young ones, who wanted to go plant churches. And so they had to come before our committee and we had to, you know, approve them. So you always ask them, tell us something about how you became a Christian. And every one of them, almost every one of them said this. I was raised in the church and I was raised in the church, but I never heard the gospel. I've never heard the gospel of grace. But then this or that happened and I learned it or somebody showed it to me or something like that. And then I became a Christian and off I went. Now, when the sixth guy in a row had come in and started doing that, one of the most prominent minister in that group, whose name was Frank Barker, probably the most prominent minister, he had a great big church in Birmingham, Alabama. And he says, you know, I don't want anybody here to get the wrong impression that somehow these guys were all in these, must have been in terrible churches. He never heard the gospel. And he says, let me tell you my story. He says, I was raised in the church and I wanted to go into ministry. And so I started taking courses at seminary. So I took some courses on theology and Bible. But then for whatever reason, he got into the military. I'm not sure. I think it might've been the Korean war, but anyway, he was, he was brought into the military. And while he was in the military, a chaplain led him to Christ, told him the gospel of grace. He'd never heard. He said, this is amazing. This is astonishing. I'm not, I thought being a Christian was just living a good life. But it's, it's like, it's having your eyes open. It's, it's understanding grace. It's trusting in Christ. It's being saved and accepted apart from anything you've ever done. And he was amazing to him. And as he was meeting with the chaplain after this, and he would be meeting with the chaplain, at one point he says, you know, chaplain, I want to know is why nobody ever, ever, ever told me the gospel. My minister at home didn't know the gospel. And here's what I really want to know. He said, why didn't Martin Luther know anything about the gospel? A chaplain said, why would, why would you say that? He says, well. and uh on martin luther in fact i read his commentary on the galatians and uh there was nothing about the gospel in there and the chaplain says well you know now that your eyes have been now that you've become a christian why don't you go back and read that book again and frank said he was telling us all this he says i went back and i opened that book and it says there on every page there was the gospel highlighted underlined and i hadn't seen it he says i want you to know right now there are young men and women growing up in my church under my preaching and they're not hearing the gospel until the holy spirit opens their eyes the beauty of grace is not something you can take in without the holy spirit's help you may say oh yeah i've heard the doctrine of justification by faith and yet your life you're just you you ignore it you you reject it you even if you think you believe it you don't believe unless the holy spirit opens your eyes and it becomes the most wonderful thing that you've ever heard the most compelling and astounding thing you've ever heard you're still blind last thing we gotta get it um don't forget spiritually blind people are blind to the depth of their sin they're blind to the beauty of grace but also they're blind to blindness i could just in a word jesus already talked about it one of the ways you know that you're blind is you don't think you are and if you don't think you are today you are it's proof you are look the most self-centered people have no idea they're self-centered do they of course not the least self-centered people actually have a pretty good sense that they are self-centered that's the way it works if you say you uh you're you know jesus if you say you see you're blind if you say i can't see right i'm i'm you know i'm blind your your sight is beginning to clear so there's the condition there's the gift how do we get the gift how does the condition get healed and there's a let me give you really fast three hows and a why how can the condition of spiritual healing of spiritual blindness be healed there's three hows and a why the three hows go like this stages suffering and prayer stages you need to recognize the fact that even though there is a spiritual healing of your sight that brings you to see the depth of your sin the gospel of grace that brings you to christ brings you to salvation nevertheless paul in ephesians one writes a group of christians and said i'm praying that your eyes will be enlightened the spiritual eyes of your heart will be enlightened that's what he says so that you may grasp the hope and the power and the and the glory of what you have in christ what does that mean what he's trying to say is yeah you know you you see enough to be saved but your spiritual sight needs to be constantly improving because it's not very good we're all very nearsighted frankly spiritually nearsighted even even the best christians are even the most mature christians so it's healed in stages secondly it tends to be healed most by suffering dothan two things happen in dothan do you know what they are class this happened in dothan a man about to be captured he looks to god chariots of fire okay but centuries before joseph stupid self-absorbed stuck up young boy joseph went to see his uh brothers who were tending sheep in the field outside of dothan and what he did was uh he went to see them and they when they captured him put him in a pit they captured him but he wasn't delivered no chariots of fire no legions of angels he was sold into slavery so to our non-spiritual site we can look there and say well you know joseph was in trouble elisha was in trouble god came through for elisha god did not come through for joseph but you know that's not true if joseph had been immediately delivered if he hadn't gone through the terrible suffering the years and years and years of imprisonment and slavery he never would have right risen up he never would have saved egypt from uh from famine he never would have saved his own family he never himself would have been redeemed from his own sin and so what you have here this this reference to dothan has always shown me that one of the one of the ways out of spiritual blindness is bad things happen to you like they did to joseph that's what that's what woke him up the delusion of self-sufficiency which is at the heart of spiritual blindness is the right one that's the heart of spiritual blindness and it's suffering that destroys that illusion and therefore actually 10 it generally suffering is one of the ways out of spiritual blindness but also by the way your ability to see that god is there even when he seems to not be answering is one of the marks of spiritual sightedness so there's stages there's suffering and then there's prayer uh paul uh in ephesians 3 prays that the eyes of our heart will be enlightened so that our hearts will grasp more the the height and the width and the breadth and the depth of the love of god and therefore generally speaking i mean i can just speak for this when i pray in the morning my spiritual sight starts to clear things that upset me get into perspective you see unless i pray again in the evening by the evening i've forgotten a lot of what i heard in the morning because your spiritual sight is something you're always fighting to clarify asking the holy spirit so it happens in stages it happens very often through the worst things that happen to us in our lives and it happens through prayer but why can it happen i'll tell you why it can happen see why were these guys saved these were people who are doing terrible things the the these guys are not innocent these soldiers why could they just be let go i mean the king of israel must have been pretty upset so elisha what are you doing why are you acting as a mediator why are you acting as a savior how can you let these guys off these guys deserve to die do you know what they've done they've done terrible things but elisha says no let them go and he prepares a feast for them a feast of grace that changes them they don't go out and you know pillage anymore well it doesn't seem fair actually it doesn't seem just but here's why it can happen to you and me why we can get this grace centuries later there are a bunch of soldiers who are also trying to capture a prophet and kill him he was the greatest prophet this was in the garden of gethsemane the soldiers came and here's what's interesting that prophet also knew he was surrounded by legions of angels and chariots of fire but he does not call on them in fact when peter got out his sword this is what jesus said this is what that great prophet jesus said the ultimate prophet he says put your sword in place do not think the father could not send 12 legions of angels but then how would the scripture be fulfilled see what jesus is doing is this all the other deliverers all the other prophets all the other people in the history of the world in the bible who were recipients of grace were able to get that grace because their sin was put on jesus christ jesus was executed so we wouldn't have to be jesus was plunged into the darkness remember darkness came down on him when he died so that we could be brought into the light jesus took the punishment so so what so that we could get a feast when we deserve to be executed so that we can be saved so that we can get spiritual sight that's why god can do this for us if you just ask so do it ask if there's anybody here who actually says i have never really seen the things you see are talking about or had these senses or or or thought these things well then maybe you need to say lord for the very first time please open my eyes but everybody in this room even those of you the most mature christians you're struggling right now because you don't see as well as you ought to see you need god to give you another touch you're afraid of darkness lord show me your light and beauty you're afraid of weakness lord show me the hope of the resurrection you're whatever is bothering you say lord open my eyes that i may see and remember the only people who get an answer to that are people who admit that they're blind that's the reason why we sing hear him ye deaf his praise ye dumb you're a loose in tongues employee he blind to behold your savior come and leap ye lame for joy let's pray so father um we are amazed that becoming a christian is a miracle it's a miracle it's like getting a new faculty it's getting a new sense uh it's uh it's such a radical thing and we pray lord that uh no that we not only thank you for it but we also pray that people around us will experience it too but we pray more than that that you would uh improve our sight i mean uh the the soldiers needed spiritual sight the elisha's servant just needed better spiritual sight and there's a lot of us that just need to have our sight cleared and we're can't see. We might know this or that abstractly, but we can't see what we need to see about you. Your wisdom, your love, your power, your mercy, your costly grace. So open our eyes, Lord, that we might see. And we ask for it through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen. Amen.
