TITLE: Signs of the King
SCRIPTURE: Acts 2:37-47
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) The Holy Spirit
SERIES: The King and the Kingdom
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/signs-of-the-king/

============================================================

When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, Brothers, what shall we do? And Peter replied, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. The promise is for you and your children, and for all who are far off, for all whom the Lord our God will call. With many other words, he warned them, and he pleaded with them, Save yourselves from this corrupt generation. Those who accepted his message were baptized, and about 3,000 were added to their number that day. They devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and to the fellowship, to the breaking of bread, and to prayer. Everyone was filled with awe, and many wonders and miraculous signs were done by the apostles. All the believers were together and had everything in common. Selling their possessions and goods, they gave to anyone as he had need. Every day they continued to meet together in the temple courts. They broke bread in their homes and ate together with glad and sincere hearts, praising God and enjoying the favor of all the people. And the Lord added to their number daily those who were being saved. The word of the Lord. Last week we began a series of messages, of talks on the church. Have you noticed how often I talk about us launching a church? Why do I like to use that word launching? Is it just because I'm a frustrated sailor? No. Actually, I think of a rocket ship. And I think of how important liftoff is. Because if you're aiming at the moon, and your rocket ship down here is just a silly millimeter off, it can be thousands of miles off when it gets there, you see. And therefore, if this church is not going to join the thousands and thousands of cultural institutions that are totally ineffective in this country, within just a few years, it is vital that we strain every nerve to think about the church aright, to envision it, to see exactly what it is and what it can be. Now, last week we said that there was a central fact, the most important thing you have to understand if you're going to understand what the church is. And that central fact is that the church is the place where God dwells, where God comes down, as it were, and meets us in all of his transcendent love and light and fire and majesty. That's what the Bible says. And the church has known this for years. Not programs, not busyness, not work, but that. You know, one of the greatest hymns ever written about the church was written by John Newton. It goes, Glorious things of thee are spoken, Zion, city of our God, talking about the church. He whose word cannot be broken formed thee for his own abode. The first thing Newton says in that hymn is, the church is the place where God dwells. Now, this particular passage is very critical because it gives us the birth of the New Testament church. You see, there's a little group of people. Jesus, when he left, had only left a small handful of people. Peter preaches this remarkable message on the day that, in the history of the church, we have always called the day of Pentecost. And on that day, Peter preached the message, and the message that formed that church, that gathered those 3,000 souls that first day. The message was, through Jesus Christ, you can have the presence of God in your life. Now, we'll look at that just for a minute because I want to show you that that was his message. That's what formed the church. And then, we see that in verses 37 to 41, that that's the message that formed the church. But then, in verses 42 to 47, we see the marks of the life of this early church. In other words, if a group of people actually come together and build their lives on that reality that God is present in the midst, if a group of people come together and actually take that seriously, not cynically, but seriously, and say, this is what we're going to build our lives on, the presence of God expresses itself. There's a cosmic vitality that expresses itself through a church like that. And I want to show you the signs of it. It's right there in verses 42 to 47. There's five signs. whether a church is realizing the presence of God. So what we're trying to show here and what this passage tries to show is that first of all, number one, before we can run off to our busyness and run off to our ministries and our programs, we've got to stand before God and realize his presence and know it and yearn it, yearn for it. But then it's the presence of God that becomes like the motor or the drive shaft for everything else the church does. And that's what we're going to see. First, the message that forms the church. Jesus Christ is the way to know the presence of God. And then secondly, the signs of life that flow out of that, that every good church should be characterized by. So let's look at the message and then let's look at those five signs which are the evidences of that kind of vitality. First, the message. And in a way, we talked about this last week, but I just want to show you again what it is. Peter says to them, repent, what's he say? Repent and be baptized. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Okay, first of all, he says, repent and be baptized. That's virtually the same thing Jesus said when he came out of the wilderness and first began to preach in Mark chapter 1 verse 14 and he says, repent and believe the gospel. Those two things are always there. Repent and trust. Repent and trust that your sins can be put away through Jesus Christ so they're no longer a barrier between you and God. Repent and believe. Repent and believe. Those are not two different things. That's one thing. It's repentant faith. Turning from your old ways, resting and trusting in Christ, making him your only hope in life and death. They're really two sides of the same coin and that's how you receive Christ as Savior and Lord, through repentance and faith. Then Jesus, pardon me, then Peter here says, if you do that, now obviously we could spend quite a bit of time talking about repentance and faith, but right now let's move on to how this creates the church. If a person receives Christ as Savior and Lord, Peter says you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Now let's take that apart for a moment. First of all, will you see, friends, I'm going to give me a 90-second tangent for some of you. It's even though you've repented and believed, the Holy Spirit comes in as a gift. Your repentance and your faith does not earn the Spirit. It is a gift. Now the only reason I say that is because I continually meet people who don't know where they stand in the Christian faith. And they say, I know you're not saved by your efforts and your good deeds. You're saved strictly by faith alone, but I don't know whether my faith is good enough. It doesn't seem to be very strong. It doesn't seem to be very pure. Listen. Repentance and faith receives the gift. Your repentance and faith doesn't have to be pure enough to earn it, then it wouldn't be a gift. Or let me put it this way. It's the fact of your repentant faith, not the purity of it, that brings it in. And anyone who's worried and always saying, oh, I don't know that I've repented well enough, I wonder if I've repented good enough. Oh, I can clear that up for you right now. You haven't. Nobody's ever repented good enough. Huh? Who in the world has ever been sorry enough for the things they've done wrong? You say, oh, I don't know whether my faith is good enough. I can clear that up too. My friends, and here's the bad thing. If you're worried about it, there's pride in there. As humble and as despairing as you seem. No, what you're saying is, oh, I've got to get good enough. I've got to be pure enough. I've got to be faithful enough so Jesus Christ can give me a spirit. My friends, receiving Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord is, Jesus Christ is a gift. Eternal life is a gift. The Holy Spirit is a gift. Your faith receives it. It doesn't earn it. It can't. Don't you see? But now, it's the gift of the Holy Spirit that I want to look at here for a second. And Peter is telling us something that I'm afraid most of us here cannot really understand the momentous nature of. How do you like that for a sentence? I don't think anybody in this room can understand how momentous a statement this was unless we spend some time reflecting on it. Peter didn't just preach this sermon. Years later, he wrote a couple of epistles which are in the back of this book. he says, there's a tremendous promise. He says, the promise is to you and to your children, to all who are far off, you can come near to God. You can come near. You're far off. You can come into the presence of God, receive the Holy Spirit. Now, he says it a different way in his second epistle, his second letter, in chapter 1, verse 4, where he says, through his great and precious promises, we participate in the divine nature. That's the same thing. See, what is the Holy Spirit? It's the glory of God. It's the life blood of God. I'm sorry. I mean, you see, this promised beggar's description, it's his very glory. And Peter is saying that that, through receiving Jesus Christ as Savior, Lord, can flood into your life. Now, get the hang of this. Remember, Moses said, show me your glory. What he was saying is, oh, Lord, I want your glory to come into my life. I want to see it. And God said, you can't. It'll kill you. Your poor, bitty little soul would crack under the strain of it, so I'm going to let you see the gleam of my brightness through the back door, in a sense. He says, I'll put you in the cleft of the rock and I'll let my hind parts go by you. And we don't know what in the world that means except that God was saying to Moses, Moses, you can't take my glory. When Isaiah got just a glimpse of God in the temple, what does he say? He says, woe is me, I'm undone, which is a good King James version way of saying, I feel unzipped. I feel I'm being unbuttoned. I'm unraveling. Why? He says, for mine eyes have seen the king. The king is here. And even getting this close, I feel like I'm coming apart. And you know, the glory of God, his face, his royal presence, his raw presence, what in the Old Testament they called the Shekinah, the glory cloud of God, dwelt in the Holy of Holies, in the center of the tabernacle and the temple, behind the veil, over the Ark of the Covenant. And who could get there? Who could go back there? See? Who could get near the presence of God? Only the high priest, the holiest person, supposedly, in Israel, one day a year on the Day of Atonement, after spending days purifying himself in body and soul. And then he would go back there with a blood atonement, sprinkling incense everywhere so he didn't see anything that might kill him. And he had bells on the tassels on his robe so that the people outside could hear him moving around so they knew he was still alive. Hmm? Now, why was the presence of God so fatal to people? One of the problems is that we've got movies. And I know that, in a way, Steven Spielberg wasn't really trying to depict this. But you know, in the Raiders of the Lost Ark, the power of God that comes out of the Ark of the Covenant is depicted as a completely abstract thing. You remember, don't you, that through great special effects, the nasty Nazis open the lid and they look in. And if you remember correctly, if I remember correctly, Harrison Ford and Karen Allen closed their eyes. Isn't that right? And you get the impression, number one, because they closed their eyes while the Nazis were looking at it. And number two, you just also get the impression that because the Nazis are nasty, the Nazis are nasty, the Nazis are nasty, and because Harrison Ford and Karen Allen were kind of good people, they didn't get melted down the way all the other people did with all those great special effects. In other words, the power of God, the Ark of the Covenant, the Ark of the Covenant is depicted as a kind of cosmic mousetrap. And the power is abstract. And if you push the right buttons and you do the right things, you see, it'll harm, not harm you, it'll harm somebody else. My friends, that is not at all the way the Bible depicts the glory of God. The glory of God was fatal to people. And the reason it was fatal to people is because of the holiness issue. Holiness and sin. And maybe the best way to understand it is this. It's the old orbit analogy. God, because he is completely pure and he's completely holy and he's completely just, everything he does centers on, everything he thinks centers on, everything he is centers on what is good and what is holy and what is just and what is pure. That's why he does what he does. Now let's think about ourselves for a moment, remember? Everything we do centers on... will take the good, the true, and the holy into consideration. But we reject it if it looks like it's not comfortable. Right? Let's be honest. So what do we center on? Why do we do the things we do? Why do we make the decisions we make? What do we center on? We center on our own comfort and our own happiness and here is God centering on what is good and what is true and what is right. And my friends, when two planets have the same center, you have a solar system and you have harmony. And when two planets come together and they have two different centers, you have an accident looking for a place to happen. It's inevitable that there will be cataclysm. And when a holy God and a man who, man or woman, when human beings who make everything revolve around their own pride and themselves, when holy God comes into the presence of sinful man, there is trauma. There is clash. And so when Moses said, show me your glory, God, I said, I can't. And even all through the Bible, you see, though Moses knew that he needed the presence of God, that we were all built for it, that he wanted it, he knew it would fulfill something deep in every human soul. He couldn't have it. And in the Bible, whenever, it says, come into his presence with singing. We know that that was a relative command because the people could not come into the presence of God. They could come relatively into the presence of God. They could come into the outer courts, but nobody could go into the presence of God except that poor high priest with his knees knocking. And then, Peter has the audacity to say, through his great and precious promises, we are made partakers of the divine nature, that through receiving Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord, because he is the real high priest, because he is the final sacrifice, that when Jesus died, that veil was ripped, and the barrier between the presence of God and the people was gone, because Jesus is the door, and when you receive Jesus Christ as your Savior and Lord, the very presence of God comes into your life, the Holy Spirit comes in. Him, the Holy Spirit. With all of his unconquerable mirth, mirth, the Holy Spirit has enough joy in him to set a whole kingdom laughing. Why not? God is the center of joy. The Holy Spirit, with his absolute purity, the Holy Spirit, with his boundless love, the Holy Spirit, with his dynamic energy and strength, comes in, and we're never the same again. Don't you see? This is radical. And this is what the church was built on, and this is what the people responded to. Now, just before we move on, quick, one thing. One quick thing. I'll be as quick as I can. You can't have something like that coming into your life without turmoil. See, there's a lot of people. Some of you are fairly new Christians, and that's one of the reasons I'm here in New York, to meet people like you. And some of you, it depends on how new you are. I would say if it's been a few weeks, if it's been a couple of months, somewhere, somewhere in there, you experience the tough side of being a Christian. Now, there's all sorts of tough sides, and I don't have time to go into a catalog of them now. But some of you are out there saying, if God is my Savior, and if my sins are forgiven, if He accepts me, and all these great things are true, why are all these problems happening to me? Or some of you are saying, if the Holy Spirit's come into my life like this, why does it seem to be taking so long for me to get better? Why in some ways do I feel like I'm actually doing worse in some ways? Am I really a Christian? Now look, friends, for something of this kind of power and magnitude to come into your life, it just does not sneak in. It doesn't slip in. If you think of the Christian life as one unbroken, smooth road of peace from here on in, look out. Suppose we were in the middle of a tremendous heat wave. I mean, not, we haven't had heat waves this year, but like last year. That's worse than last year. 110 degrees. Day after day after day. People are dying. Imagine being in a heat wave like that. And you start to say, we're going to perish if we don't get a cool Canadian high. Ah, we find out there's one on the way. Well, how will it come? How will it come and release us and deliver us from this heat? Thunderstorm, right? You know, you see a cold air mass coming and hitting... before everything clears off and the haze is gone, things get worse before they get better. Before the haze is gone so we can finally see the blue sky, things have got to get a lot worse. That's the normal approach. And my friends, when God comes into your life, when His presence comes into your life, full of selfishness with His love, full of power with your anxiety, you see. There's going to be a clash. It has to happen. There will be. But don't worry. The haze will clear out. That's the only thing I need to tell you. But you see, somebody says, if God's a loving God, why is it that He's showing me so many bad things about my life? Why is it that everything is going like this? Well, listen, the presence of God, remember who He is. He is light, and He is love, and He is wise, and He is holy. There's this tremendous quote that I got out of C.S. Lewis' book, The Problem of Pain, in which he says, just be careful when you ask the living God into your life. He says, in awful and surprising truth, we are objects of His love. If you ask for a loving God, you have one. The great spirit God you invoked is present. Not, now listen to every word here, not as a senile benevolence that drowsily wishes you to be happy in your own way. Not with the cold philanthropy of a conscientious magistrate, but He is the consuming fire Himself. And the love that made the worlds is as persistent as the artist's love for his work, as provident and as venerable as a father's love for a child, as jealous, as inexorable, as exacting as love between the sexes. Yes, God's come in with this love. It's a holy love. It's a powerful love. And it's going to renovate you, and it's going to remake you. But nobody ever renovates someplace without a lot of dust, and a lot of dirt, and a lot of inconvenience. Right? Without it getting uglier before it gets more beautiful. That's normal. How can you expect it to be any other way? Trust Him, though, you see. You trust Him in it, of course. But recognize that when something like this comes into your life, there's going to be a cloud of dust. Now, verses 42 to 47 tell us that these people who took hold of this truth with both hands and said, All right, we're going to build our lives on this. That though we were far away from God, we can be brought near, right into the presence of God, have the Holy Spirit in our lives. I want to show you that there are five signs of this vitality. Let me put it this way. Father, every one of you in this room who have received Christ as Savior and Lord, you have access to the presence of God when you sit down and pray, when you say, Because of what Jesus Christ did, O Father, hear my prayer. You have access to His presence. But the Bible also says, Where two or three of you are gathered in my name, there am I in the midst of you. And what that means, among other things, is that when several Christians get together, though they individually have access to the presence of God, the presence of God expresses itself in corporate ways, in the corporate life of those people. And here's what they are, five of them, and I want you to keep this in mind. I'm going to go through them quickly, because every one of them at some future date will get an extended treatment. I guarantee you. But I want you to see, at this point, the importance is that they all have to be together. Having one or two or three will not do the trick. Now, explain why. Number one, well, let me just give you the five. They're all here. Okay? Teaching, community, social compassion, evangelism, and worship. Teaching, community, social compassion, evangelism, and worship. Five things. Now, look at them. Let's go right through them. Quick, quick. Okay? Number one, teaching. It says here in verse 42, they were devoted to the apostles' teaching. Devoted. A vital church understands that truth is not just a subjective thing. Of course it's subjective. But we also believe there's a body of truth. The teaching of the apostles and the prophets is deposited here. And that truth not only gives us guidance for every area of our life, but the truth isn't an abstract thing. The Bible says about itself that it's alive and active. It's a transforming power that comes in and changes us. Now, for a church to honor the truth does not just mean that people flock to hear the great teacher. Nor does it mean that the people of the church just run by their Bibles in the morning. jump out of it onto you somewhere to take you through the day. Rather, it says that the people of a church like this are devoted to the apostles' teaching. They devoted themselves, you see. They dug in. They spent the time. They reflected. They thought. They meditated. They wrestled. They said, how do I get this truth into my life? What does this truth mean, you see? They thought about it. And one of the hard things to explain, one of the hard things to show in a place like New York, especially in a place like Manhattan, is that wherever God's presence is, there is an insatiable hunger for truth. Now, the reason it's harder to show in, say, a college town or a big city is there's lots of people around. Lots of you are already predisposed to enjoy reading and studying. You become Christians and you continue to enjoy reading and studying. But it's starkly obvious when you go to a place where people hate reading and studying and the Spirit of God, when the presence of God comes down in their midst, it's amazing to see the change. I took a church in Virginia that when I got there, as far as I know, virtually none of the officers had finished high school. And especially the males in that particular blue-collar southern community felt that reading and writing were feminine. I remember a man who came to Christ before I got there, just before I got there. He had been an alcoholic. He had been a career army sergeant. He was a tough, rough person. He became a Christian. And this man, who had only finished eighth grade, and I don't know how in the world he got that far, became hungry to study the Word of God and he could barely read. And he would spend hours reading a passage, having to look everything up in the dictionary. And after a while, he came to me and he said, I want to teach. I said, I don't know how you're going to do that. He says, give me a chance. So we gave him a Sunday school class and his wife told me absolutely for sure that he spent 45 hours a week preparing his lesson. And what he would do is he would have to take out his dictionary and spend hours just reading through, with a dictionary, the Sunday school teacher's guide, you know. And then he would write out what he was going to say. He would speak it into a tape. He'd take the tape to some friends and they'd listen and he could say, now am I pronouncing these words right and what does this word mean? What did he turn out to be? A, you know, a good teacher. You know, nothing spectacular. A mediocre teacher. But it was unbelievable to see what happened in this man's life. And he changed. And I remember after being there for nine years, one of the last days I was there, this man came up to me and said something. He said, you know what? Before you came to this town, before I came under your teaching, I was a racist. Now, I had never, ever, ever talked to this man. Of course he was a racist. Everybody in town was a racist. And frankly, I had never talked to this man about it, ever. And that's one of the last things that a blue-collar southern male over the age of 50 will ever see. What happened to him? Let me see. Whenever God is present, the truth shines. Some of you may, up to now, have been saying, I don't even know, I'm sure, what you mean when you talk about access to the presence of God. Let me tell you what the sign of it is. You're reading a passage. Let me give you the most common way to experience it. Only through Jesus Christ, of course. You're reading a passage you've read a hundred times before, and suddenly, it shines. Like somebody plugged it in. And you're looking for the cord. You're saying, Why didn't I ever see that before? You see, the truth gets real. Real. When we talk about the presence of God, we mean it gets real. So, for example, the promise of God's love becomes more real to you than the rejection you're getting in your life. And so you're just not walking around with your head hanging down. The promise of God's protection, the truth of that, becomes more real to you than the things that you are afraid of, the threats that are coming to you. Do you see? That's why Peter can say, through his great and precious promises, we participate in the divine nature. It's the promises. It's devoting yourself to the Word. It's getting in and understanding the truth. It shines only when God does it. You experience the presence of God when He becomes real to you through the Word. And that's a sign of the presence of God. Now, that's the first sign. And that's a mark of real Christianity. It's the essence of a real Christian, and it's the mark of a church. Like this. Now, unfortunately, I've got four more to do. Look at that. I'm going to give you a look at that. And that's a mark of real Christianity. It's the essence of a real Christian and it's the mark of a church like this. Now, unfortunately, I got four more to do. Look at the clock, my greatest enemy. Then I'll do it more like this. Number one, number two. Number two, community. It says there that they had everything in common and they didn't hold any, they didn't claim that anything they had was their own. Now, I know that the example it gives here is economic sharing, giving a lot of money and resources to each other. But let me just say this. They devoted themselves to fellowship, community. Community exists to the degree that people are saying to one another, what's mine is yours. Community exists to the degree that people are saying to one another, what's mine is yours. And we're not just talking about money at all. As a matter of fact, see, you can have communism without any community at all, right? I mean, you can have a forced redistribution of wealth without any community. Community has to do, first of all, with what's in here. For example, in the church, somebody comes to me and says, you know what? I don't like the way in which you're treating your children. What if I say, that's none of your business? I have no concept, then, of community. No concept of what the Bible says the church is. I'm a radical American individualist, but I have no idea about this. Because, you see, my sins are your business. The Bible says, confess your sins to one another, bear one another's burdens. That means we don't just share our bucks, though we do. We share our joys. We share our mistakes. We share our sorrows. Now, this can be done in a very icky way. And you can very artificially press this kind of community on people. It grows. It grows. And it has to grow in an organic, natural way. But I tell you, we are, in America, absolutely against this. Robert Bella, in his book, Habits of the Heart, says, the one thing that Americans hold dear is the idea that I am not accountable to anybody but myself for the meeting of my own needs. That, my friends, is worldliness. I know that many churches have said what worldliness is is we don't smoke and we don't chew and we don't go with girls that do. You know, that's worldliness. My friends, that's not worldliness. Worldliness is saying, I don't want to be accountable to anybody. The only thing that can really create community is the presence of God. I saw The Abyss the other night. It was pretty good. I'm just a frustrated film critic, so I won't say anything about the movie. But the one thing is that movie is a typical adventure movie in that you have a bunch of people who, for one reason or another, don't like each other. But because they go through the same incredible experience that sets them apart from everybody else in the world, by the end, they are, you know, lifelong pals. It's like the Dirty Dozen. They all hated each other, but then they get on this great mission in the end. That male bonding stuff, how great it is. Listen, any two people, no matter how different they are, in every other way, any two people who through Jesus Christ have experienced the presence of God, there is community there. And the relationship between two Christians outweighs any other relationship you have on the basis of your race, on the basis of your gender, on the basis of your social status. You are a Christian first and you're white second. You're a Christian first and you're black second. You're a Christian first and you're wealthy or poor second. You're a Christian first and you're an American second. Do you see what I'm saying? Community can only be based on the presence of God. Thirdly, social compassion. It says here that these people were unbelievably generous to anybody who was in need. And anyone who understands the gospel, the difference between a real Christian and a moralistic person is not that Christians repent of their sins. My friends, lots of moralistic people repent of their sins. The difference between Christians and non-Christians, difference between real Christians and moralistic people, is Christians also repent of their best deeds. In other words, they also recognize the fact that even the best things I've ever done are filthy rags in God's sight and I have to rest wholly and completely on what Jesus has done for me. Now, if you are a moralist, if you're basically a Pharisee, if you basically believe that God saves you and loves you because you're a pretty good person, you're going to look at needy people and you're going to say, pull yourself up by your bootstraps. I did. And if, on the other hand, you know that you're a sinner saved by grace, when you look at a person who smells terrible, who's got no resources, no mind, nothing left, you say, I realize I'm looking in a mirror, I realize that this is what I look like to God spiritually, and you're generous. Only an encounter with God through Jesus Christ can you have that kind of spirit. And any church, any church that understands and realizes the presence of God in its midst it says, they enjoyed the favor of all the people and they grew every day. Now, can I point out to you that though it says that the radiance and the responsibility and the beauty of this Christian community was so great that people were attracted to it. They loved it. Non-believers said, what's going on here? They had the favor of all the people. Don't forget 2 Timothy 3.10. In 2 Timothy 3.10, it says, all who live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. Now, somebody's out there saying, what do you mean, don't forget it? Those two things seem to contradict. How can you keep them together? It's really pretty simple. Anybody who is living a consistent Christian walk will polarize people. That means there will be some people that will say, you are remarkable. You are amazing. You are fascinating to me. I want to talk to you about my problems. I want to find out what's going on in your life. I want to get to know you better. Or you'll have people who are extremely upset with you, offended by you, angry at you. You may go through seasons where there's a lot of popularity and seasons where there's persecution. It may be happening at the same time. But only if you are absolutely not living a consistent Christian life will nobody notice. The fact is that whenever the church is the church, it's getting both a terrific amount of growth through attraction and it's getting persecution. I knew a man, well, he was a college kid when I was a college kid. And one summer he was going to work for the post office. And he said to me, the thing I want to know is how can I be a Christian postal worker? So we sat down and said, okay, how do we integrate our Christianity into our postal working service? And we started to say to ourselves, okay, is it the Christians put on their, do you put the stamp on any different than a non-Christian? No. We finally figured out that all he could do is get in there and do eight hours hard day's work. He polarized in just one brief summer that office. Because on the one hand, he had people saying, I like your style. I like your hard work. I like your savvy. I like your attitude. And you had other people coming and saying, you might get roughed up if you don't slow down. You're making us look lousy. You're just a kid. You're here for three months. We have to work here all of our lives. Your production is making us look bad. It's putting heat on us. Cut it out. He polarized the place just by doing eight hours good work. What I want to know is why that's not happening to you. Why it's not happening to me. Why it's not happening to us. All I know is that if you're walking the way you ought to walk, there will be that polarizing and the church will grow. Lastly, worship. They praised God in the temple and in their homes. There was awe, verse 43, and there was intimacy and glad, generous hearts. You know, real worship is characterized both by an awe and an intimacy at the same time. Not just sober dignity that eventually makes the place seem like a funeral home. And not just, gee, wish, golly, isn't God a wonderful guy that, you know, makes us feel warm and fuzzy. But both together. There's both an awe and an intimacy. And the reason for that is God will reveal his face to us as a group when we come together and worship him. That's not an easy thing to understand. And I can't explain it. All I know is this. I exist in this entire field of space right here. Six foot four of it, 220 pounds of it. And I exist in this whole field of space. But if you come up and try to talk to me, you probably won't talk to the back of my kneecap, will you? Why? Because that's not the way in. This is the way in. Isn't that weird? The front of my head is the way in. You're going to talk to the front of my head. You're going to talk to my face because that's the way to make contact. God is a spirit. He is everywhere, you see. In fact, he's more than everywhere. It says heaven and highest heaven cannot contain me, which is pretty hard to figure out. He's bigger than everywhere. The greatness of God. But the place to communicate with him is at his face. How do you find his face? Well, how do you find my face? It's pretty easy. It's up here, about six foot four. How do you find the face of a spirit? He has to reveal it to you. And he promises to reveal it to those in worship who receive Christ as Savior and Lord. And in conclusion, let me just say, how in the world can we be, how can any church be a church like this? The answer is, on the one hand, we do have to be careful to balance our programs. Yeah, we do. realize how bad it can be? It's possible to have social compassion, not because of the Spirit of God. Listen to this. Not because of the Spirit of God, but just out of a pride in a humanism, a pride in human beings. And a social compassion like that, which arises out of humanistic pride, will not go along with teaching. And it won't go along with evangelism. Or you might be, you can have a church, a group that loves great teaching and indoctrinating people because it likes tidy systems and it likes telling people that they're wrong, but there won't be a lot of fellowship or celebration in that church. Or you can find people that love celebration. They love great music. They love to get together and they say it's worship, but it's probably just an emotional catharsis because there's no truth and teaching in that church. You see what I mean? You can have a church that's full of, seems like it's full of fellowship, full of community, where people love each other because they're lonely, but there's no outreach and there's no social compassion. What I'm trying to say is only if you have all five is that a sign that the Spirit of God is there. And you have to work for balance in your programs, yeah. But ultimately, my friends, you and me have got to create little altars in our own lives for the fire to come down on us if we expect a church to be a big altar on which the fire can fall. And that little altar is right there in verse 42. I suggest you circle it. I suggest you take it home with you. It says you've got to be devoted to three things. They were devoted to the apostles' teaching, that's study. They were devoted to fellowship, that's real communication and accountability to other believers, and they were devoted to prayer. And my friends, if you give those things short shrift, do not expect the fire to come down. In the Old Testament, you built the altar, you put the sacrifice there, and the fire came down. And the fire is the reality and presence of God. I've got three sons. And I can't spend all of my time in their face. I love to do it. I love at night to climb into their bunk bed, to read them a book, to communicate my undying love and affection, to hug them, to touch them. I can't do that all the time. I love to buy them gifts, and I love them to hug me. I can't do that all the time. But I do tell them this, that if you listen to me, if you obey me, if you love me, if you follow me, those times will become more and more frequent. And God says the same thing to you. And you have to look at your life, and if you say, this reality is just not part of my understanding, my knowledge at all, dare I say it? You really have no excuse. There's a three-pronged tripod there. They were devoted to the apostles' teaching, to prayer, and to fellowship. Look at yourself. Is there anybody in fellowship that you're accountable to for your life, that you really talk to? Not just in general about the weather, but about what God's doing in your life. Do you have anybody like that? Can you really be said to be devoted to study? Can you really be said to be devoted to prayer? Then you can forget about access to the presence of God. It's not automatic. It's not automatic. Lastly, if there's anybody in this room, if there's anybody in this room who has had a religious experience, has had maybe God answer prayers, has asked God for help in changing some bad habits and you've changed them, and you say, well, I think I'm a Christian. Let me tell you this. The gospel, the purpose of Jesus Christ is not just to give you a lift, just to help you overcome your bad habits, just to answer your prayers. He does all that, yes, but the purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to give you something that enables you to stand before God face to face, today on the day of your death. And if you don't know that you can do that, then you still don't understand what the gospel is. Jesus Christ, if you repent and believe in him alone, you receive him, then you can look at him face to face. To stand in the presence of God, that's what the gospel is. The gospel is not primarily about forgiveness. It's not primarily about good feelings. It's not primarily about power. All those things are byproducts, sparks. It's primarily about the presence of God. Do you know that in your life? Let's pray. Our Father, Father, we thank you that... ask that you would enable every person here to realize that now many of us belong to you, yet we're dry as a bone. We're cold and we need your fire. And we see there's an altar that we have to build. Enable us to build it. And Father, there's people here tonight, I believe, I know. I know. That have never actually received you in repentant faith and therefore do not know.
