TITLE: Sin and Temptation
SCRIPTURE: James 1:9-15
TOPICS: Sin
SERIES: James: A Faith that Comes Down to Earth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sin-and-temptation/

============================================================

James chapter 1, and we're looking mainly, though we're going to look back a little bit, we're looking at verses 13 to 15, but I'm going to read the whole passage that's there in front of you. James chapter 1, verses 9 to 15. The brother in humble circumstances ought to take pride in his high position, but the one who is rich should take pride in his low position, because he will pass away like a wild flower, for the sun rises with scorching heat and withers the plant. Its blossom falls, and its beauty is destroyed. In the same way, the rich man will fade away even while he goes about his business. Blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life that God has promised to those who love him. When tempted, no one should say, God is tempting me. For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone, but each one is tempted when? By his own evil desire. He is dragged away and enticed. Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin, and sin, when it is full grown, gives birth to death. This is God's word. The reason I, though we're looking at verse, the new verses we're looking at, as we're going through the Bible, this particular book of James consecutively, we get to verse 13, but I want you to see in context, because those of you who've been here for several nights in a row know that we've been looking at the book of James, and the early part of the book of James, from verses 2 down to 12 at least, is talking about something that's called trials, see? Verse 12, Blessed is the man who perseveres under trial, because when he has stood the test, he will receive the crown of life. Now, trials, as we've said, are troubles, and we've said that James shows us the troubles are inevitable. Suddenly, when we get to verse 13, it says, When tempted, no one should say, God is tempting me. Now, it seems like he's changing the subject. Ah, we're not talking about troubles, we're talking about temptations. No. It's not as easy to see as you read through it, but the very same Greek word James uses and has rendered tempt is the word that was used in verse 12 and verse 2 that the translators rendered trial. In other words, in verse 2 and in verse 12, this Greek word, parasmos, came up and it was translated trial. Here, the word is, the same word comes up in verse 12 and 13 and it's translated temptation. Why would the translators do that? It's the same word. Why would they render it as two different English words? And that's because the same word can have a couple of different nuances. And the nuance here in verse 13 and 14 and 15 has to do with inner enticement towards sin. The teaching here is that God tests us, but he never tempts us. That God may give us a test, a circumstance from the outside, but if we find that that test leads us to sin, it's not God who is tempting us. Because every test is a temptation. The test may come from God, but the temptation comes from inside. Now, what we're learning here, therefore, is a number of things about temptation and about sin and about how sin works in our lives. And anybody who thinks that we're, well, you know, we're beyond talking about sin now, just not at all the case. It's the great question. We know that there's evil out there. We know that the world is filled with evil. Where in the world does it come from? Why do we treat each other the way we do? Where does it come from? Why can't we get rid of it? Why doesn't it matter whether the Democrats or the Republicans are in power, but it still seems to just keep moving on? Evil. Inhumanity, you know, of one group to another group. Oppression. Evil. Sin. Why? Here are some of the reasons. This passage teaches us several things about the nature of temptation and sin. The first thing it teaches us is that every trial is a temptation. Now, let me lay this out. Every trial is a temptation. That's the reason why you have to see this in context. And if you look, those of you who were here last week, the reason I even included verses 9 and 10 and 11 is any change in your existence, any change at all, is a test. Look, verse 9. If you fall into poverty, that's a test. And if you fall into riches and success, that's a test. Let me lay the principle out here. Every adversity and every prosperity, every difficulty and every success is a test that could either make you much wiser. It's an opportunity for great growth. And it could, if you... 12, toward life, the crown of life. But the same opportunity is also a terrible danger, and if you mishandle it, it moves you from temptation to sin into death. But every change in your situation, whether it's a good change or a bad change, every adversity, every prosperity, every success or every failure is something that will push you to become a much better person or a much worse person than you were before, but you will not stay the same. If you lose love or if you gain love, there's tremendous opportunities for growth and also horrible spiritual dangers, and if you lose love or get love and find it, if you make a lot of money or you lose a lot of money, both those things are tests. And when they come into your life, they will make you either a much better person or a much worse person, but you will not stay the same. You'll be pushed on toward the crown of life, or you'll be pushed on down toward death, one or the other. Now, just to make this, let me give you an illustration, which is a little bit like taking all my clothes off on stage, I think. You'll see what I mean. Because this is true in every single field, but I can only, let me tell you about a field that I know something about, the professional ministry. When a person decides to go into the ministry, that's a kind of difficult thing, and you go to, you take a lot of classes and then you hope somebody calls you, but if you make it a ministry and you find that you're successful, people now treat you as a religious authority. People, I just noticed, I was talking to a couple of you the other day, I noticed if I, if a minister sits down, you know, I'm this religious authority figure. If I sit down at the table and say, how's it going? Well, you know, suddenly, you know, your whole life flashes before your eyes and you think about, gee, where am I going and how am I doing, and you, and you, and you feel sort of like God has said, where are you? And you see, you get into this position as a religious authority, and people come and hang on your words, and people ask for counsel about all these important things. That's a success, let's say. You will never be the same. Because one of the things that you find as a minister is that before, when you were just a sort of a, you know, kind of a regular, a Christian with a kind of regular secular life, you could get into situations where you got spiritually dry, where you didn't really like to study the Bible, where you maybe indulged in a particular attitude or action or habit that you knew was wrong, and you would kind of take a vacation, you know, from, from spiritual walking. You know, ordinarily what happens is you'll wax and you'll wane and your heart will get cold and you'll, you'll give in to grudges, you'll give in to various sorts of things, and then eventually you bring yourself back. But here's the problem with being a minister. At least every seven days, you've got to get up in public and say, God is great. God is wonderful. God will solve your problems. At least every seven days, and what actually ends up happening is it happens every day. What are you going to do? Either, there's only two things you can do. Either you are going to have to, every day, sit down and say, oh my gosh, I do not find you wonderful today, God, but I'm going to have to tell somebody you are. And so every day you have to, you have to wrestle and you have to pray yourself hot again. You've got to, you've got to, you've got to melt the ice over your heart. You can't do things that later on you're telling people don't do them. You can't get up and tell people God is great when you don't feel he's great. Tell people you ought to live like this when you're not doing it yourself. So every day you've got to, you've got to pray yourself hot. You just can't take vacations. It makes you a far more genuine person. Or the other thing you can do is you get up and put on a spiritual face anyway. Anyway, you see what I mean? You get up and you tell people how great God is when you don't find him great. You get up and you tell people don't do this when you're actually indulging in it yourself. You either become a far, far more genuine Christian than you were before, or a far more hypocritical Christian than you were before, but you do not stay where you were. And I'm telling you that happens in every field. What happens, look, verse 11, 10 and 11. What happens if you strike it rich? What happens if you start to get wealthy? You either can let it humble you. You can say, Lord, why me? Why me? I know about very bright people out there. I know of talented people out there. I know of hardworking people out there who just have not made it. And I've been successful. Why me? And you can let it humble you. And you can, and you know that, you can make it generous. Because a person who's doing well financially, you can start to reason like this. You can say, you know, when the average person making the average salary tithes and gives 10% of their income away the way the Bible directs, and you've beenuvovia, in the 90s, but I don't feel like he's waiting on your line. Thank you. well financially, you can start to reason like this. You can say, you know, when the average person making the average salary tithes and gives 10% of their income away the way the Bible directs, that gets them pretty close to a discomfort level in their lifestyle. But I could give away 10%, I could give away 20%. And even, of course, it doesn't mean I can do, you know, I wouldn't be able to live as high as I would if I wasn't giving it away, but I can live very comfortably. You see, you can let it make you humbler and more generous. Or what will happen is you can make it more, it'll make you more arrogant. You'll say, the reason that I have gotten successful is I'm a higher class of person. I'm a little smarter. I'm a little better. I'm a little savvier. That's the reason. I am better. That must be the reason I'm doing well. And it'll also make you less generous. Statistics prove this. People who make under $25,000 a year give away 4% of their income for charity on the average. And people who make over $100,000 a year give away less than 1% of their income. Why? Because, you see, riches can also tempt you into believing that luxuries are necessities. But it will not keep you the same. If you're financially successful, it'll make you a far more humble, far more generous, far more useful Christian than you were before, far more useful person than you were before, or it'll make you far harder, far more less generous, far more arrogant. But it will not keep you the same. This is true in every situation. The same thing with adversity, though. If things go badly, you can let it make you humble. You can let it make you compassionate, more understanding to other people who have gone through it. Or it can make you bitter. It can make you anxious. It can make you despondent. But it will not leave you where you were. Don't you see? Trials, tests, are all temptations. That's the fact. But now, secondly, we're also told why they are. Now, look. First of all, we see that all trials are also temptations. Secondly, we learn why all trials are temptations. And it tells us right here. When tempted, no one should say, God is tempting me, for God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone. But everyone is tempted when, by his own desire, he sins. Now, the second thing we learn here about sin and temptation, when I say this, some of you are going to go, you know, tell me when this point is over. I know this, you know. Wake me up in five minutes when the point's over, because I already know this. But this is not as obvious in our culture. It's a necessary point in our culture. This point is, you never sin except for one cause. There's only one cause to your sin. And that's just, you want to sin. Nobody makes you sin. No conditions make you sin. You only do it because you desire it. Now, that's very important in our modern day and in our culture to know that. Notice, he says, you must not make the mistake of confusing the cause of your sin for the occasion. Let's say you're bitter. Let's say you've done something wrong. Let's say you've lied. Let's say that you've abused somebody. You can, there's a big difference between the cause and the occasion. The occasion is the temp, is the test. But the cause is your own desire. For example, an algebra teacher gives a test. The purpose of the test is to show you what's in the heart. But if the student has not learned the material, you might say that the test doesn't cause the student's failure. It's the lack of discipline, the lack of knowledge in the student. The test is the occasion for the failure, but not the cause of the failure. Very important. Now, you see how, what you realize, however, the student could very easily say, if she hadn't tested me, if that stupid algebra teacher hadn't tested me, I wouldn't have gotten an F. And so you can make a mistake, and it's very, I felt, a very self-justifying one, in which you say, in which you mistake the occasion for the cause. This is extremely important. New York Times book review last week was reviewing a book on evil, and it said something, the critic, the reviewer, said something very important. Most people who abuse children, beat children, hit children, and so on, were abused as children. And therefore, we can say that your abusing is caused by the abuse you got? No, it says we have to come to the place where we give people the dignity of saying what? That though you may have been abused, it doesn't excuse what you're doing to your children. They say, why does that give dignity? To say you're responsible, you're not an animal programmed by your genes, you're not a machine programmed by your environment. The abuse you got is the occasion for why you now abuse, but it's not the cause. Now, you know, I I don't want to give you the impression that a person who abuses, because they're abused, can say, oh, I can stop this tomorrow. Our heart, our mind, our will, our feelings are all bound up. They're all tangled up. I'm not saying that. But what I am saying is it would be very difficult to stop this. But I am saying, this is saying, you're a human being. You've got dignity. Don't mess up. Don't mix up the cause and the occasion. You're responsible. You can stop this. You know, just to show you, before I move on, which I have to quickly here, Jonathan Edwards, in his book, The Freedom of the Will, which I do not particularly advise to read. It's a very difficult book to read. And I've only gotten pieces of it, and basically I'm telling you what I remember of the pieces and also what my teachers told me about what's in the book. But he worked this thing out like this. He says, you know, the Bible does absolutely teach us that we all have free will. You know what it means to have free will? Free will means that you only and always and ever only do what you most desire to do. We have free will, which means you never, ever do anything but what you most want to do. So take responsibility. Somebody says, I don't believe that. Somebody says, listen, my boss told me I had to lie or he'd fire me. I didn't want to lie, but I had to lie. I lied, but it's not what I most wanted to do. No, no, no, says Edwards. I'm sorry. He says, you wanted to keep your job more than you wanted to tell the truth. So you did what you most wanted to do. Don't ever say that you have sinned, but you didn't want to. Don't ever say you have sinned, but you really couldn't help it. You always do what you most want to do. Somebody says, oh, but I know I robbed the bank and I looted the town, but the guy said he would kill me if I didn't, so I had to do it. Edwards says, no, no, no, no. Don't say you didn't want to do that. You wanted to save your own neck more than you wanted to not harm the town. You always do what you want to do. This is liberating and humbling. You can get out from under the responsibility of this by saying, the reason I am the mess I am, the reason I'm treating people who I am, the reason I'm doing the things I am, I know they're wrong, but I can't help it. Wonderful. Wonderful. You've taken that great burden of responsibility off of yourself, and you've also destroyed your humanity. You're an animal. You're a machine. You're not a human being. The Bible says you are a human being. When you are tempted and you sin, it's because you desire to do it. There it is. Now, the last thing. First of all, we're taught here, as we already saw, that every test is also a temptation. Every trial is a temptation. Secondly, we saw why every trial is a temptation, and that is we have sinful desires and we do them. But, now finally we see how temptation happens, how trials bring about temptations. And one of the things that is the most astonishing about this little passage, you have to, I've read through this quite a number of times, but I've really never studied it as deeply as I have to in order to preach for it. And the commentaries show you something that I guess you see, you know, once your attention is drawn to it, that James uses a sexual metaphor to describe how sin has its way in our hearts. Look it. It says, When tempted, no one should say, God is tempting me, for God cannot be tempted by evil. But here's what happens. Verse 14. Everyone is tempted when, by his own evil desire, he is dragged away and enticed, which is a word that means seduced. A sexual word. And, of course, you see, what it comes after is clearly part of the sexual metaphor. And then, after you have been seduced by your evil desire, there's conception and there's birth. And then, believe it or not, there's a grandchild. Because, you see, after desire is conceived, it gives birth to sin. And sin, when it is full grown, and it can become a mother as well, it gives birth to death. Now, what are we being told here? Some of you are going to be surprised when I tell you this, but if you've been coming here for years, you'll know that we went through Ephesians, right? Remember? A long time ago. Then we went through 1 Peter, a long, long time ago. Then we went through 1 John last year, and now we're here in James. And every time we get to this word, this word, evil desire, they never know how to translate it. It's not a good translation. In the old translations, it's translated lust. In the new translations, it's translated evil desire. It's the word epitumia. Some of you are going to say, gosh, every year you talk about this. Well, it keeps coming up. If the Bible thinks it needs to be beaten into our heads, let's bow the head and listen. know, like an epicenter? It's the ultimate center, the intensity. The way sin works is not that we want bad things. That's what's kind of misleading about this translation. The way sin works is not that we want bad things, but we want things so badly. The essence of sin is not wanting bad things. It's wanting things too badly. An epi-desire is an over-desire. And this tells us it's your over-desires that seduce you. This is powerful theological imagery. The Old Testament tells us, God tells us, he never sees sin as just breaking the rules. He sees it as spiritual adultery. In the Old Testament, God characterizes himself as our husband, and he characterizes his people as his wife. And he never just sees us as breaking the rules. He says, the reason people sin is they are enticed away into the arms of other lovers. And what are these other lovers? Again, right away we think, ah yes, it's when you want to do bad things. No. Anything that becomes a way to self-esteem more than God becomes a fatal attraction. That's what an epi-desire is, a fatal attraction. Over the years when I've talked to men and women who have committed adultery, very often they have said, it's not so much that I was unhappy with the spouse I had. But here's what they usually say, here's what the guys say about the lover. They'd say, ah, but she made me feel like a man. Or the woman will say, ah, but he made me feel like a woman. And usually what they'll tell us is the problem, the reason that they fell into the adultery, the reason this is ordinarily what goes on, is not that they're so unhappy with the spouse. But something started to happen in their lives that made them feel insecure and bad about themselves. Empty inside. And they needed the strokes. And they needed the worship. They needed the adoration. They needed somebody who came along and gave them what this lover gave them. What the Bible tells us is, sin is not just breaking the rules. Sin begins when something becomes your paramour rather than God. Something becomes the author of your self-esteem. It's okay to want work, career. But when the career becomes the way you feel good about yourself and the way you feel happy about life, it becomes a fatal attraction. You go after it. You need to have it. You've got to have it. That's spiritual adultery, the Bible says. That's how sin starts. What's wrong with career? Nothing. But an epi-desire for career is seduction, spiritually speaking. The same thing with, you know, here's what's so funny. The same thing with romance. When you say, I won't be anybody unless somebody loves me. Here's the double take on that. It's not, gee, it's not the person that you might be in love with right now so much as love itself has become the idol. It makes you feel like a human being. It's a fatal attraction. It's a fatal attraction. Now, the Bible says right here that sin always starts like that. Something that you add to Jesus Christ as a requirement for being happy. Something that you have to have. Jesus is nice. God is nice. Yes, of course I pray to God. But if I don't have this, my life is over. An epi-desire. Now, somebody says, doesn't this come up once a year, at least every year? Yeah, it's because this word keeps coming up. This is what the Bible defines as lust. Lust is not wanting bad things, though of course it could be that. Lust is wanting things badly, so badly, that you're fatally attracted to them. And I've got to have it, and I'm going to have it. God sees you sleeping with that. This has become your lover. And as a result, it's controlling you. It's a fatal attraction. Now, what happens is, it says, when your epi-desires, now look carefully, your epi-desires entice you, seduce you away, then what happens? Conception. Now, conception, which leads to the birth of sin, what that means is, conception means something inside that will eventually come outside. You might punch somebody in the mouth. You might harm them. You might kill them. But it starts with anger. Conception. Something inside that will give birth later. See, all sinful actions start as little embryos in the heart. Okay? And what this is saying is very important, if you think about it. All of your resentments, the internal things, all of your anxieties, they come from the epi-desires. Why are you saying that? you think you've got to have has been taken from you. That's why you're so angry about it. Why are you so anxious? Why are you so afraid? Why are you tempted to lie? Now here's a person who says, I had to lie because my boss said I'd be fired if I didn't tell the lie. Well, now look carefully. What is giving birth to that lie? Don't blame your boss. Here's a person who says, fine, then fire me. Here's a person who says, I know it's wrong, but I've got to. What's the difference? The person who lies is lying because there's a fatal attraction to my job, to my career, my precious career, to money. Don't you see? The lying comes from the fear. The fear which is conceived gives birth to the lie, but the little embryo of fear has come because the fatal attraction to your career. Don't you see how this works? Don't you see how brilliant this is? Don't you see how? It's not me. This is in the Bible. I didn't see it until this week. I've never seen it. Sin is not just breaking the rules. Sin is a fatal attraction that conceives. All of those troubling emotions that are deep in your heart that will lead to sinful behavior have come because you were seduced by one of your lover gods, see? By one of those false lovers. And then it says, after desire is conceived, it gives birth to sin, and sin, when it's full grown, gives birth to death. I don't know how many times I used to sit down with my children if they'd lied to me. And I'd say, honey, you're going to have to, you know, you can't go to the party. You have to stay in your room. And they'd say, why, daddy? And we'd always sit down, or mommy, and we'd sit down and we'd say, honey, if you get in the habit of lying, it will lead to death. And here's what I would mean. I would say, if you get in the habit of lying, when you get older, you'll lie at work and you'll lose your job. It'll kill your job. Or you'll lie to your wife and you'll lose your marriage. Or you'll lie to yourself and you'll lose yourself. And you won't even know who you are. Because sin, once it's conceived, always gives birth to death. An over-desire, an epi-desire for success, you'll kill your body with overwork. An over-desire for love, if you don't get the person, you'll kill yourself with self-flagellation. But if you do get the person, you'll destroy the relationship because of all of the expectations you put on that person to make your life perfect. Sin will lead to death. The death comes from the sin. The sin comes from the conception. The conception comes from being seduced. A fatal attraction to something which you love more than God. Now, what are we going to do about it? How can we escape? How can we possibly ever get away from this? And the answer is, you have to work backwards. If you think of sin as simply breaking rules, you'll think, well, the way to deal with temptation is just say no. Just say no. Remember just say no? The Bible never says just. Saying no is certainly part of dealing with sin. But it's never the main part. It's never the only part. It's never just. I mean, one of the ways you can deal with temptation is like Ulysses did. Remember he was going by the sirens and he was afraid he'd be tempted by the sirens? So what did he do? He tied himself to the mast in front of hundreds of people and said, no matter what I say, don't let me out. And that's one way to deal with temptation. Kind of a severe way. And frankly, to be completely honest with you, in a pinch, there's nothing wrong with that. When it's severe, tie yourself to a mast. Tell everybody, watch me like a hawk. Don't let me do it. But for the long run, I'm sorry. People get bored with that. They'd, you know, they would rather go to a movie instead of saying, I've got to watch Ulysses at the mast. No, I don't want to see that anymore. Thomas Chalmers, the great Scottish preacher in the 1840s, his most famous sermon was, the name of it was, The Expulsive Power of a New Affection. And his thesis statement was this, the only way to break the hold of a beautiful object on the soul is to show it an object even more beautiful. The only way to break the hold of a beautiful object on the soul is to show it an object more beautiful. You can't just say no when you find out that sin is due to the fact that your imagination has been captured by something. And therefore, the answer to temptation is spiritual passion. Not just negation. Not just discipline. Not just say no. You've got to fall in love with somebody. You've got to bring Jesus out of the realm of the conceptual. Into the realm of you, the passion of your heart. Now, you know, there's plenty of places to talk about that. In Ephesians 5, 32. as Christ loved the church and gave himself up for her to make her holy, cleansing her, to present her to himself as a radiant bride without stain and without wrinkle or any blemish, but holy and blameless. Now look, there is a husband. If we put ourselves in the hands of any other husband, now let's go back to the Old Testament imagery, the biblical imagery. If we say, you make me feel, you know, beautiful. That's what we say to our career. That's what we say to our romance. That's what we say. That's the reason we sin. You make me feel. But how in the world can you miss this? Look at this lover. Jesus. Look what he's done. You know, it says in Jeremiah chapter 2, the Lord says, does a maiden forget, does a bride forget her jewelry? Does the bride forget her wedding ornaments? Yet my people have forgotten me days without count. And what's God saying? He's saying, you know why a bride wants to look beautiful? To walk down the aisle in confidence. Don't you see what Jesus has done for you? Jesus was stripped so you could be beautiful. Jesus was disfigured, so you could be beautiful. Jesus was stripped naked so that you could be clothed. Have all these other lover gods done that for you? Of course not. Look what Jesus has done for you. Fall in love with him. And that is the only way. You have to look when you're scared. The woman who says, my boss told me that I've got a lie. What could she do at that point? She could say, my boss, this career, this will never clothe me. This will never make me beautiful. This will make me feel like a woman. Jesus. Look what the hold of one beautiful object on the soul is to show it a more beautiful object yet. The expulsive power of a new affection. And you know what's so beautiful about this? This is why we see that Christianity is way beyond behaviorism. So far, it doesn't just say no. Look at how he tells the poor person and the rich person to deal with their poverty or their riches. Look, it says the brother in humble circumstances should take pride in their high position. What's the high position? If you're a Christian, the Bible says in Christ, you're seated at the right hand of God. Look at that in Ephesians 2. In Ephesians 2, it says if you believe in Jesus because Jesus is seated at the right hand of God, so are you because God sees you as as perfect as Jesus. You should take pride in your high position. Think about the beauty of it. See, this isn't behaviorism. You'll never overcome your temptations unless you're just, you're living in holy consciousness of what you are in him. That's the only way a poor person is going to overcome bitterness. It's the only way those of you who haven't gotten the things that you want in life will overcome your bitterness too. You're supposed to take pride. Pride. That's an astonishing thing. Clothe yourself in the self-esteem that only the only lover that can do it is Jesus. And then it says the one who is rich should take pride in his low position. What? Take pride in his low position. Yes. The way to humble yourself is to remind yourself that you are a sinner saved by grace. In other words, the poor person is supposed to take pride by remembering the glory of grace. But the rich person is supposed to deal with the temptation to arrogance. You see, the poor person deals with the temptation to despair by remembering the glory of grace. But the rich person deals with the temptation to arrogance by remembering the grace of glory. That the glory that comes to us is strictly by the grace of God. Robert Murray McShane, a Scottish preacher, once was dealing with rich people in his congregation who didn't want to give their money away. And what did he do? He said, take pride in what he's done for you. He says, dear Christians, some of you, this is from this sermon. This was a guy who also studied under Chalmers, by the way. Some of you pray day and day to be branches of the true vine. You pray to be made all over in the image of Christ. If so, you must be like him in giving. Though Christ was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor. Someone objects, my money is my own. I earned it. Fine. Christ might have said, my blood is my own. My life is my own. Then where would you be? Someone says, but the poor are undeserving. Why should I give my money to the poor? Answer. Christ might have said, why should I lay down my life for these wicked rebels? Shall I lay down my life for these? I will give to the good angels, the deserving poor. Ah, no. But he left the 99 and he came after the lost. He gave his blood for the undeserving. Objection. The poor may abuse it if I give my money to people. church, somebody might misuse it. If I give my money, somebody might abuse it. Answer. Christ might have said the same thing. Yea, with far greater truth, Christ knew that thousands would trample his blood under their feet, that most would despise it, that many would make it an excuse for sinning more, and yet he gave his blood. Oh, my dear friends, if you want to be like Christ, give much, give often, give freely, even to the vile and to the undeserving. Christ is glorious and happy, and so will you be. It's not your money I want, but your happiness. Remember his own word. It's more happy, it's more blessed to give and to receive. What's going on? What is the minister doing? He is saying, think about the grace of your position. Think about what he's done, and that will get rid of all your pride. Then he says to the poor, think about the glory of where you are, and that will get rid of all of all your despair. Think about him. Take pride. Clothe yourself in it. The only way to break the grip of sin on your heart, the only way to break the grip of a beautiful object on the heart is to show it a more beautiful one. There he is. Why do you think I show him to you every time? Why do you think I always get to Jesus? Why do I always say, look, look, look, look? Because just saying no will not do it. Saying yes to him. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask that you would show us, no matter where we are, whether in poverty or riches, whether we're in adversity or prosperity, help us to see that if we see your son and we take pride in what he is to us, that is the thing which cuts off the power of sin in our lives and moves us on to the crown of life. Would that we would all have it. Would that everybody in this room would know that and get it. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
