TITLE: Sin
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 2:16-17; 3:1-9
TOPICS: 
SERIES: What We Believe: Foundations
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sin/

============================================================

The reading this morning is from Genesis chapter 2, verses 16 and 17, and chapter 3, verses 1 through 9. And the Lord God commanded the man, You are free to eat from any tree in the garden, but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat from it, you will certainly die. Now, the serpent was more crafty than any of the wild animals the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, Did God really say you must not eat from any tree in the garden? The woman said to the serpent, We may eat fruit from the trees in the garden, but God did say, You must not eat fruit from the tree that is in the middle of the garden, and you must not touch it, or you will die. You will not certainly die, the serpent said to the woman, for God knows that when you eat from it, your eyes will be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil. When the woman saw that the fruit of the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eye, and also desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. She also gave some to her husband, who was with her, and he ate it. Then the eyes of both of them were opened, and they realized they were naked, so they sewed fig leaves together and made coverings for themselves. Then the man and his wife heard the sound of the Lord God as he was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, and they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden. But the Lord God called to the man, Where are you? The word of the Lord. We're looking at the basic beliefs of the Christian faith, and there's no way to do that without getting to what the Bible says is wrong with us. It's real obvious to everyone that human beings can do an awful lot of very bad things, really evil things, but why? Sociologists will say unjust social conditions, oppression will result in violence. The real problem is what made the oppressors oppressors if they weren't oppressed, and they weren't. It's okay. Psychologists will say, well, if a person is deprived of love, if there's abuse or neglect or abandonment, then they're capable of very horrific things. Well, the trouble is a lot of people who've done very horrific things have not had that kind of background. What if these conditions do not actually cause the evil? But what if those conditions only magnify something that's already inside of us? In 1961, Adolf Eichmann was captured and put on trial. Maybe the first televised trial. I can't remember exactly. But in 1961, Adolf Eichmann, who was the first lieutenant, SS, German, Nazi colonel, who was the mastermind behind the death camps and the Jewish genocide, and he was put on trial, and a man named Yehiel Dinur, who was a death camp survivor, was brought in in order to testify against Eichmann. And when he walked in and he saw Eichmann, he collapsed on the floor, sobbing and fainted. Now, 22 years later, Mike Wallace, on 60 Minutes, 1983, interviewed Yehiel Dinur and showed him the clip, you know, showed him himself, you know, falling apart and all that. And Mike Wallace asked him, what went through your mind at that point? In other words, why did you collapse? And Wallace said, was it hatred? You know, did you, were you overwhelmed with hatred? Were you overwhelmed with fear? Fear in the presence of your former, you know, persecutor. And Yehiel Dinur startled Mike Wallace, and anybody's ever seen this, by the way, by saying, no, no, no, no. He says, here's what just overwhelmed me. I came in, I looked at Eichmann, and I realized, this is not a demon. This is not a Superman. This is someone just like me. And if he's capable of doing this, so am I. And this is what Yehiel Dinur said. Eichmann is in all of us. Eichmann is in all of us. He was facing himself. Now, the Bible says that's exactly right. And here's my question to you. Have you faced yourself? Do you know what's in your heart? Do you know what's in your heart? to do about it? And if you grasp the biblical doctrine of sin, you will be forced to answer all those questions, which you need to answer. So there's no better place to look, even though the Bible's just... There's no one place that will give you everything the Bible has to say about this subject of sin, human evil. But there's no more classic or more foundational place than the great story of the serpent, an agent of Satan, tempting the first man, the first woman in the Garden of Eden. It tells you pretty much everything top level you need to know. And as we take a look at this narrative, we're going to learn about the root of sin, the essence of sin, the signs of sin, and the solution for sin, which is pretty much everything, okay? The root, the essence, the signs, and the solution. First of all, the root of sin. In verse 4, obviously, I printed chapter 2, verse 16, 17, where God gives the first man and the first woman a command. You are free to eat from any tree in the garden, but you must not eat from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, for when you eat it, when you eat from it, you will certainly die. And in verse 4, the serpent says to the man and the woman, you will not certainly die, for God knows that when you eat from it, your eyes will be opened. Now, what this is, is a direct contradiction of what God has said. The serpent says, he will make, he says, you will not die. If you do this, you'll be better. You will see better. Your horizons will be open. Now, what is the serpent doing? The serpent has not targeted belief in the existence of God. He didn't go after that. And of course, if you look out in the world, evidence of what I'm saying is that most people in the world do believe in God. Probably most people will believe in God. But that's not what the serpent goes after. He's not targeting that. What is he targeting? Here's what he's targeting. If you look at 16 and 17, where God says, I'm only giving you one command. Now, some years ago, I was in a class, and a teenager said, that's paradise. What's paradise? Only one command. I mean, it's amazing. You can do anything. I put you in paradise, and there's only one law. Not ten commandments, not two commandments, one. Don't eat the tree. Ah, but wiser heads than me have noticed something, that there's something implicit here. It's not just that God is saying, don't eat that, and you'll be fine. Notice that he says, don't eat the tree, but he doesn't give a reason. He doesn't give a reason. He doesn't say, don't eat the tree because it's fattening. And for New Yorkers, that would have been enough, you know. Okay, don't eat the tree because it's not nutritionally good, it's caloric, too many carbs. And, you know, there's, or, or something bigger. Or he could have just said, oh, by the way, don't eat the tree, or else the rest of the human, you know, human history will be just an absolute atrocity. He doesn't even do that. He just says, don't eat the tree. Well, what are you, what, wait, what's going on? Here's what God is saying. God is saying, no, I'm not telling you why you shouldn't eat the tree. Because then you might do it simply because you think it's good for you. That's not obeying me. That's self-interested compliance. No, I want you to obey me. I want you not to eat the tree just because I'm asking you to. Just because you love me. And just because you trust my love for you. And that's what the serpent goes after. He does character assassination. When God says, if you eat this tree, you will surely die. And when the serpent says, oh, no, no, you will not surely die. You will not get worse. You will get better. Your eyes will be open. You'll see new horizons. Here's what the serpent is saying. You can't trust God. You can't trust his love. You can't trust his love for you. You can't trust his good will for you. If you obey God, he'll keep you down. If you submit to God, you'll miss out. You will be held back from opportunities. You won't be all that you could be. And therefore, this is what the serpent is saying. You can't trust God. You can't give yourself completely to him. Therefore, you're on your own. You have to take your life into your own hands. And that, friends, that is the lie of the serpent that has passed into, indeed, every human heart. or not, whether you're religious or not, whether you're moral or immoral, it's passed into every single human heart. Do you know that? My friend Sinclair Ferguson, a Scottish minister, who's probably the best at preaching about this and teaching about this, tells a story to try to get it across. He tells a story. Some of you heard me tell it before. It's so poignant. He says, imagine around Christmas time, a man has a little boy, and he takes that little boy to a super toy store, some toy super store. And he goes through with his son, walks all the way through with his little boy. He says, you see that? Would you like that? He says. And the little boy goes, oh, yes, daddy. Then he goes a little further. Do you see that? You see those things? Oh, yeah. Would you like some of those? Or would you like that? Oh, yes, daddy. And he goes all the way through the store that way. Gets to the very end of the store, and he turns to his son. He says, let me tell you why I brought you here. I brought you here to let you know you're not going to get any of this. I'm not going to give you anything. You see all that? You'll have none of it. Now let's go home. And Sinclair says, that is what you believe in your heart of hearts about God and you. If you don't understand that, if you don't know that, you won't understand yourself. That you really do not believe God has your best interest at heart. That he's never going to give you really the things you most want in life. That you might have to negotiate with him. You might have to deal with him. You might have to have some kind of relationship with him. But you can't utterly trust him because that's how God is. That you're on your own. That you're going to have to, you know, you're going to have to take charge of your own life. You can't trust him. That is what's going in. Look, Eric Erickson, you know, I don't understand psychology like I probably should, but Eric Erickson wrote a book called Childhood and Society. And one of his, it's a pretty famous book. He's a psychologist. And one of his points was that if a child doesn't learn to trust in its earliest stages, I mean, if an infant, for example, or a young child is abandoned or abused by the dominant adult, like a father or a mother or somebody like that, if they don't learn how to trust in the earliest stages of their life, all kinds of pathologies, you know, result from that. They have problems their entire life. Now, I, you know, I don't know well enough what his, what Erickson's theories are and whether I'm sure there's people writing all sorts of papers and books criticizing it. But here's what I do know that that is what happened to us at the beginning of history in the, in the deep, in the deeps of time that the human race has learned from the serpent at the heart of our, our, our heart, not to trust God. And there's people, listen, there's people all over the world. I see people out there who are working themselves to death to try to prove to themselves and others their value. And they work on themselves to death because they don't trust God's love enough to get it from that, to get it from him value. I see people demonizing others and, and tearing others down and criticizing others to bolster their own sense of self-worth. Why? Because they don't trust God enough to get that worth from, from him. I see people out there exhausting themselves, trying to control everything, make sure their family and their, and their children and their health and their finances, everything will be fine. Nothing will go wrong. And they're eat up with anxiety because they don't trust the love of God enough to give them that sense of safety. Now, this is the, this is the lie that's at the root of every human heart. And in a sense, it's the prereq for all the bad things that we ever do. Because we've got to take life in our own hands. We got to live, you know, we, we have to do it ourselves. We can't trust God to do it. Now, then what is sin itself? Okay. If that's the root of sin, that's sort of the prereq, what is sin? And the essence of sin is right here in the very next, uh, right here. Uh, there's actually two sides to the essence of sin. There always are because obviously you say, well, what is the definition of sin? What's the essence of sin? According to the Bible? Well, verse six, when the woman saw the fruit of the tree was good for food, pleasing the eye, desirable for gaining wisdom, she took some and ate it. Now I could parse that, but the main point is there was a law. Don't eat the tree. She violated the law. She ate it. And that is certainly one of the biblical definitions of sin. It says in first John, sin is transgression of the law. So, you know, if you have a, if you have a prescription, don't do this, you do it. God says that you, you disobey God, you sin. But Sermon on the Mount, Jesus says, shows that the, um, the motives of the heart, the impulses of the heart, Torn. behavioral sins are also sin. So what is the essence of the heart that leads to behavioral sins? And the answer is actually in what the serpent says just before she takes it. See, he says, you will not certainly die. That's the contradiction. That's the lie. God knows that when you eat from your eyes will be opened and you will be like God. And theologians, commentators over the years really went, it was when you will be like God, that is actually what we're all after. We want to put ourselves in the place that only God should be. That's the essence of sin. We take on prerogatives that only God should have. We put ourselves at the center. We make ourselves the authority of our lives. God should be that. We try to get everything to orbit around our glory and our worth and our acclaim. Everything in our life should, God should be the center of that. So you could say sin is putting ourselves in the place of God. Sin is making everything center on us instead of on God. Sin is trying to be our own Savior and Lord. And that's extremely important to grasp. Martin Luther, of course, has said it best. In his famous lectures on Romans, there's a spot where he says famously that human nature is incurvitus se, which is Latin, for being curved in on itself. And this is what he actually says, quote, quote, our nature is so deeply curved in on itself that it wickedly, curvedly, and viciously seeks to use all things, even God, for its own sake. Now, that is brilliant. And let me, I'm just going to have to unpack that a little bit. He says we are so curved in on ourself that we wickedly, curvedly, and viciously seek to use all things, even God, for our own sake. Now, if you want to understand, what he's saying is self-centeredness is the essence of sin. And self-centeredness. But when you and I think of self-centeredness, we think of a couple of people, kinds of people. First of all, we think of cruel people. And it is true that some of the greatest tyrants of history, some of the greatest dictators and tyrants of history have been self-centered. I mean, you know, they're often called what we call egomaniacs. And that's really true. But here's what you need to see, that what, the essence of self-centeredness is not just being cruel or being bad or, no, Luther says it pervades everything because it makes you use everything. And so, self-centeredness, let me show you, self-centeredness also is the main motivation for being good. It's the main motivation for being moral, for being nice, for giving your money away. Okay. What? Yeah. There is no better way to get control of other people than by being nice. There is no better way of demanding that people give you respect and hear you by being good. There's no better way to get everybody to have to do everything you want than by being incredibly self-sacrificing and loving. And deep down inside, what we're doing when we're helping people, when we're giving our money away, when we're doing all these wonderful things for people, we're using them. We're not doing it for their sake. We're doing it for our sake. That's what Luther's saying. But let's go even further. Religion, in general, is fueled by self-centeredness. That's what Luther is trying to say, too. Here's how religion generally works, what most religious people do. I obey my scriptures, whatever they are. I go to my place of worship, whatever it is. I pray to God. And I'm doing all these things. And I expect results. I expect answers to prayer. I expect blessing in my life. And as I often have said, because it's often happened to me as a pastor, I have had people say, you know, I try to live the Christian life, and now none of my prayers are being answered. None of my prayers are being answered. Everything's going wrong. And I try to live a Christian life. What use is it to be a Christian? If God never answers my prayers, ah, use, Freudian slip. Let me point out what Martin Luther just said. If you obey God and you say, I'll obey you, Lord, but if. I'll obey, I'll be a Christian as long as. Well, whatever's on the other side of the if. Whatever's on the other side of the long as. That's your real God. And the God you supposedly are obeying, you're using him. Look, if you love somebody, really love them. Why do you do the things they want? Because the reward is just the look on their face when they're happy. Just to see the smile, it's a reward all by itself, right? That's love. And Martin Luther says, no. God. Nobody loves God. Why? Deep down inside, we all believe he's somebody we're going to have to negotiate with. He's somebody we're going to have to do things for if we're going to get anything. We're going to have to do it in order to sort of put him in our debt. Otherwise, you know, you can't trust. Nobody just loves God for who he is. Nobody just pleads God unconditionally. We all use him. And that's the normal way that religion operates. The essence of sin, then, is putting yourself in the place of God. Self-centeredness. Being your own Savior and Lord. And listen, just as a sidebar, even though we've got to move on. Christians, do you understand how radical this understanding of sin is? Sin isn't just breaking the rules. Sin is being your own Savior and Lord. Living for your own glory. Being your own rescuer. And that's the reason why we often say around Redeemer, if sin is being your own Savior and Lord, instead of letting God be that for you, because you don't trust him. If sin is being your own Savior and Lord, well then, that means you can do that. You can be your own Savior and Lord as much through keeping God's law as by breaking it. By keeping God's law and insisting that God obey you and making sure everybody respects you. That's what a Pharisee is. That's what a self-righteous person is. And once you realize that sin is this self-centeredness, and it can work itself out just as much through being moral and religious as being immoral and irreligious, because suddenly, it's so radical. It levels the world for you. You can't just, you can no longer do what almost everybody else does, but Christians can no longer go around by basically dividing the world into the good guys and the bad guys. We can no longer just divide the world into, you know, sinful people and us wonderful people. You can't do that anymore. It's impossible. And that's the reason why, this is a great quote by G.K. Chesterton about how radical the belief in original sin, the belief that we're all sinners, the belief that we don't trust God, the belief that we're all self-centered and we're just working our self-centeredness and our sin out in both religious and non-religious ways, in respectable and non-respectable ways. So Chesterton has this great spot where he says, Christianity preaches an obviously unattractive idea, original sin. But when we wait for its results, they are sympathy and brotherhood and a thunder of laughter and pity. For only with original sin can we at once pity the beggar and distrust the king. You see, no longer do we look at the person out in the street, or he could have said, pity the criminal and distrust the king. Because you see, we're all mixtures. We're all mixtures of, obviously, in the image of God, goodness, but also because of our sin we're all broken. And whether you're being respectable or not, everybody's a sinner. And so Christians look at that and we no longer can just feel superior to anybody. We just can't do it. So there is the root of sin, there's the essence of sin. Now, the signs of sin, very brief. Almost a single statement. Because if you go through the rest of the chapter, of chapter three, you see the results of sin. And they're not really in the passage we have chosen, but they're there in embryonic form. Basically, sin is a malignant tumor that destroys relationships. All relationships. Because if sin is self-centeredness, sin is self-centeredness, destroys all relationships. And you see it in two ways. One is, as soon as they sin, you see what it says, what happens to them? As soon as they sin, then the eyes of both were opened. Oh yeah, it's by the way, it's exactly what the serpent said. Never trust the serpent. Okay, FYI, you know, make a mental note. Never trust the serpent. Never trust Satan. Then the eyes of them were opened and they realized they were naked. They felt shame. And they were scared to death of anybody having unmediated knowledge of who they were. See, the reason why they sowed the fig leaves is this. Now that I'm my own Savior and Lord, now that I'm not resting in God's love, but I'm going to have to kind of patch up a righteousness. I'm going to have to patch up an identity, a self-worth of my own. Now, my relationships are this. I cannot bear to have you see all the way into me. I have to control what you know of me. I can't do transparency anymore. I can't do self-giving. I've got to use you. I've got to use you. I've got to use you to get you to see me the way I need you to see me. And so... relationship with God himself. Because when the Lord God was walking in the garden in the cool of the day, they hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden. Now, what this means is something pretty simple. If you build your identity on being a really smart person, there is nothing more devastating than sitting with a person 10 times smarter than you. If you build your identity to any degree on being talented or being good-looking, and you get into the presence of someone 10 times more than you, it's just devastating. Well, that is just the dimmest hint of what it's like to get near the real God. It's the reason people don't want to believe in God. It's the reason why people, if they do believe in God, want to create a God that doesn't traumatize them. Because if you get near a holy God, you're going to see you're so flawed, and you don't want to admit that. If you get near a powerful God, you're going to see how absolutely weak and helpless you are, and you don't want to admit that. Because as human beings, we're all basing our life on the idea that we're competent to run our own lives, and that we're not all that bad, and we're better than a lot of other people. And you get near God, and it's smashed. And the way this plays out in our lives now is even if you don't believe in God, even if you don't believe there's a heaven or a hell, even if you don't believe in the Bible, even if you don't believe any of that stuff, yet you have a sense of condemnation you can't shake. And there's a voice almost sometimes that calls you a fool, a fraud, an imposter, that you're not living up. You know what I'm talking about. You know what that is? The Bible says, whether you believe it rationally or not, that's your heart and your conscience picking up the fact there's a God out there. And if you ever came near him, it would just be utterly traumatizing and devastating to your whole way of thinking in life. So look, because we just distrust God, and we think we're out there in the universe on our own, and we are radically self-centered, and it destroys relationships, what in the world are we going to do about it? Now, I must say that this text only gives us the barest hint, and yet it's the most delectable and wonderful hint. It's verse 9. This points to the whole rest of the Bible, ladies and gentlemen, the whole rest of the Bible, because all the bad stuff's happened, right? They're already experiencing the anxiety, the insecurity, the fear, the shame. Everything that goes wrong in the human life is already happening. But the Lord God called to the man, where are you? Now, surely he knew. I mean, your first response is, he's God, right? This is this God, the same God that we get in the rest of the Bible, right? Isn't the God that created the world, chapter 1, okay, the universe. How could he not know? Well, of course he knew. Well, then why is he asking the question? He knows where they are, and he knows what's happened. But if you actually go on and you see the interview, it goes like this. The first question is, where are you? Which means, why are you hiding from me? What should the right answer be? What would be the right answer? Because I sinned. But what is the answer that actually, that God gets? He says, I'm hiding because I'm ashamed, because I was naked. So God says, why have you, why are you hiding from me? The right answer is because I sinned. But the answer he gets is, because I'm ashamed. Okay. So God says, all right, then why are you ashamed? Did you eat the tree? Leading question. Did you eat the tree I told you not to eat? And what's the right, what should the right answer be? Yes, that's the right answer, right? Pretty simple, right? Okay. That's not the answer he gets. The man says, the woman made me do it. And the woman says, the serpent made me do it. What's God doing? He's counseling. Seconds into the fall of the human race, and he's already our wonderful counselor. He's counseling. Look, those of you who are counselors, or those who've been through counseling, and you know this, that if a counselor sees a person all screwed up, all messed up, you know, in denial, not owning what's wrong, saying, you see what the, you know, you're the counselor. You see what the person needs to do. What do you do? Do you just, do you just lecture them? Do you say, you're a dysfunctional person. I'm going to give you a lecture on borderline personality, and this is you, and you're going to listen to it. You don't do that. You don't descend in judgment. What you do is you try to get the person to see. You ask questions so they'll come to see it. So they'll, it'll start to dawn on them. So they'll experience metanoid. of their denial and see the truth and own up and start to get liberated from the things that are binding them and the delusions and the illusions, right? And that's what God's doing. It's amazing. He doesn't descend in fire and judgment. Instead, he comes out and seeks them in love like a shepherd, like a counselor, tenderly trying to wake them up, trying to redeem them, not judge them. Now, if you had only read the Bible up to this point and you never read the rest of the Bible, you would have no idea the lengths to which God would go to not judge us but seek us in love and to come near. Of course, he does it with Jesus Christ and in Jesus Christ. And, you know, in verse 15, we're told that some descendant of the woman, in verse 15 of chapter 3, we're told that some descendant of the woman would come and he would be bruised, he would shed his blood, but he would destroy the works of the devil. And here's what I want you to see here at the end. What's fascinating about this is this, that if you want to understand the gospel of Jesus Christ and the solution to your sin, it all comes down into this nutshell. Jesus reverses the work of the serpent. He comes back to reverse the work of the serpent and restore paradise. How? The serpent put a lie in your heart through a tree. And Jesus Christ is going to take the lie out of your heart through a tree. The first Adam in the Garden of Eden was told by God, obey me about the tree and you will live. And he didn't do it. The second Adam, Jesus Christ, in the Garden of Gethsemane was told by God, obey me about the tree. What tree? The cross. The first Adam was told, obey me about the tree and you will live. And he didn't do it. The second Adam was told, obey me about the tree, go to the cross and I will crush you into dust. But it's the only way to end the hiding. It's the only way to end the shame. It's the only way to take the punishment for their guilt. So the second Adam was told, obey me about the tree and I will crush you. And yet he did. And George Herbert, in that great poem, The Sacrifice, which is a remarkable poem. You can find it online. It's a long poem, but in it, it's Jesus speaking from the cross. George Herbert depicts Jesus Christ and imagines him speaking to people as they pass by from the cross, as he's up on the cross. But there's one, there's two lines that are astonishing to me. It's a place where it goes like this. All ye who pass by, behold and see, man stole the fruit. Now I must climb the tree, a tree of life for all, but only me. Do you see what the poetry is saying? All ye who pass by, behold and see, Adam stole the fruit, but I'm climbing this tree, the cross. A tree of life for all, but only me. Because the cross was a tree of death for Jesus Christ, that cross becomes a tree of life for you and me. Because he took the punishment. And there's the gospel. There it is. If sin is putting yourself in God's place and trying to take on yourself what only God deserves to have, prerogatives only God has, well, salvation is God taking your place and my place and getting what we deserve. See, sin is putting ourselves in God's place. Salvation is God putting himself in our place. Sin is trying to do things that only God deserves to do. Salvation is God coming and taking the things that only we deserve to have. And he did it for you. And see, that's what's going to root the lie out of your heart. You're exhausted. I'm exhausted because we really don't trust God's love. We really don't believe it. And if you just say to yourself, I know God loves me. I know God loves me. That won't work. That's just abstraction. But if you behold the glory of Jesus Christ dying on the cross, turning that tree into a tree of life because it's a tree of death for him, all for you, that transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice. New Yorkers, you work so hard. You want to look good. You want to have a great resume. You want to go to the right schools. You want to be in the right networks. You want to have the right job. Those are fig leaves. And the pitiful fig leaves of your own making will never, ever, really, of Christ will. It'll never really deal with the deep down self-doubt you've got, but this will handle that. Don't you want this? Don't you want this? Get Jesus Christ healing. Let's pray. Our Father, we're grateful that you have helped us see through this famous and great story of the origins of our human problems that there is a solution, that you have come out for us, not in judgment, but as the wonderful counselor. You've come for us as a sympathetic savior. You've come into the world and, and mounted the tree of death, making it a tree of life for us. And here we have the solution and here we have the gospel. And we pray that you would help us to take this into the center of our lives so we could be healed of our biggest problem. Oh Lord Jesus Christ, with your gospel and the power of the Holy Spirit, uproot the lie that it's the root of our hearts so that we can begin to relax in your love. We pray this in Jesus name. Amen.
