TITLE: Singleness – The Biblical Guidelines (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Sex, Singleness, and Marriage
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/singleness-the-biblical-guidelines-cont/

============================================================

So Abraham walks up the mountain, prepared to put to death his only son that he loved, and then God said, no, stop, you don't have to do this. And Tozer goes on in those couple chapters about if you're withholding something from God, whatever it is, your desire for something that is to you the most precious thing, and you're not willing for God to touch it and have it his way, then you need to take that to the altar, and God may slay it. He may say, yes, I do have a single life for you. Or he may say, fine, now the idolatry is dead. You're ready to receive from my hand what I have for you. And you don't know, and you can't make bargains with God either, and it's the scariest thing I think I've ever done. I kept saying, God, I don't want to feel together and spiritual and happy and wholly single, because maybe you'll look down at me and say, gee, she's doing great. She doesn't need a husband. This has never occurred to anybody else? No, I better stay messed up so that God will see I really need to be married in order to continue what I'm doing. I guess that's really just the sort of personal observations that I was going to stick in. Stay here. Stay here, answer questions. book is Pursuit of God. Jerry Bridges, Pursuit of Holiness, A.W. Tozer, Pursuit of God. Second chapter, The Blessedness of Possessing Nothing. Doesn't he have a good memory? I let him remember everything for me. All right, let's take some questions. This one is completely related to what we just talked about. It says, if you have the gift of singleness, are you more likely to be single for life? No, I don't think that's, I'd like to go along with the gist with what our sister was saying over here. You go for the time being. You don't try to make up your mind whether or not you're going to be single for life. You can't know that. I've known people that were cruising along, happy in their singleness, saying, gosh, this is everything. The way in which I feel now is just, it sounds like, it feels like I must have the gift. And then they found somebody, they fell in love, and they got married. They didn't suffer at all. You know, they were happy as singles. They were happy as singles for 15 years, and then they were happily married. You know, so why, Lord? Why me? And the point was, if they had deduced from those 15 years of happiness and no burden and no burning and anything like that, that therefore they must be single for life, no. You know for right now, you say, Lord, give me the ability to honor you in my singleness. If he does, that might be a gift. To me, the gift of singleness is a permanent thing, but you can never be sure you've got it. All you can know is right now, God's helping me. And if God would change my heart towards someone, bring me, bring into my life somebody that I should marry, I can marry. I don't have to worry about disobeying some gift. The same is true of marriage, by the way. You could be married and the next day be widowed. My best friend had her husband electrocuted the day we were moving out of Hopewell to Philadelphia. He was coming to see us off and they found him dead under his house. Bam. You know, nothing that God gives you is a certainty. Not the good or the bad. You don't know what he's going to do next. Michael, go ahead. Would you comment on Matthew 19, 10 through 12? The eunuch, the eunuch passage. It says some are eunuchs because men made them that way and some are eunuchs. Why don't you read it since I've got to go get it out of my... The disciples said to him, if such is the case of a man with his wife, it is expedient not to marry him. He said to them, not all men can receive this thing, but only those to whom it is given. For there are eunuchs who have been so from birth. There are eunuchs who have been made eunuchs by men. And there are eunuchs who have been made, who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Right. He who is able to receive this, will let him receive it. Right. Yeah. I don't know if Michael's got a good voice. You might have heard all of that. But where Jesus has said, basically, you have to have sex inside marriage. You can only have one wife and so on. And you can't get divorced easily. He's just saying divorce should be a major thing. You shouldn't just divorce your wife if you don't like her. And they turn around and they say, my word, in that case, it might be better not to marry. And he's saying, the Christian sex ethic that says, if you are single, you should not have sex. And then if you marry, you need to stay married. They're responding and saying, gosh, that's not the way we live. And it's amazing, in some ways, for them. They're Jewish folks, and this was a religious nation. And yet, they were under the impression that you just needed sexual gratification. And, I mean, they were closer to the sex is an appetite view. And they said, my word, to not be able to have sex. can receive this. Most people have a sexual capacity and need to be married and have sex and have a sexual relationship. He says there are some kinds of people that don't have a problem with that. One is people who are physiologically, they physiologically are not, don't have a sex capacity. He says some are eunuchs from birth and some are eunuchs because men made them that way. That was a, you know, a custom at the time to have servants which were castrated. And then he says some have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of God. And he's talking about the gift. To make yourself a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom of God means you, as a Christian, find that you do a better job of ministering as a single. And you are not, you're not under such a crushing burden of your singleness that it makes it hard for you to minister. And it's the same thing Jesus is talking about that Paul's talking about, the gift. Okay? Back there, the buried person. No, no, Scott. One more is all you get. One more is all we get. We only, no, the rate, we only do two. After that, you're on your own. I'm not sure I'll start talking and you nod your head if it sounds familiar. No, before you do it, could you say, could you take another 15 seconds and say it again to make sure? Elaborate. In the screening process, people look for perfection. Oh. All right. Exactly. And there are special promises for relationships, but in the context of marriage, I think that affects the way people often are so, that I'm not sure whether they're really going to give themselves a gift. Right. Okay. I know where we are. Okay. When looking for someone to marry, and this is jumping into next week, I bet. That's okay. We're very often looking for a piece of perfect statuary. You go circulating to, you know, the great houses of Europe where they have all of Michelangelo's David and what all. We want the perfect person. And we want someone who's not going to be full of flaws or suddenly come up twitchy or, you know, have great hidden faults. And so you see people who have, yes, a designer spouse. And you see people who prolong these dating relationships forever and forever and forever while they do quality control testing. You know, I want to know everything about you. So if there's any problem, it comes up now while I still can get out of it. That's right. Amen. The promise that God has for marriage is that you're a sinner and he or she is a sinner. And when you get married, it's two sinners being married. And there's no hope unless God is the one to whom the covenant will be supported by him. And you don't need to be terrified about marrying an imperfect person. You're imperfect after all. And your relationship does not depend on the perfection of the other person or even on you yourself. Your relationship, your covenant vow, the strength of that is supported by God and by your intention to honor him. And the times where your marriage seems like it is absolutely going to break, you have the confidence that there must be a way out of this. We've got to find a solution. I mean, Tim and I have looked at that wall more than once and say, you know, we are at a brick wall. There is no solution. But there's got to be a solution. We have no option here. We have got to solve this. And God has always honored that. And I think he always will honor that. That the promises that he gives to people is that he's going to continue the work he began in you. He's going to continue the work he began in your spouse. So you don't need to go through this endless process of sifting through the person. You know, have I seen everything I need to see? Is there something hiding under the rug? You know, maybe another couple of years we should date just to make sure there's nothing. That, you know, trust God, get on with it, get married, and just keep going. There aren't any guarantees in life. I don't mean you marry the first person you go out with. But there's a reasonable point at which you should consider the fact that possibly the reason this relationship isn't coming to closure, and here I'm talking to you men, maybe, is, you know, that your sinful anxieties are getting a hold on you, an upper hand on you, and you need to trust God a little more. Betty Elliott has written. her book, Purity and Passion, I think. And I recommend it to you. Okay, I don't want to take everything we're going to say next week. There's balancing statements to make. You do not, we're not trying to say anybody, anything that breathes, as long as it's a Christian, go ahead. But I think what Kathy's just trying to respond to is, it seems at least around here, in talking to people, which we do a lot of, it seems more often than not people are overly anxious about finding a designer spouse, rather than being reckless about marrying somebody who obviously has got a lot of problems, and who therefore has got a lot of flaws, a lot of structural flaws, and therefore is going to be a bad vet. But, okay, right over here, sure. Yeah, what happens if you have a lot of flaws, and you burn, and you reject it in your life, and trying to reach out to others when you have a lot of issues you've never dealt with in your life? There's a lot of healing that you can process when you've done in your life when you can reach out to those persons. How do you feel about dealing with those issues in your life? Yeah, that's very hard. Brother's saying, look, if you've been rejected, and you're, that creates problems. You know what it's really like? It's like having shell shock. I mean, if you have been through a relationship, and you've been thrown out, or rejected, it's a little bit like, oh, getting your hand blown up in a, you know, by a grenade over during World War II in France. So then you come back to New York City, and every time a car backfires, you go like this, because it sounds like a grenade, even if it's not. And a lot of times, because of bad relationships, or because of rejection, and that sort of thing, you're shell shocked. That means you don't want to go out, you're scared of every little noise, you can't handle normal kinds of car backfires, which aren't dangerous at all, and you can't handle the normal kinds of scrapes and bruises that happen in any relationship. If you find that when the other person isn't responding quickly enough, or is being kind of critical, and so on, and you go like this, I'm being rejected again, and you fall apart. And then you pull out of a relationship too quickly, and then you get more, you're more shell shocked, and so on. The way to get out of it, first of all, if you can name it, like you're naming it right now, if you can name it, and if you can, I'm not, if you can identify the patterns, that's one big step in the right direction. Secondly, what you have to do is you begin to, you have to laugh at yourself. That sounds an awfully funny thing to say, but it's true. At a certain point, you have to find the comical aspect of your sin, and you have to start to say, I am being silly. What is the big deal? All she said was this. That's not the same. And so what? How can she hurt me, really? You have to laugh at yourself a bit. But you have to, you have to have, now look, you also, the way to get healed from something like this is through, there's two kinds of counseling. The first kind of counseling is the general counseling that happens between Christians, and especially between Christians of the same gender that can talk about those things. And at a certain point, you may need specialized counseling, that is a professional counselor. Somebody who can sit down and help you think about it, help you, first of all, help you identify and name the problem, see how it operates, break it into parts so that when it begins, you can pull out of it. A big part of the rejection phobia, the rejection fear, is it happens so quickly. And a good counselor can sometimes sort of say, now, identify what's going on. This is happening, and you're thinking this, and this leads to this. And if you're able to watch it in slow motion and get a kind of diagram of it, you can stop it in early stages. When I say the best kind of counseling is the general counseling of Christian friends, I mean, no one counselor, and I know this because people come to me for counseling, no one counselor's got all the insights. Because every counselor, as it were, is looking at you from a certain perspective, and it takes a lot of different people who see you from a lot of different perspectives. So you just want wise Christians that you can talk with and open up to about that, who can say, oh, I went through this, this helped me. You see, the general counseling from Christians is helpful because you get a little nugget here and a little nugget there and a little nugget from this person. Nobody's sitting down and giving you therapy, but you're getting little pieces. And at some point, you may, if you just still find yourself phobic about rejection, that you probably ought to sit down with a good Christian counselor who sits down and slows the process down and shows you what it is. You have to name it, identify it, laugh at it to some degree. You also have to recognize those kinds of things. I don't think what you have said is a... know, I have a lot of respect for somebody who's trying to work that through. Those are just a couple of ideas. That's more of a response than an answer, because that's a very difficult question. Do we have a whole bunch of these sitting out there waiting? No, I've been responding to most of them. Are there any others up there? Say another hand. Sort of hand them forward. Over here. Yeah. Yeah. Sometimes it seems when I compare myself to another person my age who's married, they, the few that they've made to be married, especially when they have children, have had opportunities for emotional growth that I don't feel like I have in my own life. And it's just a follow-up question for me. I think sometimes it seems like people who are overcoming things from their childhood, things of scars or wounds, they have a better chance of that growth, and they may have a commitment to another significant person. I want that one. I want to answer that simply because I've had a bee in my bonnet for a while. I think it's a mistake. Can you not hear me, Kathy? You want to repeat the question? Oh, repeat the question. People who are married very often seem to have more opportunities for emotional growth than single people, and how can that take place in the life of a single person if you do not have the close emotional bonds that a spouse, and particularly children, can give you to work through some of the rejections and things? Are you building on the thing about your spouse overturning the... Not just that. Not just that, okay. When I was a brand new Christian, I don't even know whether I was a Christian. When I was brand newly getting close to God, the old open your Bible and stab your finger method of getting guidance from... Lucky dipping. Lucky dipping. The first time I did that, the verse I landed on was, More will be the children of she who's barren than the one who's married, or words to that effect. It's in Isaiah 53, something like that. And I think that single people are missing a tremendous opportunity for emotional growth by withdrawing from the opportunities of involvement with other people, and particularly with children. There's a way in which I've seen single people who are intimidated. They sort of don't really know much about children, and they seem kind of weird, and slimy, and noisy, and they seem that way to the parents, too. I'll let you in on a secret. But I was talking to someone who's here tonight, and she was telling me how she felt like her own life was so much more enriched because she works with children all the time, and that an awful lot of the loneliness that other single people are experiencing, she feels like she avoids because of her opportunity to be with children, to minister to children. And I think that children are wonderful with that. I don't think it's exploiting them at all for you to take nursery duty. You know, here at Redeemer, we've got babies down at the nursery, 9.30, 11.15, 6.30. Go down there and volunteer. You'll give the rest of us a break and hug those little critters. I mean, they're not going to get weirded out by it. They can draw in as much affection as you can hand out, and it's, I can remember coming home from college and going and hugging my dog because it was the first living thing that I had touched in 13 weeks, and there was just a hunger, a need to be with someone who would uncritically give me a hug. I mean, the dog didn't hug back exactly, but I think that we need to provide opportunities in the church where people can be involved in the lives of children and deeply involved. I don't just mean the nursery, but I mean many other ways. There are thousands of children out there in New York. And can I use your name? And Pat Williams is nodding. She's the one that told me the story. She works for Child Evangelism Fellowship. Hungry kids out there who get absolutely no affection from anyone. And Pat has already talked to me about trying to channel some of the Redeemer people to the kids that she works with who need big brothers, big sisters, and who are, you know, not your crack addict type kids, but just normal kids who are neat kids who really need the involvement of steady adult role models in their lives, and they're not getting it anywhere. And here we are. Becky Pippert wrote a book called Out of the Salt Shaker. Here we are, all these little grains of salt sitting in the shaker feeling sorry for ourselves where we should be sprinkled out. So you're saying, see, though, when you get married and you start to have a family, you get deeply involved in people's lives at a depth you never would have chosen to otherwise. You know, they're dropped on you. If you're single and you want that kind of emotional growth, you've actually got to go find them. You've got to go get involved. Now, I would agree, though, don't forget, there's a sense in which there's a trade-off. in the ways that being a parent will grow you if you're not a parent admittedly but it's also true about the the trade there are many ways that being a parent weaken your sanctification no no there's no doubt about that it's it's the the disadvantages of parenthood i i was saying to kathy one of the things that um amazes me after having lived out in in couples land for so long uh where very few people are single everybody's in their little hermetically sealed uh containers their their two-bedroom houses and their white picket fences is that um well you know christian movements don't spread very fast out there they just don't spread uh the fact there's so many single people in new york there's a much higher energy level no matter how old you are you have a far higher energy level you're able to get around more you're able to make changes faster and you see that because there's no doubt about it if you are if you're 45 and never married you are definitely younger and you know that then your friends who are also 45 have been married for 20 years you can tell it you can tell that you're more open to new ideas you're more mobile uh you're more decisive in some ways it's more easy to uh it's easier for you to adjust to new things and i recognize that just by the way in which the christianity is spread in the in the friendship networks i say i know that would never happen you know out in land where everybody is in their family and everybody's so tired and nobody can ever get to a small group meeting because they come you know because they're so tired spending quality time with all their children they have no other friends they have no other friends now anyway i i'm not see i'm not trying to i'm not trying to knock being married i'm not trying to elevate being single i'm just i'm just trying to show you that there's some myths here i guess that i want to uh push against there are definite advantages there's no way in the world that uh i could say that being involved in children's lives apart from being a parent it's not the same thing katherine it's not the same thing on the other hand uh if you make the effort to get involved in ministry you you accomplish much of the same kind of growth and you avoid in many ways some of the problems of being married that's the reason paul can say singleness is good because you miss a lot of blessings but you miss a lot of the pitfalls too that's again not a total answer but uh it's part of a response the second part of the question was about was what do you remember cass well i you mean what i said about how do you overcome these regards of life look at it this way this is the best way to put it and maybe at this point i'm i'm showing some of my theology if you're single now and if you're a christian and if romans 8 28 means anything it means today you can grow better as a single than you could if you're married or god would have you married in other words there's things that you're learning now there's ways in which you can grow right now uh there's opportunities for service and ministry that would be are better for you and for him and for other everybody around you as a single person it's better for you and that means if you have dysfunctionality in your background you come from a dysfunctional family i know i know that marriage and a good marriage and remember we talked about the massive power of the spouse to reprogram yourself which is a wonderful way to heal that but if you're not married right now it means that that's not the way god has ordained for you to be healed of that and if and since god wants you to always grow it says first thessalonians this is the will of god your sanctification it means that right now your healing and your growth can happen better in ministry to people who are not members of your immediate family not your not your uh uh your spouse and so on you always grow through ministry that's what kathy was trying to say to kathy and right now the ministry that you can grow with best if you are single is the ministry of a single person uh there was did i hand what okay another hand i have another piece of paper here's a piece of paper that says what though if no one is approaching you in turn for friendships or for dating and it's going on a long time it's not like well i haven't had a date in a in six months how about i haven't had a date in six years and so on uh what happens if you don't have anyone approaching you at all now uh what are you supposed to do and you and you don't think you uh you don't like being single i mean that's all implied in the uh in the uh the question i you know i think the best answer for that boy this is the one question where i would you you want to respond to this you want yeah and ask another seven or eight questions before, of the person before I answer that question, but I can't. I, um, I'll say one thing to give, buy you some time. I'll say something. This is how we operate. I shoot off my mouth while he thinks. Um, we had a friend at seminary whose name I won't mention because he's in the ministry now. He was a very weird guy. I mean, he had every strange mannerism. Yeah. And he did what I consider to be an extremely humble and mature thing. He went to some of the regular guys on his dorm hall and he said, what's the matter with me? I know there's stuff, but I don't know what it is. I know people get this sort of weird response to me, but I don't know what I'm doing. I mean, you never see your worst flaws. He said, how about you guys just disciple me in making me a regular guy? You know, tell me what I'm doing wrong here. What's, what's, you know, my physical mannerisms? The way I talk and he had a real high pitch little laugh, you know, and doggone it if that wasn't a humble thing to do. And the, the fellows that he went to were real sympathetic and mature and understanding. And they showed him how to change the way he walked and showed him how to lower his voice a little bit. I mean, that was just part of it, but why not go to your best friend? You know, what was that bad breath commercial, you know, about only your, only your friend will tell you or something like that? Go to your best friend and say, what am I doing? What am I doing in relationships? What am I doing to, to send people away from me? How could I be more welcoming? Ask. I mean, if we can't help each other in the church, where else are you going to get that kind of honesty and whatnot? Also, you know, the only reason I was about to say something like that, and I don't want to give whoever wrote the question out the impression that if somebody's not approaching you, or I don't want to give anybody this impression, that the first thing that you ought to assume is that something's wrong with me. It may be that you do need to talk to friends and say, do you think there's something about me that puts people off? I mean, that's a fair question. And it does take a lot of humility. I remember that issue. That's, I don't think anybody ever has been as humble as to come and say, I know that I'm striking people in a bad way. Tell me how I'm doing it. But, but the other, the other issue would be, some people have come to me and said, I'm just going to move, I'm going to change, I'm going to change situations just simply because I'm not meeting anybody. Is that an unspiritual reason to move or to change jobs or to change locations or to change churches and so on? And I say, that is not unspiritual. I don't think so. Because I do feel like you need to put yourself, if you seek to, if you want to be married, there's really no reason why not to seek it in every way possible. Jay Adams recommended that women go to seminary because all these guys look around and say, I don't want to be a minister and be single. It does work for some people, doesn't it? Remember that? That's not why I went. No. But you don't refuse God's gifts either. The other reason, but the other thing you have to say is, if you're, if, if there's not even nibbles, there's not even nibbles, and you want to be married, you're, you're in the furnace at that point. God's a refiner. And when, when, when Elisha was, when Elisha was in the city and he was surrounded by enemy warriors and he prayed, Lord, deliver us, God sent chariots of fire and delivered. And late, many, many years earlier when Joseph was in the same spot and he'd been thrown into a pit and he was surrounded by people who were going to sell him into slavery, he prayed and prayed and prayed and said, Lord, I want my freedom, just like Elisha did. And what happened? He was sold into slavery, spent years in slavery, praying, Lord, when am I going to get free? And eventually, as you know, God raised him up and used the slavery to bring him to Egypt, make him prime minister of Egypt, to save his parents, to save, to save his family. He had no idea why he was in the pit and he didn't get out. Peter, when he was put into prison, everybody prayed for him and angel came and sprung him and out he came. And John the Baptist was put in prison and everybody prayed for him and he was beheaded. And the point was that God has his purposes and he doesn't always, he doesn't promise, if I push a certain button, the box is going to spring open. Why did Joseph stay in slavery for so long? Why are you going so long without even a nibble? I don't know, but I do know this, God, and we're going to have to close on this, you have another question. I have two. he was to Elisha in his noise. In other words, God answered Joseph's prayer by saying, I'm going to make you happy. I'm going to use you. I'm going to make you great, but not on your schedule. Okay, but Kathy, you better do this quickly because it's 930 if you don't mind. They don't look bored. I know, but I promised them. One is, how do you break the pattern of meaningless relationships, and why do we so easily idolize relationships? Bring them to a Monday night seminar. Why do we so easily idolize relationships? Because they're good things. Because God made us that way because he intended it. And like I said before, we live in a broken world, and therefore we put up with a lot of brokenness around us. You only make idols out of good things. That's right. I mean, you don't go idolize something that's bad. You idolize something that's good. I mean, it might be twisted, and it might be perverted, but relationships are generally pretty good things. That's why we idolize them, because they are good. How do you break the pattern of having a lot of meaningless relationships, though? Well, you see the fact that you are in a pattern, I think would be the number one thing. I want that one. Yeah, you can read it, but I want it. All right. You see that you're in a pattern. You say, what am I failing to do right to get out of this? What do I always do wrong? How do I always blow it? Find out the ways in which you're tripping yourself up and leading yourself astray in relationships. I think you analyze the pattern, just like any other habitual thing that keeps going wrong in your life. If you blew a circuit breaker every time you plugged in the toaster, you'd figure it out after a while. And if your relationships are always blowing the circuit breaker, you need to sit down and figure out what's going wrong here. I strongly suggest a three-sentence response, and we can take it up next week. You get a hard and fast rule not to date non-Christians. How do you advise your Christian friends who date non-Christians? When you're 16 years old and you want to date to the prom, I advise them, go with whoever will take you. When you're 36 years old, the stakes are a lot higher. Nobody is fooling themselves anymore. It's just a whole lot more difficult to have a relationship that's just good friends and we're not really involved and it really doesn't mean anything and that sort of thing. Because the clocks are going off, the biological clocks and the relationship clocks are going off. The older you get as a single person, the more important it is to make your friendships those that are based with people that you have the most in common with. I mean, don't you already see this? The people you knew in high school, your best friends? You go back to the reunion and you think, what did I ever see in him or her? I mean, you grow and you need to let your relationships grow too. And I do not advise people to date non-Christians when they get serious about being single. Yeah, okay. That was 11 things. No, the quickie answer is, and that was the right quickie answer, there's nothing in the Bible about dating non-Christians because there's nothing in the Bible about dating, remember? The point is, however, the older you get, the less likely it is that it would be a good thing for you to date somebody who's not a Christian. And that reason is, there's two kinds of dates. One is, you want to do a fun thing and you just need somebody to do it with. The other is, you want to get to know somebody to have a relationship so you find a fun thing to use in order to get to know them. In other words, fun thing is the means and the end is a relationship or a relationship or a date is the means and the end is a fun thing to do. Now, that first kind is not, you're not going out in order to get to know somebody. And earlier on in your life, that's the reason you date. And therefore, whether it's a Christian or non-Christian is really not nearly as important. But as life goes on, you find you have less and less of those kinds of dates. And as you get older and older and you find you cut to the chase quicker in dating relationships and so on and say, do I have a relationship here? The older you get, the less likely you should date non-Christians. And serious relationships, of course, since they are, what a serious relationship is, we'll talk about that next week, is basically trying out parts of what it means to be married. Even to sit down and to work out a problem, you're trying out part of what it's like to be married. So it's not a good thing. Great question. Next week here, I need a quick vote. We debated, I decided in an executive decision that it wouldn't be a good idea to try to split us up this week because I felt we'd lose a lot of people. And here's a question. Would you be interested next week in splitting up and having women one place and men one place for questions and answers? Or would you prefer to stay together? your hand for a minute. Would you? No, don't be afraid. It can't be that bad. Would you rather stay together? Are you really shaking your head? Would you like to split next week? All right. If somebody is afraid to say yes, come and tell me afterwards. Let me close in prayer, please. Next week, how do you know if we should marry this person? Let's pray. Now, Father, we thank you that you have made both singleness and marriage good states. Because we don't love you as we ought, we can find ways to strangle ourselves with singleness, and we can find ways to strangle and smother ourselves with marriage. But because you are God, because you're in our life, and we can lay these things on the altar, both singleness and marriage are ways in which we can meet you and know you and serve you. We pray that you would help us from the time we've spent tonight be more equipped to do the latter, and to put our state, our single state, on that altar and keep it there, a living sacrifice. And be with us till we're able to get together one more time and talk about these great matters. We thank you for the glory of relationships. And we pray, most of all, that you would make our relationships like your relationships, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. And we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
