TITLE: Singleness – The Biblical Guidelines (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Sex, Singleness, and Marriage
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/singleness-the-biblical-guidelines/

============================================================

This is not going to be as systematic as I gave you last week, partly because, as I think I told you last week, if any of you have ever got any kind of evangelical church background, and you've probably gone and heard seminars or talks or things like that on the biblical view of dating, and I think I said last week, there is no biblical view of dating. Dating is not mentioned in the Bible. Things were a lot simpler back then, remember? In other words, when you were three years old, somebody betrothed you to some other person of the other gender who was also three years old of a nice family, and there was no problem, you see? Really, the Bible doesn't talk about dating. However, the Bible has plenty of things to say that bear on that relationship that we have in this culture called dating, and therefore we're going to talk about that tonight, a little bit less systematic of a way. So here's how I want to begin. First of all, I need to kind of turn this away for a minute. First of all, let me remind you, not all of you were here last week, and it would be helpful, let me remind you, everything that Kathy and I, my wife and I, are saying tonight is based on a certain assumption about sex. And let me quickly, quickly recap that, basically. We said there's a low view of sex we call platonistic. Somebody pointed out that Plato wasn't a problem. He had a fine view of sex. It was his disciples. Well, it doesn't matter. They're platonistic, all right? And it's true. But the platonistic view of sex is that sex is degrading somehow, it's dirty somehow, and that particular view of sex we talked about as not being the Christian or biblical one. Secondly, we said there's another view of sex that said sex is an appetite. It's just a biological need. We need to have sex. Like, we need to have food. We need to have rest. And therefore, we have to, just like with food, we have to be careful about our diet. We can't eat in an indiscriminate way, and so we can't have sexual relations in an indiscriminate way. But we basically have to have sex when we need to have sex, and we should have sex with people and not be repressed about it and limit ourselves and so on. And I'll call that the middle view of sex. There's a low view and a middle view, and then there's a high view. The high view is the biblical view, and the high view says that it's not, not only is it not degrading, but it's not just an appetite, but rather the Bible, in a very audacious way, in a very intimate and daring way, says that sex was God's invention to show us, to give us a sign, to show us the union that he built us for, the real union, and that is union with him. Sex just points to that. And the need we have, that we respond to in sex, is the need for intimacy and closure and union with someone else. The Bible comes right out and says that marriage and the sexual relationship between a man and a woman is a smaller reflection, a mirror of the relationship between God and a believer. And because of that, if you stop and think about it, does God give you intimacy apart from total commitment? Does he? Does he enter into personal loving relationship? Does he flood your hearts with his love? Does he enter into intimacy with you? When you say, well, Lord, I want lots of intimacy. I want, every time I come to you, I want to have your heart flooding my heart with love, but I don't want to commit myself to you. I don't want to get up in front of the world when I'm baptized and commit myself to obey you completely. I don't want to give my life over to you. I want to still be in charge of my own life. Does God say, oh, that's all right, fine. I'll be very happy to flood your heart with my love and give you all these, you know, peace, love, and groovy vibes as long as, it doesn't really matter. I don't care whether you commit yourself to me. He would never do that. He doesn't do that. And so, therefore, we say, why would it be right for you to say, I want to have sexual intimacy. I want to be naked and vulnerable to you physically, but I don't want to be naked and vulnerable to you in any other way. I want to have sex with you and then I want to be able to do what I want. I don't want to be bound to you. I don't want to have to make my decisions around you as if we were married. You see, if somebody says, I want to have sex with you because I love you, but I don't want to get married, what he or she is saying is, I don't love you enough to get married. I am not willing to bind myself to you so that I have to make my decisions with you that I no longer have that independence. You see, I want to be vulnerable and naked to you physically, but I don't want to be vulnerable and naked to you in other ways. And we said last week, just as ridiculous as it would be to say, God, I want your intimacy without commitment. It is silly to talk about sexual intimacy, sexual union, without every other kind of union. Paul says to be physically one and not to be socially and legally and emotionally in every other way one is a monstrosity. It just doesn't make sense. And it doesn't. And since sex is covenant cement, sex is a way of continually resubring. total life commitment. That's what a covenant is, a legal thing, a moral thing, a spiritual thing. Sex is the ability to continually recreate that covenant and to say, I belong completely and exclusively to you. And if you use sex outside of a covenant of total commitment, what you do is you destroy your ability to entrust yourself to other people. That is what we said last week. And that's the assumption. Now, we'll have to say something else at the end of this time, because I got about 99 questions about masturbation at the end of last week. And you say, you're going to, and you know, and then everybody said, you mean you're going to talk about living a single life and not talk about masturbation this week? And I said, oh, that's, all right, I will. So let me say something about that, too. If you don't mind, do you have something to say on that, too, at this point? Yeah, all right, I will. Here. First of all, you know what all the, it probably cost somebody millions and millions of government dollars to come up with this research statistic. But 90% of all single people masturbate, and the other 10% lie. Have you heard that one? No. You hadn't heard that one? Look, there's nothing in the Bible about masturbation. Those of you with a church background may have heard that there's something deep in the Old Testament about it, and there isn't. There's a story about a man who married a woman and then did coitus interruptus, pulled away at the last minute, and spilled semen on the floor because he did not want to bear children through her. He wanted to be married and have sex, but didn't want to have children with her. And it was his responsibility to raise up children. And he was struck dead, not because it had anything to do with sex or masturbation or anything like that, because he wouldn't obey God and has nothing to do with masturbation. There's nothing in the Bible about it. But here's the problem with masturbation, if there's a problem. And that is, in the passage we read last week, 1 Corinthians 7, it says, Got you nervous there, right? The first half of the sentence got you nervous, but it's reciprocal. And that is a very, very important passage and extremely fundamental for a biblical understanding of sex, because it's saying your sexual capacity is not really for you. It really isn't like eating. Your sexual capacity is not for you. The reason that God invented sex was not so you could get pleasure, but so that you could give pleasure. And people who have experienced the apex of godly, married, sexual passion know this. The height of sexual pleasure is the pleasure of giving pleasure. The height of sexual satisfaction is to see that you are giving someone satisfaction, and that is the most satisfying and the most arousing thing possible. It has nothing to do... Sexual capacity is not there for you to take a climax, but for you to give it. Your body does not belong to you. The other person's body does not belong to him or her. Do you understand that? I remember one time early on when I grasped this, and I was doing counseling as a pastor, and I remember there was two or three couples in a row that came to me and said, we hate sex. It's terrible. It's bad. They're married couples, and they said, our sex lives are terrible. The other person doesn't satisfy me. And I said, look, I'm not a therapist, but I've been reading 1 Corinthians 7. And I wonder if we could try this. I would like you to have sex regularly, whether or not you feel like it, for the next week. Have sex as regularly as you can agree on, but you can agree and have sex. And when you make love, please don't worry at all about whether you get any pleasure. Just worry about whether you're going to give pleasure. Don't even concentrate on how you feel, or whether you're moving along, or whether you're being aroused. Just say, my job right here is to bring the other person as much satisfaction as possible. Can you do that? And they looked at me, and they said, sounds really weird, but all right. And so after a week, I said, how was it? I saw them after a week, and they said, strange. And after two weeks, I said, how was it? And they said, better. And after three, four weeks especially, they said, this is great. And I said, well, according to the Bible, all you've been doing is actual mutual masturbation. Oh, yes, you've been having intercourse, but you see, what's been going on is you've been sitting there saying, am I getting enough? Now, the problem with masturbation is that it's completely focused on you. Completely. It is horribly self-conscious. It's exactly the way sex is not supposed to operate. And it doesn't at all, in my, and my wife will probably say something too about this, we can just speak personally, it doesn't really... you incredibly self-conscious about how your body operates and how important it is for you to be getting a certain amount of pleasure. When the best thing, listen friends, in every other area of life the best thing you can possibly do is forget yourself. You know how you do your best piano playing, you musicians? It's to forget yourself and just to think about the music. Not worry about whether the people are digging on you. But worry about whether, you're not worried at all, all you care about is the music and the beauty of the music, you see. Same thing with preaching, not that, I guess, thankfully, hardly any of you are preachers, I hope. The worst thing you can possibly do is get up there and wonder about what you're getting out of it. You've got to forget all about that. You've got to forget about yourself. Instead, you say, am I able to get the point across? Same thing with sex. The worst thing you can do is say, am I getting mine? Instead, you have to be saying, how can I give satisfaction? And that's what's wrong with masturbation, frankly. It's not because I can point to a verse and say, ah, you see, it's a sin. Every time you do it, I can't say that. I know it's addicting. I know it's also something that actually takes you away from reality because masturbation virtually always involves fantasy. And since it's addicting and it brings you into a fantasy world, into a world that never will exist, ever. Because, you see, most people aren't built like the person in your fantasy. And you probably never will find people like that. Or you're thinking about somebody that is unreachable. Or you're thinking about somebody from the past. In other words, you're addicted to something that takes you away from reality and you think that's healthy? No. You see, for all kinds of reasons, it takes you away from God's purpose for sex. And as a result, I say, it's an unhealthy thing. It's a good thing to resist. But I'm not saying, here's the verse and here's what's wrong. Now, you said you wanted to advise. Did I take everything? He took most of what I was going to say. But one thing I'll add, and those of you who have struggled with this know this from your own experience. And speaking from my own experience as someone who got addicted to masturbation very early, like about 12, I thought I had invented it. I think maybe a lot of people discover it accidentally and think, Gee, I wonder if I could market this. I mean, this is... Does anybody else know about this? But it leads to a lot of loneliness. It makes the loneliness worse. It makes the loneliness harder to bear. It doesn't... Because it is so diametrically opposed to what God meant sex to be, the real union between your soul and another person's soul, there's nobody else there. When the climax comes, sure, there's a tingle. But there's nobody else there. And the bitter loneliness that follows the masturbatory experience, I think is probably a better argument or just as good an argument for avoiding it than practically any other one. If you didn't have a theological or a spiritual reason, just the fact that it leaves you feeling so bad in one sense, so lonely, so wondering whether or not anyone will ever be there, you know, for you really, is a good argument against it. And another thing, another good reason that I found, just speaking personally, to try to get a handle on this whenever it was such a problem in my life is because it's kind of... It's an easily measurable victory. A lot of times in your spiritual life, you're talking about, am I more patient? Am I more kind? Am I more this or that? You know whether you've got more victory over a problem that has mastered you in this area than practically any other one. It's measurable goals, which is supposed to be a good thing whenever you're trying to see forward progress. One thing, Tim, you didn't mention, maybe it really doesn't add that much to what's already been said, but one of the verses in Scripture that was helpful for me was the one that said, don't be mastered by anything. And one of the problems with masturbation is it does gain a real mastery over you. It's a hard thing once the pattern's established to avoid. And that's just another reason for thinking that it's not part of the healthy life that you want to cultivate if you're trying to focus outward, focus on having a servant heart before God and letting Him do with your life what you want. Masturbation is just sort of a detour from everything that your goals really are. And when we split up, or maybe we're going to be me with the women, Tim with the men, or switch, or whatever, I'll be glad to take any questions, and I'm sure Tim will too. If someone's real brave and wants to ask a question right now, do, okay. We'll see how long that takes. We'll see you next time. Let's see you next time. Let's do, okay. We'll see how long that takes. Let me tell you, let's see, one, two, two or three things about, two or three observations about single living from a biblical perspective. First of all, something that some of you don't want to hear but is true is, let me say something about the goodness of singleness. The Bible does talk, especially Paul, talks about singleness being good. He has the audacity to say, I wish you were all like me, and he was single. He says, it's a good state to be in. It's a great state. I wish there were more people who were doing it and were opting for it. Now, how can Paul talk so positively about being single, and how can he talk about singleness as being good when so many of us, so many of you, think of it as an absolute curse, a torture? Well, there's a couple of reasons why, and they are important to keep in mind, very, because today you are single, probably, not all of you, most of all of you probably are, today you are single, and the Bible says that singleness is, can be a good state, and here's why. First of all, Jesus was single. That is not something to overlook. We know this, that Jesus Christ is the standard for humanity. How do you know what it means to be fully human? How do you know what it means to be truly a human being? Where's the definition? Do we take Hitler's definition? You know, Hitler had an idea of what real humanity was, and then what subhumanity was, and so on. And you say, of course not. Okay, where do you get your standard? You just pull it out of thin air? And how are you any different than Hitler? You're just going on your feelings, your opinions? Christians have said there's one standard for humanity. By that standard, we judge what really a human being should be. Jesus is the standard, and we shouldn't overlook the fact that Jesus was A, single, and B, celibate. And that must mean you can be fully human in that condition, contrary to popular opinion. Okay? Secondly, when Paul talks about marriage singleness being good, a lot of people have said, how can that be? Isn't it true, you Bible scholars say, that back in Genesis chapter 2, there's a place where Adam was created, and there is no Eve yet. So you have man without woman. And God looked, and up to now, everything God's been saying has been benediction. You know, benediction means good word. Malediction means evil word. And up to now, all that happens, everything that God creates says, it is good, it is good, it is good, it is good. And suddenly he creates Adam, and we hear this word, it is not good that man should be alone. Isn't that interesting? Before sin, before anything was wrong with the world, Adam, all by himself, was alone, and he says it's not good. And then God goes ahead and produces a woman, and man and woman gets rid of the aloneness, and that's good. So, somebody says, I mean, it's very clear that being single must be deficient in some way. How can Paul say it's a good state? Well, what Paul is trying to say, I think, is this, that it's a relatively good state, because marriage now is in a condition of disrepair. We sin. The man is sinful, the wife is sinful. All right? And because of that, and this is something, because of that, marriage is both better and worse than singleness together, and they factor each other out to a degree. You know, what is worse, a rabid horse or a rabid mouse? Which of the two would you rather deal with? If you were locked in a room with a, you know, if you had a choice between being locked in a room with a rabid horse or a mouse, which would you choose? And the answer is the mouse. Why? Because, you see, the greater inherently and intrinsically a being is, the worse that being is under the influence of evil. Marriage is a marvelous thing. It's an incredible creation. But under the influence of sin, it's a terrible thing. One of the, there's more than one way to skin this subject, but I'll put it this way. Marriage has recreational power. Your spouse, when that person that you get married to, this is one of the reasons that people, people know this intuitively, though they don't know it intellectually. And that's one of the reasons that people stay away from marriage. Your spouse has got massive power to completely reprogram your self-image. That means, and some of you may, I've said this at one sermon some months ago, if, your self-image is basically the result of accumulated verdicts that people have passed on you over the years. Everybody from your first grade teacher to your, you know, your friends at college, people have been saying things about you. And the verdicts accumulate, and slowly, if enough people say this about you, you start to believe it. Enough people say this about you, you start to believe it. When you get married, marriage is built by God so that your spouse has this massive power to reprogram your self-image. So, for example, if everybody else says you're ugly, and your spouse says you're beautiful, you feel beautiful. you're beautiful, you know how this works. And your spouse says you're ugly, you feel ugly. Your spouse can overturn all that. Your spouse has got that power, that's inherent power in marriage. And that means, on the one hand, marriage can heal you of anything, or marriage can inflict unbelievable damage on you. So, what is so good about singleness? What's good about singleness is that you avoid both. You know, on the one hand, you're missing out on some of the blessings of marriage, but you're also missing out on the difficulties and the burdens and many of the dangers of marriage as well. And that means singleness has got both profits and deficits. And when you're single, Paul says, there's things that you can do, and the freedom that you've got, and the independence that you've got, and there's all sorts of opportunities that you just don't have when you're married. And vice versa. And because of sin, you see, because of sin, singleness is actually inherently less dangerous than marriage. So, you're losing, so you miss out on some of the dangers, and this is a very odd way to put it, it may seem, but when you're married and you're in a bad marriage, you're much lonelier than when you're single. And I've always thought the worst possible way to drown would be on a raft in the ocean. People have drowned on the ocean, right, because they can't drink the salt water. It must be incredibly awful to drown of thirst when you're surrounded by water, and it must be incredibly awful to be lonely in the middle of a marriage. And a lot of you, some of you, surely know what that's like. That's why Paul can say that singleness is a good thing. It's relatively good. Just like marriage is relatively good because we live in a fallen world. And that's the reason why you have to take a look at this. The Bible says singleness is a gift. And a lot of people have said, oh, give me a break. And they really hated that particular verse. But I mentioned this in response to somebody's question last week. I'll just do this again. The Bible says that there's a gift of evangelism. Some people can talk to others who don't believe in Christ and win them and not turn them off. Don't you wish, some of you, some of you wish you had that gift. You talk to somebody about Christ who is not a Christian, and you say something, and they're immediately offended, and you say, what did I do now? You have a friend that knows how, you know, it just sounds, a friend is the voice of sweet reason. And anyone that he or she talks to is just not offended at all. They've got a gift. Every gift is also a duty. There's the spiritual gift of evangelism, but every Christian is supposed to share his or her faith. There's a spiritual gift of faith, but everybody's supposed to have faith. There's a spiritual gift of giving, everybody's supposed to give. There's a spiritual gift of teaching, everybody's supposed to teach. How do you know if you have the gift of teaching? If you have the gift of teaching, it comes naturally. It comes easily. It's not a terrible burden to do it. But sometimes you have the responsibility to teach, right? You have to teach, and so you do a lot more preparation, and you know, you sweat a lot more, but you fulfill your duty. How do you know if you have the gift of singleness? It comes naturally. It's no problem. It's not a burden. It doesn't mean that there aren't any problems involved with it, but you find that it just isn't something that crushes you and weighs you down and knocks you down. But on the other hand, if you are single today and you know that you don't have the gift, you still have the duty. And today you can discharge your duty. It's harder for you than it will be for a person with a gift of singleness. But it doesn't mean that today you don't have the duty of singleness. And the duty means to give that to God and to use it for his glory, to obey him in it. Just like a married person has got certain pitfalls, a single person has certain pitfalls, you find out what those pitfalls are, you avoid them, you resist them, and you use the opportunity. E.B. White, who is no Christian, said this about New York. It says, on any person who desires such queer prizes, New York will bestow the gift of loneliness and the gift of privacy. It can destroy an individual or it can fulfill him, depending, a good deal, he says, on luck. And a Christian would say everything is fine except that last part. No, it depends on what you do with it. It depends on who you give it to. It depends on whether you keep it yourself or not. Okay, another thing. Let me tell you something about two idols of singleness. I got these ideas from my wife. She did a talk on this a couple years ago. The two idols that singleness, singles tend to fall into, two kinds of idolatries, and they both, if you avoid sex outside of marriage, you can avoid these idolatries. One of them, do you remember this talk at all? Hmm. Okay, well, maybe I've improved it. I don't know. You tell me afterwards. It's a possibility, but I may not have, so we can talk about it later. On the one hand, there's the idolatry of independence. Remember that? On the other hand, there's the idolatry of dependence. Now, the idolatry of independence goes like this. I don't want... people start to get possessive. My freedom is important to me. My independence is important to me. And therefore, sex outside marriage is very important for me because I don't want to get married, and I'm not going to get married. I don't want anybody to tie me down. I'm too young! I'm too young to settle down yet. You're 65. But I'm too young to settle down. And that's the idolatry of independence. And it's fed by sex outside of marriage. Because a number of people tell me, now that I'm a Christian and I realize what the biblical sex ethic is, I have more incentive to get married than I used to. Yeah, of course. Because, you see, you begin to see that independence has become an idol. There's the idol of dependence, and the idol of dependence goes like this. I've got to get married, or I will die. I must. If I get married, everything will be fine. And you see, people stuck in that idolatry also use sex outside of marriage because you use sex as, at least, it's not quite getting married, but at least I'm with somebody. And at least this is my way of keeping this person in my life. It's amazing how often people of the opposite idolatries pair up. Have you noticed that? Have you noticed that? And the only way those two kinds of people can be paired up and destroy each other is if you keep having sex. Because if you have sex, then you are able to keep that relationship. If you don't, there's nothing else you have in common. Everything else, you're completely different. It's the only thing you agree on. You see? Otherwise, if it wasn't for that, there'd be no way. No way the independent person, no way that independent person is going to let you try to move on toward commitment. You see what I'm saying? And therefore, those two... Now, listen. These two idolatries, there's a tendency, and I'm not trying to stereotype, there's a tendency for the first one to tend to be a male idolatry, and here's why. And the second one tends to be a female idolatry, but that's just a tendency, and I'm not trying to give you statistics, and I don't want to push everybody into categories. But as far as I know, biblically, men have an independence gift, and women have an interdependence gift. And I think all the research bears that out. Men are better at doing things alone, and women are better at working on teams, and working in tandem. And because of that, under the influence of sin, the gift of independence, which is a great thing, it's a marvelous thing. The gift of being able to stuff your feelings. You know, what's interesting to me is, Kathy and I, you know, somebody once wrote an article, which I love so much, called Marriage is a Vehicle of Redemption. In marriage, you knock the rough edges off of each other. On the one hand, because of my gift of independence, I'm able to stuff my feelings at times. For example, I can deal with people that I'm mad at, but I can be polite, professional, work with them. It's a lot harder for Kathy to do. It's easier for me to stuff my feelings and go out and do my job. It's harder for Kathy to do. And so she learns from me. On the other hand, I don't know what's going on in my feelings. And Kathy will come up to me and she'll say, you're depressed today. And I'll say, what do you mean? Three days later, I'll come back and say, you were right. How did you know? She'll look at me and she'll say, I can't imagine what it's like not to know when you're depressed. Now, the gift of independence and the gift of interdependence, male and female. Under the influence of sin, the gift of independence becomes moral bro man. And under the influence of sin, the gift of independence becomes the Cinderella fantasy, the teen queen prom dream. All right? Okay. Repeat the first one? The whole thing. Well, the whole thing? Let's see, that's 20 minutes ago now. Yeah. In other words, under the influence of sin, the gift of independence becomes, you become the moral bro man. That means the macho man. I don't need anybody. Under the influence of sin, the gift of interdependence becomes, actually become a dependent person or a doormat or someone who is used. somebody who says, I've got, you know, the princess syndrome, which a lot of good feminist writers talk about. Under the influence of sin. And as a result, those things kind of show up very often in your singleness. And the only way to deal with those idols besides recognizing them for what they are and recognizing that the only way you really can find freedom is in Christ and the only way you can really find oneness and intimacy is in Christ and not in marriage and not in a lack of marriage. And if you also stay out of sex outside of marriage, it's almost impossible for those idolatries to really, really do a number on you. And it's almost impossible for you, as it often happens, to hook up with somebody with the opposite idolatry and kill each other for ten years. Why won't you marry me? You see. Here you go getting possessive again. I just want to be friends. You see. And there we go. Watch out for the idolatries. Third thing. this is the last thing. And I'm going to let Kathy say whatever has come into her mind while we're talking that she wants to add. C.S. Lewis talks about the four loves. Lewis talks about the four loves. And he talks about, he uses four Greek words. Storge, which means affection. And it really is something you can have for anything. You get affectionate about your old trench coat and you hate to throw it out. You get affectionate about a certain kind of music. You get affectionate about your dog or your cat. You get affectionate. You get this deep feeling of warmth. It's what the Germans call gemütlichkeit. It's coziness. Deep sense of feeling like this is just where I fit here. All right. It's romance. Sentimentality. Warmth. Storge. Then you have eros, which is erotic love. Sexual attraction. Then you have philos, which is friendship. Like in Philadelphia, the city of brotherly love. Philos, which is friendship. And then you have agape, which is commitment. Engagement, which means service. Which means it has nothing to do with feeling. It's a commitment to serve the other person and to put your needs underneath his or her needs. Those are the four loves. Now, what happens, and people have already been telling me about this who came last week. They were saying, you know, what's funny is, if you realize where sex belongs, it completely reshuffles the normal way in which we go about things. And here's the way, in American culture, you screen people out and decide who to date. You walk into a room. Let's just, you know, kind of flatten this thing and make it, you know, let me give you a caricature just to give you the principle. I'll go overgeneralize. You walk into a room and there's five people of the opposite gender. And you immediately begin to screen right away. You decide who you want to talk to, who would be a possibility. And you do it almost completely on the basis of the first two, which is storge and eros. In other words, some of them look better than others. Some of them are more sexually attractive than others. And some of them are just more pleasant looking or something like that. Now, very often, I think this is a caricature. Some of you are very, very, the very first step is eros. Some of you, the very first step is storge. But it's still, you're going on your gut feeling. And you screen people out on the basis of how they look and whether they cut a nice figure and whether they seem to know the right kind of people and whether you feel comfortable with them right away or whether you're attracted to them. And what you do is you screen them all out. Then the second step is you see a couple people that you say you'd be interested in. Then you go ahead and you try to date them. And then you try to see, well, maybe we can make love. And you get into eros. And if that goes well and you have a real relationship going, then you say, let's see if I can make this person into a friend. All right? Because almost always you're having sex before you developed into a kind of friend. Friendships take time. Friendships mean you share interests. You work on things together. You have the same vision. You want to accomplish the same things. Right? And always it's storge and eros first. Then let's see whether we can get to friendship. And if you're not into independence, idolatry, eventually, if everything works out, maybe we can do the commitment. We can tie the knot. We can say, I bind myself to you. Regardless of feeling, I give myself to you. The Bible completely shuffles that around. And that is the way you're operating. In fact, even once you become a Christian, what happens is you just pull the eros out under duress and pressure. But you still do it the same way. You're not having sex, but you're still screening people out on the basis of eros. You're saying, here's the people that turned me on. Now let's see if any of them can be friends. Instead, don't forget this. Eros has got to come last in the Christian approach because you have got to have unity in every area. There's got to be a context for physical oneness. There's got to be oneness in everything else. You know what you have to start with? What do you think the biblical way is? Philos? No. See, agape, yeah. Well, see, agape, in a sense, everybody who's a Christian that you're looking at, you've got a commitment to. And here's how you have to look at it. The Bible says that the man received the wife not because he was horny. It doesn't say, ah, it's not good for man to be horny. I will make Eve. That's not what God said. All right? It's also not true. He said, ah, it's not good that he doesn't have anything to do on a Saturday night. I won't invent Eve. He says, it's not good that man shall be alone. And when he sees her, he breaks into poetry. And the first poetic couplet, he says, at last, this is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. I feel completed. You see, there's a oneness. Your spouse is to be your best friend. Absolutely. If you've got... better friend than your spouse, your marriage is in great trouble. The Bible says, in Hebrew, the Bible says that your spouse is to be your haloup. Your haloup. Your best friend. Isn't that a great word? It's a Hebrew word, haloup. Okay? You can call somebody haloup and they won't know what you mean, but you know what you mean. All right? Your very best friend. What really creates a marriage is friendship. The romance comes and goes. I hate to tell you, some of you know that. But you thought it was, some of you were in a bad marriage, and you said, well, in a good marriage, the romance and the eros, it'll always be there. We'll talk about that next week. No way. What really makes a marriage great is that you always know that other person understands you. They understand you. They know you to the bottom. They accept you. They understand you. This is the one person you can work your problems out with. This is the one person who knows what you're like. It's the one person who appreciates you. Hmm? That. That's the backbone of a marriage. Everything else. Without the backbone, you're just a jellyfish. Without your backbone, all this other stuff isn't right. You should be looking at all five of those people and saying, remember those people that you walk into the room? Who would be a good friend? And unfortunately, that means you can't screen people out very fast at all. It takes time. You need to get to know them. You need to talk with them. You need to spend some time with them in small ways. And you should be looking for wisdom. You should be looking for depth. You should be looking for profundity. You should be looking for common vision. I'm getting into next week, so I'll stop right here. You start with friendship. And then you move. Naturally, what will happen is you may find storge developing, which is the romance. And you begin to develop in agape. And finally, you marry the person. And then comes the eros. You can tell that there's pressure toward the erotic, of course. And so there's a sense in which you can't put these things in nice, neat order like I'm doing. But don't you see? It basically is shifting around. So you're putting the friendship first, instead of putting the romance and the eros first. You should not be ruling those people. There's all kinds of people. I hate to tell you this. A lot of folks say, oh gosh, there's just not a lot of good prospects out there. You're screening out all kinds of good prospects, because they don't look right. That's all. And I keep trying to say, I want you to know, if you have a marvelous and wonderful marriage, and you live for 70 years after you get married, eventually you're going to look like anyway. Right? So, in the end, I want you to know, as hard as it, as some of you can see it already, you start to fade. Those things are not the critical things. You can be together for billions of years. You're only going to have about 20 years in which you still have sex appeal. All right. One last thing, and I mentioned it last week. And that is, one of the great pathologies, and it goes along with the independence-dependence problem. And I mentioned it, but some of you weren't here, so I'll be real quick. One of the big problems in the Christian community, now I'm saying one thing about the Christian community. One of the big problems about becoming a Christian is you suddenly have access to people of the other sex. You have the right to spend time with them that you never had before. You see, before you're a Christian, if you're a guy, you start hanging out with a woman, she wants to know, what are you up to? I mean, you know, are you taking me out? I mean, where are we going? Otherwise, you just don't hang out. You can develop relationships at the office and that kind of thing, but basically you just don't hang around. And what's unfortunate, in a way, is that in the Christian community, you've got this thing called fellowship. That is a pretense for having a boyfriend or a girlfriend without needing to make any kind of romantic commitment at all. All right? Now, what this means, of course, now don't forget, you've also got people who are expressing their independence idolatry in a very spiritual way. They're always saying, I thought we were just brother and sister in Christ. What are you getting so possessive about? You see, it sounds wonderful, but if before you were just an independence junkie and now you're a Christian and you're expressing it in a new way. And the vice is versa. But what often happens is men, as I said last week, you've got to think of them emotionally like a three-bedroom apartment. No, I mean a one-bedroom apartment. Okay? So you have a bedroom and you've got a living room kitchen. Women are more like a studio apartment. Same floor space, but there's no walls. So what happens in the one room is happening in every room in a studio apartment. I mean, what's happening in the bedroom is clearly visible and affects what's happening in the kitchen. And if you're, you know, what's happening in the kitchen is clearly visible and you can smell it in the bedroom. And it's all of a piece, in other words. Whereas in the room, you know, the apartment that's got a bedroom, there's some privacy and so on. See, what happens is it's possible for man to kind of move on in relationship and develop friendship. no store-gay and erotic relationship at all. It's possible for him to keep his feelings apart a whole lot longer. He knows how to stuff them, basically. It's a lot harder for a woman to do that because the difference and distinction between the erotic and the store-gay and the phyllos is really much, much more gradual. It's much more of an overlapping thing. And so what very often happens inside the Christian community is these great friendships happen. And they look like fellowship. But what's going on, actually, is it's affecting every part of the woman's life. And next thing you know, the woman is saying to the man, what do we really mean to each other? And he's saying, what are you talking about? Now, this happens. Now, you know, what's really odd is when I became a Christian in college 20 years ago, and it happened incessantly. And then I saw it happening when I was in graduate school. And then I kind of got out of single life, in a sense, because after I got married in my mid-20s and went off back out into middle America suburbia where we banish single people, we don't let them live out there. We make it very hard for them to live. We tax them extra, you know, we tax them extra, you know, and all that kind of thing. And we herd them into cities like Manhattan, and we put up barbed wire, and we say, you must live there. It's the only place we'll let you live. But then I moved in, and I realized, you know, it's still happening. Gosh, it doesn't really matter, 30, 40, 50. Be careful about that. Be careful. Because the older you get, especially, the more you need to cut to the chase on some of these things. The more you need to say, look, we're having a good friendship here, but on the other hand, I don't know that there's much of a future for these reasons for us. You need to be up front about that. And it can still happen, absolutely. Now, I think I'm going to, that's the last thing I wanted to say. I think Kathy might have anything. Do you want to add, or do you want to just take questions? Some things came to your mind, did they not? Okay. Tim does this for a living, and I don't, so bear with me. A couple things did come to mind, talking about managing singleness. I was the queen of meaningful relationships whenever I was single, and that was my way of disguising the fact that I could get close to a guy without having to show my hand that I was interested in him in a romantic way. Or if he wouldn't let me get interested in a romantic way, he was clearly not interested in me. I could still sort of pick up the emotional leftovers of my meaningful relationship. And this is easy to do in the Christian community, you know, to keep relationships going that don't really have a future, that aren't clearly doing either of you any good, but to continue to have long talks and, you know, difficult scenarios where you're discussing your relationship that really just drain the life out of you. So, the, the, this happened to me probably, what, four times in a row before I met Tim, and then it was sort of happening again, and I kept saying, God, what is going on? I mean, I feel like this happens every time I meet someone, you know, I get interested in this big unrequited passion, and I'm in this Christian relationship where we're having all of this fellowship on one level, all of these good talks on another level, but it's, you know, there's nothing going on in any kind of personal arena. And the, the image that came to mind, I was one of those girls that grew up horse crazy, you read all those novels about, you know, Susie, whatever her name was, with the horse. Whenever you train a horse to jump hurdles, steeplechase jumping, if a horse balks at a hurdle, it's not allowed to walk around and jump the next one. You have to back it up, approach again, and jump that hurdle before the horse is allowed to continue with the rest of the course. And it was clear to me that that was what God was saying to me, is you keep balking at this hurdle. You keep balking at the hurdle of laying your need and your desire to be married on the altar and allowing me to do with it what I want to do. So we're just going to keep coming back to this time after time until you get it straight. Which, you know, it's up to me how many times I was going to do it. But the Abraham Isaac, what book was that, Tim? We were both reading it at the same time. Tozer, okay, A.W. Tozer, The Pursuit of Holiness. He has a couple chapters in there that I clung to for such a long period where he talks about having the thing that's dearest to you, your Isaac, the thing that's most precious to you. I mean, you can imagine Isaac to this 99-year-old man who'd been waiting for how many years, 30 years for a child, how precious that child was to him. And God said, give him to me, kill him.
