TITLE: Slave and Free – Money and Possessions in the Community
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Life Together in Gospel-Community (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/slave-and-free-money-and-possessions-in-the-community/

============================================================

Now, what we're doing every week, and this is, I'm going to have to do a little bit of, just a little teeny bit of intro because not everybody's been here all year, and some of you are only here this week. What we're doing is we're looking at gospel community, of course, but we're not just looking at how to have friends and how to build fellowship, but we're actually asking ourselves, what would a gospel-shaped community look like? Because we've been saying each week, and you can see here at the top of the background, we've seen that the church, according to the Bible, is supposed to be an alternate city. When Jesus says you're a city on a hill, that all the world might see your good works, he's really saying is that you're supposed to be an alternate city. So we're supposed to be an alternate New York City in New York City. We're an alternate nation. We're an alternate new humanity, where the way in which we live in our community with each other is supposed to show the world what human society would look like if it was renewed by the gospel and under the lordship of Christ. So in other words, fellowship and community isn't just a way to kind of build each other up and help us along, you know, with supporting each other in the world. We have to have, there has to be a shape to it. And what we've been doing is we were looking, the last few weeks or months, we've been looking at this verse, Galatians 3, 26-28, where Paul says, because of our sonship, because of what the gospel has done for us, there's neither Jew nor Greek, slave nor free, male nor female. You're all one in Christ. And instead of arguing about what that means, which is, you know, that verse has been argued about so much recently in the last few years, let's just see what it really means. Our sonship changes our community in three ways. Jew nor Greek means the races relate to each other in a new way, okay? Male and female means sexuality and the genders relate to each other in a new way. And slave nor free means that we're talking about economics and the classes relate to one another in a new way. Now what we're going to do tonight is we're going to, we were not done with sexuality, we were not done with gender, there was all sorts of other stuff we could have talked about, but I tell you something. For every one thing the Bible says about sex, it says 10 things about money and economics. And I just, you know, we're going to go next year, we're going to continue to work on this, we're going to talk about what it means to live as Christians in gospel community next year, too. And I just, I couldn't bear to, you know, just to keep on going with sexuality and gender without at least getting to some of the other things before we hit the summer, and the summer hit us. So what I wanted to do tonight is talk about how Christianity affects the way we, well, our economic life. And I'm going to divide that into two parts. How does Christianity in the gospel affect the way in which we look at our money and possessions? And then how does it affect the way we look at our work life? And you put that together, it means that Christians have a distinct economic life in the world. And what a, you know, it's a huge subject, but at least I want to broach it tonight for you as leaders. Now, one of the questions that comes up, you remember last week in the sermon, and I don't mean this last Sunday, but two Sundays ago, we said that what we learned from the book of Daniel, we learned from Jeremiah 29, God will not accept us either assimilating or separating from the world. He doesn't want us to assimilate and just pick up the thought forms and the values of the world. And he doesn't want us to separate and stay away. He wants us to engage. And we said, one of the reasons why engagement is so hard for people is because there's not enough what we call rules in the Bible to tell you. And I mean, the example I use in the sermon is if you're a Christian actor, you're going to ask, and if you, if you haven't assimilated and just picked up, you know, just the values of the world, you're going to ask a question. You're going to say, well, are there certain roles I shouldn't take? Are there certain things I shouldn't do? Are there certain things I should be trying to do as a Christian? If you've assimilated, you don't even ask the question. But as soon as you ask that question, you look around, where are the rules? And one of the reasons why so many Christians just separate and say, don't even get in there, don't even be in the world, is because unfortunately, the Bible doesn't have a chapter on what roles you should take and what roles you shouldn't. And yet, here's God in the Bible telling us not to assimilate or separate. So now, how do you develop a Christian approach to things? How do you develop a Christian approach to money, to sexuality, to the various things? Now, let me give you a little methodological preliminary here, and then I'll just apply it to money and work. This is something that at Redeemer over the next couple of years, I'm hoping to develop more because people are always asking the question, what does it mean to be a Christian in the world when the Bible doesn't seem to give rules? Well, it does, but it doesn't give the kinds of nice, simple behavioral regulations. Let me show you what I'm going to, some of you heard this before, but I'm going to try to get, I'm trying to talk about this more often. When the church is trying to develop a gospel worldview that leads to distinct behavior, like, you know, Galatians 2.14, where Paul confronts Peter and says that your racial discrimination means you're not walking in line with the gospel. He says, you know, you're not listening to the implications of the gospel for your race. we do what Paul did with Peter? How do we work out and say, okay, what is the gospel implications for every area of our lives? The best way I know is to do this, creation, fall, redemption. The Bible tells us always three basic things about the world we see. First of all, the Bible tells us everything you see, everything out there is God's creation. That means it's his and it's good. Everything you see God make, you know, in Genesis 1 and 2, he keeps doing benediction. It is good, it is good, it is good, it is good. He created everything in perfect wholeness, beauty, glory for us to enjoy. That's the first thing we know about everything out there. Everything has got is good. Secondly, everything is fallen. That means everything's affected by sin. Though creation is not destroyed and creation has not lost its inherent goodness, it is also fallen. It's not like it used to be good and now it's sinful. It is good, but it's fallen. That's the only way to understand, I think, the Bible's attitude toward things. It's good, still, and I'm going to show you some examples of this, and yet it's fallen. It's used by us. The world is used by us as if it's ours and thus it's distorted, broken, perverted from its original wholeness. So the first thing is everything is good. Second thing is everything is sinful. Everything's tainted. Everything is fallen. And then thirdly, everything's being redeemed. Everything. That's one thing we try to say over and over at Redeemer. Jesus Christ came to earth and was resurrected, which means God created the soul and the body. He's going to redeem both soul and body. He's going to rehabilitate both soul and body. Redemption is redeeming everything. There's going to be a new heavens and new earth. There's going to be a new ocean. There's going to be new families. There's going to be new relationships. There's going to be new work. There's going to be new music. Everything is going to be renewed. Salvation is not just for my soul taking it to heaven. You know, the Bible says it's a new creation. All creation is going to be rehabilitated and wiped clean. That means, and let's not go into all that, it's being done in stages, though, as we've been talking about this. Redemption happens in stages through which God is going to restore everything to its original whole beauty and glory. And if that's true, that means if you leave any perspective out in trying to understand anything, whether it means your money, whether it means your family, whether it means sexuality, if you leave any one of these three perspectives out, you have something less than a Christian worldview. And let me show you exactly how that happens. Turn over to the next page. Here's an interesting quote by a guy named Al Walters. Now, this isn't the easiest book in the world to read, but it's short, and it's actually a pretty good book. I could imagine some of you getting this book and trying to figure it out and finding it boring or difficult. But anyway, you can get it on Amazon.com for $8, and it can be here by Wednesday. So I just checked it out before I came, just to let you know. And Al Walters is a philosopher, and he teaches, and he's Canadian, teaches in Toronto, and the name of the book is Creation Regained. But now listen to this. The central point to remember, he says, is that biblically speaking, sin does not abolish the goodness of creation. Very hard for Christians to remember. Creation and sin remain distinct, however. Closely, they may be intertwined in our experience. Sin attaches itself to creation like a parasite. Now, here's a great example. Hatred, for example, has no place within God's good creation. But hatred cannot exist without the creational substratum of human emotion and healthy assertiveness, which is good. Hatred participates simultaneously both in the goodness of creation and the demonic distortion. The great danger is to always single out, and this is what he's saying here is, are you following this? Now, since we tend not to keep it together in our minds, this is what happens. The great danger is to always single out some aspect of God's good creation and identify it rather than the alien intrusion of sin as the villain. Such an error conceives as good, conceives as the good-evil dichotomy as intrinsic to the creation itself, which means the result, you know, I know what that means. Don't worry about it. The result is that something in the good creation, usually, in most people's ways of thinking, something in the good creation is identified as the source of evil. And in the course of history, this something has variously been identified as whatever. So, for example, Plato decided what's really bad about the world is the body and its passions. Whereas Rousseau and Romantics said what's really bad is culture in distinction from nature. Whereas psychodynamic psychology said it's authority. Authority is the bad thing. We've got to get back to our original creational childlike self. the boundaries off and just let it get out. And Heidegger and existentialists saw technology and management is a bad thing. In other words, everybody who's not operating out of a biblical gospel worldview is going to find something in the good creation and say that's the source of the evil rather than saying that all things are, and what, you know what that means if you're going to demonize something, what that also means, look down here, is the Bible is unique in its uncompromising rejection of all attempts to identify any part of creation as either the villain or the savior. Because all religions, all philosophies, all worldviews, in one way or another fall into the trap of idolatry as well as demonization, of failing to keep creation and fall distinct. And this trap is an ever-present danger for Christians. Now, do you see that? See, in other words, because we don't, and you know the reason why, and he doesn't go on to say this right here, at least I didn't get this part, I didn't get this quote out. Why is it that most people can't keep creation and fall together? Why is it we want to say, for example, these things are bad, stay away from them. This is the good thing. If you have that, then you'll be saved. Why do we want to identify things? Everybody does that. And Christians, by and large, they're either platonic in that they're kind of down on the body, or they might say, you know, the traditional family, if you just have a family and you have, you know, happy children and you're going to church, but if you're a single person or if you live in a city or if you have any kind of, you see what I'm trying to say? Well, instead of looking at all of creation is good and yet all of creation is fallen, and the reason why we can't do that is because we don't understand the power of redemption. We really don't see the strength of the gospel. And as a result, we pick something that's a villain and something that's not. Now, that's extremely important. And even though, I mean, if I was doing the whole evening just on that, I'd have to spend a lot of time illustrating if I can. I'm just going to illustrate it with money and possessions. An example would be, well, socialism really does tend to say that wealthy people are the problem. And if you just give all the money, if you just give all the means of production to the workers, the laborers, no problem. That's not true, is it? And on the other hand, laissez-faire capitalists have a tendency to really say it's the, you know, it's the lazy, it's the unproductive people, they're the problem. Really just give the means of production in the hands of the motivated and that doesn't work either. In other words, every human system is going to idolatry a certain part of creation and say that's good and forget that it's fallen and demonize a part of creation and say that's bad and forget that it's good. Now, you know, that would be worth the whole course now, wouldn't it? It would be awfully nice if we had a three-hour graduate level course in which I could try to demonstrate that, but it's incredibly important. And virtually all the systems that aren't based on the gospel will identify something like that. Now, let's go on. And it's fairly important to, you know, see just, I'm just going to apply to economics tonight, okay? Take about five or ten minutes on money. Some of you have seen this material on money because two or three years ago, I did a sort of series of studies on stewardship the year we were raising money for the capital funds. And some of you have seen this, but it's been reworked and I'm going to try to be, you know, go quickly. Number one, let's say, okay, how do we understand money? Well, first of all, money and wealth from the perspective of creation is this. God is the creator and thus he owns everything. And everything is his, but he gives us the material world to rule over and care for as his stewards. Anything we have then is from him. And he's given us power over the part of the world that he's given us. So, you know, if you make a certain amount of money, you actually have power over the part of the world that you own, whether it's a piece of land or it's a certain, you know, amount of, you know, of wealth or capital. Now, what does that lead to? Here's what it leads to. The motivation is because the world was created by him and it's his, the implications are that we're under obligation to give. We're stewards. It's not really ours. So the doctrine of creation when it comes to money means that everything you have belongs to him. Everything, not just 10%, the whole thing. And that's the first thing you have to understand. So giving money away to ministry, giving money to the poor, giving money to our neighbors and our family, our families, is really not something we do out of the kindness or goodness of our heart. We're obliged to. It's not ours. And you say, well, I've worked very hard for it. Yeah, you worked very hard for it with your two eyes that happen to work if you're not blind. Where'd that come from? From God. Or your IQ, which maybe is pretty good. Where'd that come from? From God. Or you say, no, that's not just, you know, I got good habits from my parents. Great. A lot of people have lousy parents. That's one of the reasons they have no marketable skills today. I mean, in other words, everything you have, in spite of the fact that you can hide behind saying, well, I've worked so hard for it and I've been very smart and I took risks and I did, and I worked like crazy to get into a good school and I worked like crazy to get to the top. You did all. there came from him. So that's the first perspective. And here's some practical guidelines that come from it. Number one, because of creation, we can never look at wealth creation as an evil in itself. And there are definitely systems of thought that see making money as sort of automatically a bad thing. This is a huge subject, but the creation perspective of the Bible protects us from seeing money and making money as inherently evil. The politics and economics of the left have made some real mistakes here. I think that's fair. However, okay, number two, that's the very bottom of the page, and then the next page. The bottom line, however, turn over. The second thing we learn about from the creation perspective is that we're supposed to tithe. Over and over and over again in the Bible, you see the idea of tithe, meaning you're just, you're a steward, meaning you're an investment broker. That means God has given you a certain amount of money, and it's his, and he's asking for only 10% of it. And so the creation perspective not only says we have an obligation to give, it is not wrong to make money, but we're supposed to tithe. And then look down at the middle of this middle of this first full paragraph where you see the standard of doing justice. The third thing we learn is that the creation perspective to me, now I think the Bible, I don't know, the creation perspective also means this. When I look out there and I see some people with a lot of money and some people with less money, there's no doubt that, you know, here's a person who was born into wealth, and here's a person who was born into poverty and worked themselves out to be wealthy. Still, the Christian says from the creation perspective, everybody who has what they have has been given it by God. Even the person who works hard. He worked hard, she worked hard with talents they got from God, or with the incentive actually they even got from God. And therefore, look down here, it's true that sometimes people with less less than you have are in, you know, in poverty because they have not worked hard. That's also true. But it's more likely, especially if you look through the scripture, the main word for the word poor in the Bible means the wrongfully oppressed. But when you see the word poor in the Bible, 80% of the time it's a word that means the wrongfully oppressed. And I think the Bible means that it's most people in the world who've been living in poverty have been living in poverty because of the conditions into which they were born. Can you think back on it? Just think back on the last 3,000 years. Most of the people who lived in poverty haven't lived in poverty because they didn't pull themselves up by their bootstraps. And what that means is, if you were born with a strong family, a great IQ, so that you've been able to hold on to your money, when other people are born in a worse circumstance, what that really means is you become very, very generous with your money. You realize, in a sense, it is a gift. You look out there at all kinds of people that were not born into the same kind of circumstances. And that's the reason why you don't see your money as your own. You don't say, if I worked hard for it, so it's mine. They didn't work hard. It's not theirs. The creational perspective kind of, you know, wipes that away. Are you following me? It wipes the whole thing away. Oddly enough, people that I know who are kind of more conservative in their view of economics, on the one hand, they really like the creational perspective because it shows that making money isn't inherently evil. But the creational perspective also undermines a lot of conservative economics. Because what it also is saying is that once you've made your money, you don't look and say, I earn that money. That's my money. You can't do that. You have the money you have. It's strictly because of a gift of God. You weren't born on a mountain in Tibet in the 13th century. That's the main reason you've got your money and you're not living in poverty. Because if you were born on a mountain in Tibet in the 13th century, you would have been living in poverty. That's the creational perspective. That means once you get your money, you don't sit there and say, well, I should enjoy the fruits of my labor. No, you shouldn't. Not that much. See, it undermines, it undermines, it's to some degree, it undermines the conservative economic in other ways that it seems to be, pick it up. Just the way it does with more socialistic, liberal economic views. Now look at the second perspective. So the first perspective is, it's not yours. Therefore, you should tithe and be generous with it. That's justice. That's only fair. Secondly, we have to also see that the fall. And the fall means that money is spiritually dangerous. And I'm just going to give you the basics of this too. Money under sin has become an enslaving power. It's very interesting when you see, you know, Jesus dealing with the rich young ruler. At the end of his dealing with the rich young ruler, he says that it is hard, not impossible, but hard for a rich person to find the kingdom. We tend to downplay that, or at least we do, well, not tend to downplay that. of Jesus' day was, the richer you are, the more blessed you are by God. The richer you are, the more godly you probably are. But Jesus turns that totally on his head and says, the richer you are, the harder it will be to make spiritual progress. Why? Because works, righteousness, religion will always look at wealth positively, always. It will always say, this is the blessing, I deserve it, I've worked very hard, I've gone to church, I've done all these good things. It's my hard work, it's my savvy, it's my moral life. But the gospel tells us, you can only be saved if you become a little child, if you admit your complete inadequacy and helplessness. And wealth completely undermines that sensation. See, the Bible says, the only way you'll ever be saved and great in the kingdom is if you see yourself as a helpless person, just the recipient of grace, a helpless, hopeless sinner. It's very hard to feel that way when the money's rolling in, extremely hard. And therefore, the Bible actually says, Jesus actually says, a lot of money is spiritually dangerous. Now, I know that seems to go right against the creational perspective. Oh no, it just balances it. It balances it. If I'm preaching a sermon from this perspective, it'd be very easy to get the impression that the Bible is saying, you know, it's a bad idea to make money or have any money. That's not the only perspective, but turn on over to the next page, page four. And therefore, what's the motivation now to give and be generous? Well, the motivation under creation is justice. You didn't earn it. It was a gift. You need to be generous with it. It's not even yours. But under this perspective, you need to give it for two reasons you need it. Number one, in general, you need to give your money away in great proportions in order to break the power of money over us. Money can be an idol. We just talked about that. That's what Jesus is saying. The power of money to undermine our understanding of grace, to undermine our ability to really grow in the gospel is huge. There's another reason why to give your money away, not just to undermine the power of money over us, but look at number two. And it's halfway down that big paragraph. You see where it says second? Second, we need to give our money away, even if money's not an idol, because it's money that will show you where your idols are. Where your treasure is, there is your heart. Do you understand that? See, the place, your idols, the idols of your heart, the idols of your heart may not be money. But if you want to find out what the idols of your heart are, start to really give your money away in major proportions, and you'll start to realize you don't want to do it. Why? Because you want your money for this, and that's probably an idol. See, in other words, you know, see, actually, years ago I thought there was, there is such a thing as greed. I think there is such a thing as greed, but if you press underneath, you'll see, why do you want money? A person who really wants money, why? Some people want money, and they spend it on themselves. Other people stick it in the bank, and you'd never know they weren't poor, right? Isn't that weird? Yet they're both entrapped spiritually by money. But it's because, actually, money is serving a deeper idol. Money is what they call a near idol, but there's a far idol. The person who takes the money and spends it all on him or herself is a person, maybe, who's using money to get approval, and approval, human approval is the idol. But a person who takes the money and sticks it in a bank and never spends any of it, they need control. This is their way of controlling their life. They don't wear anything nicer. They don't care that people know that they're wealthy. So, in other words, only by giving your money away in eye-popping proportions will you ever get down underneath to find out what your idols are. Now, thirdly, under this, practical guidelines, on the same page, the fall perspective on money, therefore, means you have to see the dangers of wealth creation for its own sake. But go on down halfway, and this is a big issue, where it sees the guideline of giving the excess. Under the creational perspective, we see the tithe. But now, under the fall perspective, under the sin perspective, we recognize that too much money is not good for us. And we see the Bible doesn't just talk about giving away a tithe. It doesn't just stop there. It also says, don't store up. Or 1 Timothy 6 says, godliness with contentment is good things. In other words, what it's saying here, secondly, is if you want to know how much to give away, you should not only... The tithe is a great way to start, but it's not the end of what the Bible gives us. We should also be giving away the excess. Now, what's that mean? What this means is the Bible does call us to live below our means. I think no matter how you read the Bible, you've got to see that. I have a lot of passages here that talk about it. We should be living below our means. We should be living a certain number of notches below what we could live at. And it's not that easy to tell exactly what that is. And now you might know, certainly many of you know, there are some Christians who really believe that all Christians... income and live almost at voluntary poverty level. There are some people who hold that up. They usually don't say all Christians have to do it, but the way in which they present it is pretty close. And there's plenty of other people who say, no, no, no, if you make $100 million next year, you give away $10 million to charity, to the poor, to the Lord. You can spend the other $90 million on yourself, and there's no sin involved. Wrong. Wrong. You know, look at 1 Timothy 6, when it talks about if we have food and clothing, we should be content with that. So it's clearly saying that there needs to be some level of lifestyle that we choose that's simple, simpler at least, and far enough below what we could live at so we can really be radically generous and do a lot of good with our money. Right where that happens, though, where is that level? That's a problem. And I would say that it would be wonderful at Redeemer if we could be almost unique. See, most churches don't even want to talk about this. They want to say, if you tithe, because most churches, nobody's tithing anyway. You know, 99% of the churches are just fighting to get people to believe they should tithe. The fact of the matter is that there's another way to look at it, and the other way to look at it is you ought to be choosing a lower lifestyle. In many cases, that might mean more than a tithe. Now, how do we do that? I have some ideas in here, but turn over to the next page because I don't have time to go through them all. But I've got some summary points. You see where it says some, the little bold thing over there on the right? See where it says some? The bottom of the first, near the end of the first paragraph. Here's what I gather from several other passages of Scripture. If after you've tithed, you can afford to give more without hurting your health, without becoming a burden to others, without reneging on obligations, or without being able to live and minister among the people to whom God has called you, then you ought to give more than a tithe. I'm sorry. It's kind of bad to give a summary when you haven't gone through and explained all that, but that's all the time I've got tonight. In other words, I do think that you have to come down. But, for example, there are people who would say, well, you know, what does it mean to just have food and clothing? That's what Paul says, 1 Timothy 6. You should be content with food and clothing, give the rest away. Well, but I think what he's really talking about is a level of life that is simple, but certainly wouldn't get to the place where you would go below these things, which is some people, I don't know, have you ever heard of Simone Weil? She was a Jewish-Christian-French woman during World War II, and she did believe in living in voluntary poverty, and her health did go down, and she thought it wasn't Christian for her to live better than the people that she loved, who were in occupied France. She was in Britain when she was doing this, and they were living in poverty, and she would not eat more than they were eating. She would not live at a better level than they were living, and she was a person of sort of poor health, and she died. I mean, you might consider that extreme, but I think we do have to be very careful. You don't want to hurt your health. Secondly, I know some of you are saying, is this a danger here at Redeemer? Well, all right. Without becoming a burden to others, I know John Murray, professor of systematic theology at Westminster for years and years, did not believe it was right to have life insurance or medical insurance of any kind, and he believed that's just too much money. It's self-indulgent. It's not trusting in God, and near the end of his life, he was a huge burden to a whole lot of people because he did not have any insurance. Number three, without reneging on obligations, and D, without being able to live and minister among people to whom God has called you. For example, if you want to live, here you have a ministry in New York City. You have a ministry in Manhattan, and there are a lot of us that really should live in Manhattan if we're going to minister in Manhattan, and right away, you know, it's hard to, you know, right away you have the thing called rent, and you know that if you lived, you know, somewhere else within commuting distance, you could probably have another 15% of your income going to something else besides rent. These aren't easy questions to answer. That's why I put down here these little last bullet points. Obviously, this leads to a lot of questions. For example, do you send your children to private school? There are plenty of Christians who would say, it is private school tuition is an unnecessary luxury. You shouldn't do it. It's a complex decision. You don't know, you know, what's best for your children. Secondly, if you've been given the clarity and joy to live a much simpler lifestyle than other Christians in the same community, you shouldn't try to bind consciences and tell other people you need to live like me. Your model, as long as it's not conducted self-righteously, will be a much better lesson for other Christians than any effort to shame them or show them the error of their ways. In other words, we certainly, there's lots of people at Redeemer, from what I can tell, in my own humble estimation, are spending way too much money on themselves. But really, by far, the best way for those of us who sort of see that are still para metros andinius, from what a person should be able to see that I don't know about those of us. I don't know. We just want to see that. Then we will be able to see that even from what I can tell, in my own humble estimation, are spending way too much money on themselves. But really, by far, the best way for those of us who sort of see that to deal with it is to not do it ourselves. Because it is mighty, mighty tough to know enough about a person's circumstance to know exactly what they should be spending. But here's the last thing I'll tell you. Considering the concentration of wealth in the professional classes that is accruing in this country, the tithe, I think, fairly soon will be an obsolete standard for Christians. The top 20%, the people who are making money in the knowledge classes, it's not going to be long. What happens is it's a frog in a kettle thing. You start making more money and you just start to live in another neighborhood and you start to do a few more things next thing you know, you still can just barely tithe. But it's a frog in a kettle thing. At a certain point, the amount of money that we make is such that a tithe doesn't hurt a bit. There's, you know, there's no, we're going to have to get to the place where we as a community talk about how can we be good models for the other people around who are spending an enormous amount of money on themselves. Now, lastly, redemption. We say the creational perspective says we are obliged to give because it's not ours. It's a matter of justice. We can't look and say we've worked hard and they haven't. That just undermines that. On the other hand, don't forget, the creational perspective means making money is fine. Interesting. The fall perspective is that spending a lot of money on yourself, you know, spending, it's very, very, very, very dangerous. And you need to give it away and not just the tithe, but you have to look and see whether or not you shouldn't be giving more than the tithe. There's plenty of people because of, for the various reasons I put down here, can hardly tithe. This is the reason why a church isn't supposed to be too legalistic about it. I believe there's people in Manhattan who live in Manhattan are doing a really good job of ministering in Manhattan. They can't tithe. And then if, from what I can tell, if I sat down and knew everything about them and they said, what's your, what's your, you know, what's your assessment? And I would, and they said, we don't seem to be able to tithe and still pay our rent and still do the things that we're doing. And I could probably look at their lifestyle and everything and say, you need to stay right here. You need to do what you're doing and you probably never will be able to tithe. And I really think that from what we understand in the New Testament, the tithe is a guideline. And so is the second guideline to give the excess. Thirdly, the redemption perspective, wealth and the new creation. Turn over to the sixth page under motivation. The first two perspectives all by themselves are negative. Have you noticed that? The creation perspective says it's not yours. It's not just for you to hold on to it. You need to give it away. The sin perspective says money is dangerous. It becomes an idol. It undermines your even ability to grow in the gospel. It, you know, it feeds your other idols and so forth. Those are both negative and that's not enough. And look at where I put, look at the paragraph that starts motivation. Out of the gospel, out of the fact that God is redeeming the world, we have a third motivation. Not obligation. It's not just we're obliged to give. It's not just we need to give. But if you understand the gospel, there'll be a passion to give. This is critical. Paul, in 2 Corinthians 8, 9, refuses to find the ultimate reason for giving to be in duty and obligation. That's not very well written. You know, that works okay orally, but written, it doesn't work very well at all. Paul, in 2 Corinthians 5, 8, 9, refuses to find that the ultimate reason for Christian giving is in duty and obligation. It's in passion. It's in passion. I am not commanding you, he says, but I want to test the sincerity of your love. For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus. Paul says that the grace of God creates a fearlessness. It's no longer a security, a fullness of love that makes Christians desire to give. Now, okay, how does that work exactly? I'm going to give you two ways. Look here rather than look down there for a second. First of all, what the gospel shows me is I was saved by grace in which somebody who was rich, okay, somebody who was rich sacrificed for me spiritually so that by his poverty I became rich, all right? You want to do that with your money. Your money, first of all, you can turn your money into grace. You can turn your money into a picture of what happened to you. If you sacrifice, it hurts, by the way, to give your money away, or I should even say if you give your money away to the place where you hurt in such a strategic way that helps other people. And that could be anything from family members to the poor to ministries in the church. But see, when the gospel has grabbed hold of you, taken away money as being anything other than money, one of the great things the gospel does is money is just money now. See, when you have other... to serve that idol. In other words, if the real reason that you, if you felt, if approval was your salvation, we've been through this, right? If approval was your salvation, you needed money, otherwise you felt bad. You didn't feel like you could hang out with the people that you need, whose affirmation you needed. Or if control, security was your idol, you have to have money, otherwise you're vulnerable in the world. The gospel takes out those idols and it makes money just money. Before you're saved by grace, money is something else. It serves whatever that idol is. So the gospel comes in, takes away the idolatry, whatever idol, and suddenly money just becomes money. So the first thing is you suddenly find it's not that hard to give. But then when you realize through my generosity, I can actually mirror what Jesus did for me. My money can actually be a picture of grace. When I sacrifice, so if somebody else is enriched through my money, I'm actually doing what Jesus did for me. And that's basically what happens. That's where that passion to give comes from. It's the negative is the gospel gets rid of idols. So, you know, I might say negatively, you're no longer bound by money, but positively you see an opportunity to actually mirror grace. And that's really what this passage is talking about. And therefore the third practical guideline, look at C and then we're done here. The first guideline was give the tithe because all your money is his. The second guideline was give the excess because your money is a false savior or it's in service to a false savior. Third guideline is give the sacrifice, see, because of the, you know, because of the pattern of the cross and because your money can show people the new creation that is to come. In other words, look at the incredible stuff that money can do in people's life. And so that's why you have a passion to give. In other words, we're not giving enough. Oh, by the way, so the last practical guideline is sacrifice. If Jesus Christ sacrificed for me, then my giving ought to hurt. There should be a passion to give to the point where it really hurts, where there's some sacrifice. And that is the way in which we mirror what Jesus Christ did. And that's, that's it. Now, what happens is if the creation perspective, perspective, the fall perspective, and the redemption, redemptive perspective all come together, your attitude toward your money is pretty weird. Uh, you're not exactly, uh, I mean, see, all the themes that you find in, in left-wing economics, in right-wing economics, you see a whole lot of themes in here, but they're all there. And no one is sort of lifted up to become an ideology. And the word ideology actually is very, very linked to idolatry anyway. An ideology is an intellectual idol. Now, here's the last thing. If you go all the way to, uh, the bottom of page seven or eight, you don't even, I didn't, I didn't number them, but I have to, uh, where it says the indirect effect of our community on economic life. You see where I am? Number two, B, B2. Now, what does this mean? I didn't get, I didn't talk to you about work. I don't have much time to do it, but you see, uh, if you take creation fall and redemption and put it onto work, what you have is you find out that work is inherently good, but it's cursed. The old Greek view of work was that it's basically bad. And if you can get away from it, that's fine. So the Greek view of work is that work is an evil. The modern capitalistic society, the modern Manhattan culture sees work as your salvation. Through my work, I'm going to become famous. Through my work, I'm going to become rich. Through my work, I'm going to become somebody important. Both of them misunderstand work. Work is both good and it's fallen. And so you don't make an idol out of work actually the way capitalism does. And you don't make a demon out of work in a way that, uh, Greek, Greek or Roman thought did. And almost even, even socialism to some degree did, at least what the wealth creation part of it. So if you go down to the bottom of B2, the church doesn't have a blueprint for the economic life of the world. Rather, it gives us a unique worldview, a gospel vision to its members and encourages them to draw the implications of that vision out for their own lives and their work in the world. To a great degree, the church per se, doesn't draw them, draw them out for their members that much. In other words, I can't sit down with you as your pastor and tell you exactly how you're supposed to now, uh, take this gospel understanding of economic life and live it out. However, if you turn over, these kinds of behavior will be happening to you. the gospel perspective on economic life, first of all, Christians will choose jobs and careers that promote the common good, not just jobs that make you rich. Lots of people choose jobs simply because it'll give them a certain status and a place in the world. Christians aren't supposed to choose jobs or careers that way. Not if you have the right, not the gospel perspective. Number B, Christians would work with a lot more job satisfaction because the job career is not an idol. Neither money nor recognition is the main driving force. In general, because you're not turning your work into the main way in which you get an identity, the main way in which you get happiness, you're going to have more job satisfaction than the same person who's not a Christian in the same job. C, honesty and integrity in work and economic life. No cutting of corners in such a way that benefits you but not other employees, customers in the community. Terrific integrity in your job. D, general commitment to delayed gratification, which means self-control, discipline in work, looking for long-term benefits for all, not just short-term benefits for you in your business decisions. E, attitudes toward economic justice. Not assessing persons in pure economic terms. Never treating somebody just on a cost-benefit basis. In fact, I'm going to go, I know this is, some people are going to go after me on this. You shouldn't pay people just as little as the market will bear. That's not justice. Okay? So, you know, don't just, if you're paying somebody to do something for you, don't just pay them whatever the market will bear. Don't, you know, consider them, consider them as people, not just as really producers. F, reserve and honesty in advertising and promotion of what you're doing. Honesty in presenting yourself, but seeking to cater to the best desires in the customers, not pandering to the worst desires in the customers. G, producing products that actually benefit people. Not overwork or underwork. Savings and generosity. Now, here's what I want to know. Are Redeemer Christians working like that? In other words, are we known as people who do that? And all I put down here is, as a church, does Redeemer have a clear and specific list of these economic life gospel effects? If the gospel is affecting us, this is the kind of economic behavior we're going to be living out. Are we doing that? Do Redeemer members exhibit these things in New York City? Is there any way in which we can become accountable to each other for them? This will only work in community. Only as a community can we ever come together and start to say as a whole church, this is how we want to live our lives out in New York City. And only as a community will we ever be able to hold ourselves accountable to them. And you know what's interesting about this? These are not exactly regulations. These are, these are principles. The direct thing that Redeemer will do is create people who live out there in the world, living out gospel economic life. That's indirect. The direct thing we do is Christian community development, working with the poor, identifying countries of the world who are particularly poor and trying to help out in various sorts of ministries that do relief. And that's how we would live out our economic life under the gospel. Now I wouldn't say that probably Redeemer is being very thoughtful about any of this yet. That's one of the reasons why we'd have these meetings, why I try to do the teaching. Out of this bubbles up ideas, but are we, are we, are we saying how does our community create these kinds of economic life in our people? I don't know. It's certainly not going to be one very hot night running through an eight page handout. And you know, you can go back and say that was interesting, but that's not enough. What are we going to do about it? That's the question. Okay. Let me close this in prayer and we'll move into the rest of our evening. Our Father, we really begin to see this year as we look at the far reaching principles of how the gospel affects the way in which men and women relate to each other, how, how we relate to our money, how we, how we live our lives out in the economic world. We begin to realize that we have a long way to go. I mean, we basically are just treading water. We're just trying to live joyful lives and live basically consistent lives and understand the gospel. But we also see beyond that, we're supposed to really be salt and light in the world. We're supposed to be an alternate city. I don't know whether even in my lifetime, I'll see Redeemer be all that we, it should be. And maybe I'm not the one to bring them there, but I pray that you would raise up leaders and you would show us ways in which we can really live out the gospel in every area of our life so that we truly are a city set on a hill. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
