TITLE: Sore Afraid (Christmas Eve)
SCRIPTURE: Luke 2:8-14
TOPICS: Christmas and Advent Jesus' Birth
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sore-afraid-christmas-eve/

============================================================

Lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afraid. And the angel said unto them, Fear not, for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, and this shall be a sign unto you. He shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill toward men. This is God's word. Now Christmas is very, very good at arousing in us warm, sentimental, cozy, safe feelings. Chestnuts roasting on an open fire. Jack Frost giving you frostbite any place that's exposed. And you know, chestnuts roasting on an open fire, what is it now? A dollar, dollar fifty per what? It's terrible. Yes. But it's the season for cozy feelings. And this passage that I just read is part of that nostalgia. It certainly is. When you hear somebody say, and there were in the same fields, the same country, shepherds abiding in the fields, keeping watch over their flock by night. What do you think of? You think of years and years of little children in bathrobes. Christmas pageants. I think, I'll tell you who I think of. Who do you think of? I think of Linus. In the Charlie Brown Christmas, which is played, I guess, every year for, I don't know, how many years now. And he gets up there on the stage and his child, great child voice, he says, and there were abiding in the same country, shepherds keeping watch over their flock by night. And, you know, the angel of the Lord came upon them and glory of the Lord shone round about them and they were sore afraid. You just feel chestnuts roasting on an open fire. Jack Frost nipping at your nose. We're missing the point. This is not a soothing passage at all. This is a passage about terror. This is a passage about fear. This is a startling passage. You see, in verse 8, you see the shepherds in the dark being perfectly calm and peaceful. There were shepherds abiding in the field. As soon as God's light comes upon them, they are terrified. When they're in the dark, they're all right. But when they get into God's light, they're terrified. And it tells us here, literally, it says, the old King James is such a, again, a sentimental sounding phrase. They were sore afraid. But you see, literally what you have here is a typical ancient language way of making a point. It doubles a word. The Greek word for phobia, for fear, is phobic. And it really, literally says, they were phobic phobic. They weren't just phobic. They were phobic phobic. It's literally, it says, and they feared. When the glory of the Lord came upon them, they feared with a great fear. And what we have here is one of the main themes of the Bible. It's so far away from the wonderful feelings of chestnuts and nostalgia and all that that we get when we think of Linus talking about this. One of the main themes of the Bible is that men and women love the darkness, but that the light of God terrifies them. You see, the glory light of Christmas is not soothing at all. And anybody who's ever seen it knows that. The shepherds know it. But they weren't having gooey feelings at that time. The glory light of Christmas is not soothing. It's startling. It's terrifying. And the angel, of course, knows that. Because the first thing the angel says is, fear not. So the angel knows what's going on in their hearts and their minds. And the angel says, fear not, for behold. And what the angel is doing is responding to the person's condition. The angel is saying, don't be afraid because, for, behold, look at this what? Good tidings of great joy. And the word good tidings is the word gospel. The angel says, I know you're afraid. I know you're afraid. All human beings are afraid when they get into the light of God's truth. But, you don't have to be afraid if you behold what I'm about to tell you. If you behold the truth I'm about to give you, the gospel of joy. And so what the angel is saying is, you do not have to be afraid if you get a grip on the message of Christmas. Now, that's the point. The point is that Christmas passage here shows us that human beings... It's just when we get close to God, the fear becomes revealed. It was always there. It's almost like a bridge that has many, many stress fractures and there's many weaknesses in the bridge and you can't see it, but if a great big truck or some other great weight goes over it, the stress fractures get bigger and they get easier to see. In the same way, the Bible says we all live in fear. It's only when we get near to God and near to His truth that the fear is revealed. But the message of Christmas is if you behold what the angels say, you can be done with fear. Or let me be as practical and as direct as possible. If this morning you are afraid of anything, you're not beholding. Fear not for behold. There it is. This very famous and easy to understand passage. It's right there, but we don't see it. If you are afraid of anything, if you're afraid of anything, you're not beholding. Fear not for behold. Those are two mutually exclusive. If you're afraid, you're not beholding. If you're beholding, you're not afraid. Beholding what? The message of Christmas. If you're afraid of anything today, it's because you have not taken a real grip on the gospel of joy. So let's look at that. It's a marvel. What a marvelous thing for the angel to say. Christmas is the end of fear. And if you're afraid of anything, it's because you haven't grasped it. What a marvel. So let's marvel together. All right? That's what I want to do for the next few minutes. That's all. Let's marvel together. Now, let's take a look at the passage. Let's look and see what the message here is. First of all, in verse 8 and 9, we see the message is you have to recognize that we do live in fear. Human beings live in fear. The shepherds are just pictures of the way we all are. As soon as they get out of the darkness and into the light, they're scared. Now, what could have helped the shepherds? Should they have gone to Bible college or should they have gone to seminary? Would that have helped? If they had come to Redeemer Presbyterian Church and been instructed in things, in theology, would that have helped? They would have said, Ah, I understand what this is. I've studied this. This is a theophany. Ah, now it makes perfect sense. Well, there's no reason to be afraid. Everybody be calm. We know what this is. I don't think that would have done it. Because their problem is more fundamental than an intellectual one. So, it's actually, this interesting story, this incident, is actually an echo of an ancient incident that is deeply embedded in every person's heart. It's the history of Adam and Eve. You see, Adam and Eve, when they were first created, the first human beings, they walked with God, we're told, in the cool of the day. They loved the glory of God. In fact, when the light of God came upon them, they walked with God because the light of God's beauty and glory was life itself to them. And then one day, we're told, they decided to be their own masters, to be their own rulers, to call their own shots. And on that day, when they decided to do that, everything changed. Everything. And that day, the glory of God came upon them and they were sore afraid. That's what it tells us in Genesis 3. On that day, the glory of God came upon them and they hit the dirt. They ran. They jumped into the bushes. And when God called Adam and says, Adam, where are you? Adam says, I'm here. Why? God says, I was afraid. Full of fear. And so he hides his nakedness. He feels vulnerable. He feels naked and he hides it in the bushes. And it has been such. It has been so ever since. It has been so ever since. Because the Bible tells us we're all ruled by fear. What is fear? It's just what Adam did. It's hiding. It's wrapping yourself away and trying to make yourself safe. Safe. It's wrapping yourself up in precarious little things that you think will give you security. It's making yourself safe. You withdraw. You're like the turtle. You get into the shell so you feel safe. And what other things the Bible tells us that we wrap ourselves in? Well, anything but God makes us feel safe. We say, I'm safe because I've got a good job. I'm safe because I've got friends. I'm safe because I've got a family that loves me. I'm safe because I've got looks or I've got talent or I've got money. And the reason we live in fear is because though we tell ourselves these things that we're wrapping ourselves in, these bushes, these rags, as it were, we're telling ourselves these things keep us safe but the problem is we know that they're not. We know how precarious they are. We know that jobs may not be there. We know that family members die. We know that friends might say talents sometimes don't work, and that looks always dry up. These things that we wrap ourselves in to give us a sense of safety, we know how precarious they are, and so we do not like anybody or anything to come along to point out how weak they are. And that's the reason why underneath the polish and the assurance, especially in New York City, that everybody wraps themselves in, there's a lot of anxiety. A lot of anxiety. Now, the Bible tells us that these kinds of fears take different forms. And when you're thinking through your own life as we talk here, you might identify different kinds. Some of us are really dominated by fear of rejection. Have you heard of, and I've never been able to track it down, but there's a book or a set of articles some years ago that talked about the imposter syndrome. You know what the imposter syndrome is? It's the sense that many, many people have, but they won't admit to anybody else, and you've got it probably, and you won't admit it to anybody else. And that is that even though you look competent at what you're doing, you are deathly afraid that somebody's going to find out that you really don't know what you're doing. When will somebody find out that you really aren't any good at this? When will somebody find out that you're really not any good? When will somebody look inside and see what you're really like? Some of us are afraid to get close to people because they're afraid, if they knew what I was really like, that's it. If I get too close to people, if they knew what was in my past, that's it. Fear of rejection. There's fear of failure, which is close, but not quite the same thing. Fear of failure is this voice that I hear all the time that says, you're getting behind. You're getting behind. You can look at all the other areas where you're doing okay, but then the voice is, yeah, but what about that area? It could all fall down, so you're getting behind. There's fear of the future. You know just what the stock market is really like. These fears gnaw at us, but the Bible tells us it's all because at root, these things are symptomatic and at root, we're actually afraid of, we mistrust, we avoid, we think ill of God himself. All of our fears, all of them come from being afraid of God, thinking ill of him, mistrusting him, and that's the root. Now, when I say that, a lot of people, I would think reasonable people will say, that's silly. I find God boring, or I find God, I find Christianity offensive, or I find Christianity interesting, but I'm not afraid of God. I beg to differ with you. Every human being thinks ill, mistrusts, and is afraid of him, and doesn't want to get too close to him, because getting too close to him, the Bible says, traumatizes us. Can I give you some evidence? Friends, number one, our fear of death. I know what Kubler-Ross, Elizabeth Kubler-Ross says. I pulled this out of the end of one of her books, her famous books. She says, the moment of death is neither frightening nor painful. It is peace and cessation. It reminds me of a falling star, one of the millions of lights in a vast sky that flares up for a brief moment to disappear into endless night forever. It's not frightening. That's ridiculous. That's ridiculous. A brief, that briefly flares up and goes into endless night forever. I don't know, when you think of yourself dying and going off into endless night forever, you don't think that that word is frightening? Of course it's frightening. Death is frightening. There is nothing more unnatural than to try to make death natural. Everybody knows that we're not built for this. Everybody knows that. And as a pastor, having had more of a typical church in Virginia for ten years, the kind of town where everybody was born there, lived there, and died there, I watched a lot of people die at their bedside. Some literally dying right in front of me. And I noticed that people do not, unless they've been unbelievably brainwashed by a certain kind of literature, nobody considers death a natural thing. And what they're thinking of is this. They say, they look back on their life and they say, I don't know if I've done right. I don't know if I've done right. I don't know that I did my best. There was an article in the New York Times not too long ago that said when they would ask judges, did you read that? When they asked judges to think about their own death, just to think and imagine their own death before they sentenced people, that they tended to sentence people much more severely. It's an interesting test. The fact is that we are afraid of the judge. And that's one of the reasons why death leaves us with such dread. I'll give you another evidence for the fact that we think ill of God and that we're afraid of Him. And that is that whenever, I can see it, and I think you can too, whenever I talk to people, into faith, very often they say, what will it cost me? No, that's a natural question. It's a good question. Very often they realize it's going to change their sexual behavior. Very often they say, I'm afraid that people are going to tell me, oh my word, that person's become a Christian. Nice person, but now cut off from so many possibilities. And we're afraid that somehow if we go flat out and obey God completely and give ourselves to Him totally, we're going to miss out. Do you see what that is? That is irrefutable evidence of how much you dislike and are afraid of God because you believe that if you give yourself to Him utterly, you will be wretched. Everybody in this room, if you look at your heart, you'll see there's still some... Those of you who have grown in faith have tried like crazy to get rid of that lie, but it's still there to a degree. If I give myself to Him utterly, I know I'll be at least bored. There's so many other things that I could be doing. Can you believe that? How could you think about God like that? But we do. That is irrefutable evidence. But see, the bottom line is God is light. God is truth. And when we get near Him, He shatters our self-image because we build our self-image on our job and on our friends and on our family and on our looks and these things. When we get near God and we get near His truth, it talks about His holiness and it talks about our sin. We don't like it. Because what it does is it shatters our self-image. It shows us how weak the things are that we're building our lives on. We have to lie to ourselves tremendously to build a self-image without God and His love. The social psychologist will tell you. It's amazing how people think of themselves. Do you know that 94% of all college professors consider themselves in the top 10% of their profession? Do you know that 70% of all college seniors believe that they're in the top 20% of people in the world who can get along with others? You know that 99% of all people that are surveyed will say the world would be a better place if people obeyed the golden rule. And 95% of all people say that they obey the golden rule. Which means that the world's fine. But it's not. But we cannot be truthful. Even with ourselves, and when we get near the one who is the truth, we're shattered. It's always happened. When Isaiah got near God, he says, Woe is me. I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. When Job got near God, he says, I despise myself. I see myself, and I repent in dust and ashes. When Peter got near Jesus, he says, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man. And everyone who ever gets near the real God and the real truth always begins to get traumatized and to feel weak. Let me be as absolutely specific and as practical as possible. If you don't like to hear what the Bible says about sin and about need for repentance, if you find that offensive, that is, that is this distaste, that dislike, this being afraid of God that we're talking about. And we'll never forget reading that a letter of a, this is over a hundred years ago now, but there was a wife of, of a Harvard president who wrote her sister-in-law. And her sister-in-law and her family were very, very devout Episcopalians. And this president of Harvard's wife, this wife wrote and said, said, My dear, do you get down on your knees every single Sunday with all of your children and all confess that you're miserable offenders? Because as you know, that's what the basic confession of sin in the Book of Common Prayer is. I'm a miserable offender, you see. Do you get down, she said, and confess that you're a miserable offender? She says, Neither I nor my children will ever do that. And you know what she was offended by? There was a ray of light that was coming out of the Book of Common Prayer and hitting her smack in the heart and she was sore afraid. She was offended. She didn't want to have anything to do with a God like that. And if you're in that condition, you're just like the shepherds. And you need to hear the solution. And what's the solution? Fear not for behold. Behold what? This is the solution. And if you've got a hold of it, no more fear at all. Fear not for behold. I bring you good tidings of great joy. Be to all people. What are they? For unto you is born in the city of David a Savior who is to be Christ the Lord. There's two parts to this great news. And if you get a hold of it, you are over your fear. And if you're afraid this morning, whether you're a Christian or not, you need to get a hold of it again. First of all, born a Savior. This tells us that the first part of the good news is someone who has come is a Savior, but he's a born Savior. That means he's a Savior who became a man. And Philippians 2 tells us that even though Jesus, be held on to, but he emptied himself and he became a servant and he lived an obedient life and he died on the cross. Why did he come down? Why did he have to become a man? Because he had to live a perfect life and die a death for us, in our place, taking the punishment we deserve, doing the good deeds that we needed to do, so that if we receive him as our Savior, all of his work is imputed to us, all of his work is transferred to us, and God accepts us for his sake. Hear this, perfectionists, those of you who are afraid of failure. Now listen, Jesus Christ's standards are so much above yours, and when you're always saying, I'm getting behind, I'm getting behind, let me tell you something, Jesus' standards are even higher than yours, they're perfection, and Jesus says, you know deep down inside, you perfectionists, that you should be perfect. You'll never, ever, ever be able to rest until you know that you are. So are you doomed forever? The answer is, if you receive Christ as Savior, you, in God's sight, are perfect in Christ. That's the gospel. And you'll never overcome your fear until you're resting in him. And those of you who are afraid of rejection, afraid of rejection, afraid that somebody will look inside and see what's really down there. God's already looked down and seen, you know what, he sees things that you haven't seen yet, gasp. You think you've seen the worst, you haven't seen anything yet. You know, most of you have a few years yet to live, and you realize there's all kinds of things that are going to be happening in your life. I mean, there's going to be selfish things that are going to jump out of that heart, there's going to be mean things that you're going to say, and you say, did I really say that? There's all kinds of bad things in there you haven't seen yet. And God's seen it all. And he says, if you receive my Son as your Savior, then I love you, and I accept you. And whenever you're walking through life, you can say, that person might reject me, that person might reject me, but God's eyes completely accept and love me, and whose eyes are important anyway? You'll never deal with the fear of rejection unless you get the message. Born a Savior. But he's not just born a Savior, he's born a Savior, and he's also born a Savior who is Christ the Lord. And the only way to really understand the message of Christmas is to see that you have to glorify him as Lord. In fact, let's give you another practical principle. In verse 14, we're told these famous words, glory to God in the highest, and on earth, peace. They go together. If you want peace on earth, you've got to be giving glory to God in the highest. See, let's be real practical. This morning, have you got peace? I'm not asking for a pleasant life. I'm not asking... I know that you're diverted right now. I know that you're able to say, oh, most of the things that are weighing on me for a couple of days I can forget about. Because we can go here, and we can go here, and we can have some fun here, and I can overeat over here, and I can, you know, and the MasterCard bill won't come until a month, and so I can sort of enjoy myself for a while. But my friends, I'm not asking you whether you have a pleasant, you know, a diversion for the next couple of weeks. I'm asking you, do you have peace? Real peace in your life. If you don't, you're failing to glorify Him as Lord. It's as simple as that. If you want to have peace on earth, you have to glorify Him in heaven. Or, as my old friend, our old friend, C.S. Lewis used to say, aim at heaven, and you'll get earth thrown in. Aim at earth, and you'll get neither. Glory to God in the highest if you want to have peace on earth. Now, what does glory mean? The glory of God. This stuff that scared the angels so much, and it scares us all. The glory of God is His overness. His aboveness. His beyondness. It's His weight. His significance. Something which is glorious is something that bursts the bounds of our capacity to take it in. When you look at, even that light's pretty glorious, because, you see, I can't, my eyes can't keep it in. In the lines. When I look at the sun, it's very glorious, and it really just creates a pain. Glorious music is what? Glorious music is the kind of music that makes your soul boil over. Do you know what I'm saying? You can't really tell somebody else. Let me, you know, you can't walk down the street and say, here, let me tell you exactly how it went. Bum, ba, dum, ba, dum. And it doesn't seem to come, does it? Because something that's glorious is something that overflows the boundaries. It's above, it's beyond. Son, the glory of God literally means his immeasurable weight, his significance. To honor Jesus Christ as King and Lord is to say, I glorify you. And to say, I glorify you, is not that mysterious. It's simply this. You look at Jesus in the face and you say, your goals are immeasurably weightier in my life than my own. I count your goals as more weightier than my own. Your goals weigh more than mine in my life. Your goals weigh more than mine in my life. more than my honor. That is a simple commitment, is to say, you count more than me. Your goals count more than my goals. Your desires count more than my desires. Your business and your honor counts more than mine. Like in Psalm 3, it says, for thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my glory and the lifter of my head. You're my glory now. You know, don't you, that the promise to be perfect is an unrealistic thing. That's not what it means to give God glory, to say you are Christ the Lord on Christmas Day. It means to come and to say, I will give more weight to you than to me. You're the number one priority in my life. And you're an infinite priority, an unqualified priority. I don't pick and choose. I don't say, sometimes I'll obey you and sometimes I won't. No, you're number one. You are weightier than me. Your goals are weightier than mine. I give you glory. Are you doing that? You will never have peace on earth till you do that. Never. If you're lacking peace now, it's because you need to go back and renew your commitment to do that. And if you've got no peace, it's because you've never done it. It's as simple as that. Fear not, for behold. Your fearing always comes from a lack of glorifying God and giving Him weight. Are you worried, for example, about the future? You're failing to give weight. That means you're failing to give glory to His wisdom. You're saying, Lord, I know what's best. I don't think you do. That means you're giving your own wisdom more weight than His. You see that? That means that you're giving yourself more glory than Him, and that's why you're worried. You're afraid of the future. The reason you're afraid of rejection and scared of how people are treating you and upset about it is because you're giving more weight to what people think than what He thinks. You're giving more glory to yourself or to other people or to other things or other institutions than Him. If you want peace on earth, you must give Him glory. If you want to get rid of your fears, you've got to behold the fact that He is born a Savior, a Savior who is Christ the Lord. God's will is not a wretched thing. If you give yourself to Him utterly, there's nothing but joy for you, you see. That's what the Bible says. That's what the message of Christmas is. If somebody, if you found out today that somebody had died and left you a billion dollars, no kidding, a billion dollars, how would you feel? And yet today you're sitting here and listening to somebody say, Jesus Christ died to leave you something better. What's wrong with us? It's the noetic effects of sin. It's the effects of sin on the mind. We're not thinking clearly. We've got to behold. We've got to behold. He's given us something better. What is it? It's a kingdom which cannot be shaken. So think. Are you in the position where you're able to give Him glory? Are you in the position where you're able to identify your fears? Can you identify your fears this morning and see how they are specifically due to some way in which you're not giving Him glory? Are you recognizing that your fears are coming from an unwillingness to behold who He is to you? They were sore afraid. And we're sore with our afraid. But the angel says, fear not. Get up, for behold the gospel of joy. Let's pray.
