TITLE: Sowing and Reaping
SCRIPTURE: Galatians 6:1-10
TOPICS: Christian Living and Obedience Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Galatians: New Freedom, New Family
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/sowing-and-reaping/

============================================================

I looked and looked and looked, and there isn't anything I don't think on missions in chapter 6 of Galatians, but here's something, here's the reason why missions is important. Let me say something now about this, and afterwards we take our offering. I believe the gospel, well of course I believe the gospel is sort of like the remedy for everything, and I believe the gospel, I believe the gospel can get over our, can help us get over our geographic self-centeredness. Geographic self-centeredness. Now this is very, this is actually something we joke about. Any newspaper editor can tell you that one person drowning in the backyard pool in your neighborhood is front page news, but 100,000 people drowning in some country on the other side of the world is, you know, page 5. And we laugh about that. Oh yes, of course, you know, I'm not nearly as interested in that. But the gospel says, no, that shouldn't be. It shouldn't be for those who believe the gospel, because Jesus Christ, who was near to God, absolutely near to God, was cast far away, so that we who are far away can be brought near. And that means that we really should care about people who are far, and far from us, and therefore aren't right in front of us. Now it's very, very important, I think, for a church to keep, continually keep in mind the people who we don't actually see, who are far away. We shouldn't be like everybody else. We shouldn't be. The gospel says, no, the 100,000 people who are drowning on the other side of the world are very important. We do care about them. We are to be involved with their lives. That should twist and turn our heart. Even though they're very far from us, they may be far from us culturally, and far from us geographically. And that's the reason why a church that cares about the gospel promotes international missions. So please keep them in mind as when we do that offering. Now, now you can turn to Galatians 6, a very famous non-missions passage. I don't know. I mean, I looked, and I couldn't do it. I couldn't find it. All right, we're just moving through the book of Galatians, and here we are, Galatians chapter 6. And we read, Brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently, but watch yourself, or you also may be tempted. Carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ. If anyone thinks he is something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. Each one should test his own actions. Then he can take pride in himself without comparing himself to somebody else, for each one should carry his own load. Anyone who receives instruction in the word must share all good things with his instructor. Do not be deceived. God cannot be mocked. A man reaps what he sows. The one who sows to please his sinful nature, from that nature will reap destruction. The one who sows to please the Spirit, from the Spirit will reap eternal life. Let us not become weary in well-doing, for at the proper time we will reap a harvest if we do not give up. Therefore, as we have opportunity, let us do good to all people, especially those who belong to the family of believers. This is God's word. Okay, now, a general comment, a specific comment. There's a very, very interesting set of statements. They actually all have to do with relationships. Verse 1, relating to someone who's caught in a sin. Verse 2, relating to somebody who's burdened down and suffering. Verse 3 to 5, how you deal with your peers, the people with whom you tend to compare yourself. Verse 6 and 7, which we won't actually get to tonight, is actually talking about your relationship with your teachers, with ministers, with people who you look up to. And verses 9 and 10 have to do with how you relate to your neighbors and others in the household of faith. And here's a general observation first. Christianity is so realistic because this list is really, in many ways, very sobering. Paul assumes that now that you're a Christian, you're going to have all kinds of problems. You know, verse 1, you're going to fall into sin or you're going to find your friends falling into sin. Verse 2, there's going to be sufferings and troubles and everybody's going to be burdened down. Verse 3 to 5, there's going to be jealousy and there's going to be comparisons, people who are, you know, your friends. Verse 6 to 9 is really about the difficulties that come up between teachers and people. One of the differences between a cult and real faith, the real faith, is the cult says, take my pill and your sufferings will be over. And the Christian faith comes and says, get the gospel and you'll be ready for the constant stream of sufferings that will definitely be coming. ah, you know, believe the faith and be good and relate to God and then your life will go well. What he says is we'll give you, the Bible says, the teachers of the gospel say, say the gospel will give you a glory that will rise you above, raise you up above. A glory that will overwhelm the suffering but not remove it. That's the general point. Specifically, though, every one of these verses is actually about relationship. And what I want to do tonight, in fact, many other commentators have noticed this, that every two or three verses you almost have a whole sermon. There's lots and lots of very fascinating little, it's a proverb, it's almost like a bunch of proverbs. And if you ever read the proverbs, you know that every two or three verses it changes subjects and the two or three verses on a topic are very, very pregnant, almost every word. And I'm going to look at verses one and two with you. Look, brothers, if anyone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently, but watch yourself for you also may be tempted. Carry each other's burdens and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ. Now, when I first started looking at that, I said, man, there's so much in there. Then I began to say, oh, my word, it's happening again. How many times does God have to say it? This morning around 6 a.m., I was looking at my sermons and working in my office and suddenly I heard this crash, 6 a.m. And I knew this was not any human member of my family at 6 a.m. There just couldn't be. So I come running out and I go into the kitchen. This is what's happened to our cat. Evidently somebody had forgotten to feed her last night. And our cat had found an unopened box of little Friskies. I don't even know where it was, but she had grabbed it, knocked it over, and pushed it on the counter until it got to the edge of the counter and pushed it over the edge of the counter and it had landed smack in her, her dish. So I come walking around the corner and there is a box of little Friskies and a disc and I look up and there she has this look on her face as if to say, how much clearer do I have to be? Now, when you come to verses 1 and 2, I hope you don't think I'm being repetitious. I'm being repetitious because God continually says this in the Bible. Over and over and again, he says, one of the ways in which, I mean, how much clearer does he have to be? Over and over, he says, that if the gospel comes into your life, you have a balance in relationships. One of the fastest ways you can tell that you've lost track of the gospel or you've lost hold in the gospel is that in your relationships, the supernatural half dies. What do I mean? Because the Bible says real relationships have got to be characterized by truth and love, by toughness and tenderness, by power and sweetness, and nobody can put that together because naturally we either are diplomatic or direct. You know, we're kind and sweet and diplomatic or else we're really direct and we put, but naturally nobody can do that. And that's the reason why once you lose track of the gospel and the gospel, of course, alone of all the religions, the gospel says you are more wicked than you ever dared believe. You're more loved than you ever dared hope at the same time in Christ. And therefore, the gospel can take the other half of the relationships that you are not capable of naturally and add the supernatural half. And one of the ways in which you find that you're losing track of the gospel, you're losing your orientation of the gospel, or you're losing your connection to God, basically, through Christ, is that the supernatural half of your ability to relate dies. If you're the sweetheart type, you become a total coward. See, if you're the direct type, you just become harsh. Over and over and over and over again. Ephesians 4, you know, it says, speaking the truth in love, you can grow up into the fullness of the stature of Christ. Or just about one of my favorite places. And in John 11, you may have heard me refer to this before. In John 11, Mary and Martha, the two sides, and Lazarus has died. And Jesus comes up to Mary, pardon me, to Martha. And Martha says, Master, if you had been here, my brother wouldn't have died. And Jesus says, and she says, you know, Jesus says, he will live. And she says, yes, I know he will live. I just saw this, by the way, the greatest story ever told, Max and C. Dow. No, it's actually, I generally hate dramatic presentations or depictions of Jesus. You know, not on just theological grounds, but just because they're usually just, they just And say to you, chị, who is a world who's seen as a future. Max von Sydow, it's actually, I generally hate dramatic presentations or depictions of Jesus. I, you know, not on just theological grounds, but just because they're usually just, they just fall so far short. There's a great place, great spot in there, where Martha says he would have died, he wouldn't have died if he'd been here. And Jesus says, he'll live, he will rise. And she says, yes, you know, on, on resurrection day, he'll rise in the resurrection of the dead. And he looks at her and he says, I am the resurrection. You know, it's remarkable. I am the resurrection. He tells her off. See, she comes up and says, master, wouldn't, he wouldn't have died if you'd been here. I am the resurrection, the life, Martha. And then he moves on. And a verse or two later, Mary comes up and Mary says exactly the same thing. Mary says, master, if you had been here, my brother wouldn't have died. So what does he do? Well, if the right thing to do with Martha was to tell her off and say, where's your faith? I'm the resurrection of life. Surely, no, what does he do? What does it say he does to Mary? He didn't say a thing. He weeps. Shortest verse in the Bible. If you ever get on some talk show, or if you ever get on some quiz show and there's a $64,000 question and they say, what is the shortest verse in the Bible? This is it. John 11, 34, I hope. Oops, there goes the money. But I do know this. All it says is Jesus wept. Now you say, wait a minute, wait a minute. The same question, two completely different answers. That's the reason, here's why, because this is Jesus. All the rest of us have a natural temperament. We're not wise enough and we're not godly enough to always, always relate to the person as they need to be. We are not godly enough and we're not flexible enough. We're not versatile enough relationally to come and always give the person what that person needs at that moment. Two women, same question, completely different responses, because he's Jesus. He knows how to speak to someone who's caught in sin and how to bear somebody's burden. Now the rest of us are just good at one. And without the gospel, the supernatural half will never come. I mean, how many times does God have to say it? Over and over and over. How much clearer can I make it? And so here you have verse one and verse two. But now you say, okay, that's right. That's great. I'm moved. That's very interesting. So you're going to tell me the same thing. This does come up a lot. You know, this does come up a lot. So what new do we have? Well, there's actually a lot new, because what's great about these two, as I said, they're sort of epigrammatic. They're pregnant. Every word is important. What's great about this is these two sides of Jesus, the ministry of truth and the ministry of tears, the ministry of toughness and the ministry of sweetness. These two sides are given quite a bit of detail in here, the detailed treatment. And if you look at almost every word, you get five or six or seven specifics about each kind of ministry, about each way of relating. Let's just look at those two and then take one more look at Jesus and then we'll finish. Look, brothers, if someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently, but watch yourself or you may also be tempted. Now, boy, you know, let me just break this out into one, two, three, four, five, six, six things that this is telling us about the ministry of truth. Not the ministry of tears, that's verse two, but the ministry of truth. First of all, when do you do this? When do you try to restore somebody? When do you talk to them about their sin? Look carefully. It's not every time. This is not automatic, unfortunately. Oh my gosh, it's going to take some wisdom. This is not a law. This doesn't say whenever you see anybody sinning. Does it say that? No. It says if someone is caught in a sin. Now, these are the qualifiers. First of all, you're not supposed to just jump in every time you see somebody sinning and say, tell them off. Never. No. Because Proverbs says love covers a multitude of sins. First Corinthians 13 has so many places. First Corinthians 13 says love gives the benefit of the doubt. So you're not supposed to have a critical spirit. Not at all. But what it does say is if you see someone caught in a sin, and here's what I think that would have to have to mean. It would mean, first of all, that this is repeated. This is something that's repeated and it's over and over. You have to see that this is something that goes on and on and on. This is not something at the drop of a hat or the first time somebody irritates you. Okay? Notice this is not a sin against you. Well, I'll get to that in a minute. In other words, you just don't get irritated. You don't, not if you just see somebody do something wrong. You just say, well, you're a Christian and you should be, no. There has to be a pattern. It should be repeated, number one. Number two, caught in a sin does not just mean repeated, blinded. But it also means blinded. See, to be called ก it this way, if you know you're caught in a sin, you're not that caught. See, if you know, right now, whatever your worst sin is, okay, whatever your biggest problem is, is something you don't know much about. You see, you're somewhat in denial about it. And that's the reason why I'm trying to say, if you see somebody who's doing something, and it is a repetition, it does happen fairly often, but what if he or she knows it? They know it. They know it. They're praying about it. They're working on it. Well, then, don't go dumping on them. They know it. They're not really caught. If you don't know you're caught, I should say, if you know you're caught in a sin, you're not that caught. You're not anywhere near as caught. And you know this. You're not anywhere near as caught as when you didn't think you were caught. It was much worse then. And so here's a person who's repeated. It's repetition, number one. Number two, there's a certain amount of blindness. And number three, it even says if someone is caught in a sin, generally speaking, this is not talking about someone who sinned against you. And here's just a little aside. What's interesting is when you have texts in the Bible that talk about someone sinning against you, usually the Bible gives you directions on how you can restore the relationship. But you notice here, you're not out to restore the relationship. You're out to restore him. And generally speaking, please make this distinction in your mind. Generally speaking, if somebody sinned against you, and you have to go and try to straighten it out and reconcile, generally that person, you're not the best person to whom that, you're not the best person to give a bad message. You're not the most likely person that that other person is going to say, oh, I see. Generally speaking, people who you haven't wronged, but who have observed something and come to you and say, forgive me, I may have gotten this wrong. I may have this totally wrong, but this is what it looks like to me. It's happening. Revise it. Correct what I'm saying. Refute what I'm saying. I may be totally wrong, but this is what it looks like. What do you think? Generally, somebody that you haven't hurt, and therefore you're not embarrassed before that person, you're more likely to hear bad news from them. And therefore, very often when someone says, well, I saw this, and yes, I know, but it didn't bother me. It didn't hurt me. Well, maybe you're in a better position to talk to that person than someone who's really been wronged. So in other words, you don't just run right in every time you see somebody sin. It's got to be repeated. There's got to be some blindness. The person's got to be caught, and you need to be somebody that you think that person can listen to. Secondly, that's when to do it. Secondly, I've got to move on through here because they're both really great. Who do you do this to? Now look carefully. If someone is caught in a sin, you who are spiritual should restore him gently, but watch yourself, or you also may be tempted. Almost for sure, in the context, we're talking about a brother. In the morning service in Luke 17, we were looking at this where it says, if a brother sins, rebuke him. Now, the reason I'm bringing this up, and this is very, very important, is somebody's going to really ask me about this in the Q&A fine. As a general rule, not an absolute rule, doesn't mean there's no exceptions, but as a general rule, it is not good for Christians to confront non-Christians about sinful behavior. Why not? Because what they really need is not so much compliance to this or that. They need Jesus. And it's not just ineffective to talk to a non-Christian who doesn't have Jesus about this or that sin, but it's even distortive. David Martin Lloyd-Jones wrote this many years ago in a sermon, and by the way, when you hear this, you're going to say, boy, that sounds familiar. And this is one of those passages that has passed into my heart and infected everything I preach. But listen, David Martin Lloyd-Jones, who's an old Welsh preacher, great evangelist, and a great man, he said, Christianity is not primarily a teaching, nor a philosophy, nor even a way of life. It is before everything else a relationship to a person. The New Testament, in a sense, will not even discuss with us the kind of life we're going to live until we have come to a satisfactory answer about him. Listen, all along, the Bible shuts us down to this one matter and holds us up against this one thing. It refuses to even discuss our questions and our problems with us. Before we can discuss how to live, it says, please. Thank you. logical. If somebody comes now and says, I'd like to become a Christian, but after I become a Christian, will I be able to do this or will I have to stop doing this? And what's the right answer? Well, I mean, it's not wrong exactly to say, well, yes, there's this and this a Christian can do and this and this a Christian can't do. It's not exactly wrong, but it's utterly misleading. Because you see, until you come to Christ, how do you know what all these things are going to look like? To become a Christian is not just to pick up a set of rules. To become a Christian is you get a new center for your solar system. Everything was orbiting around something, now it's all going to orbit around Jesus. And everything in your life is going to orbit around Jesus. And therefore, everything you see now will look different. You say, well, will I be able to do this if I become a Christian? Well, the right answer is, first figure out who Jesus is. Because you see, if Jesus is who he says he is, that is irrelevant. If Jesus is who he says he is, it doesn't matter whether this or that or this or that, you've got to come to him. And once you do come to him, this and that and this and that will look utterly different than it does now. So that looking at this or that is not the way to make this decision. That is irrelevant. Come to him. Now, Christians continually, I'm not trying to talk to you preachers, though, if there's any preachers here or anybody listens to this tape as a preacher, please think about that. What I'm trying to say is you as Christians have to realize that when you come to, if you take a person who's not centered his or her life on Christ and say, well, you know that what you're doing there is against what the Bible teaches, what you are saying to that person, what that person is hearing is, to be a Christian, I've got to do all these things. Well, maybe someday, that person says. And we're giving them that impression. You don't go correcting. You don't go trying to restore. You don't go doing all this stuff to somebody who hasn't got their life already centered on Christ. They need Jesus before they need correction. Once they have Jesus, then you can do this. Okay? So that's when to do it. This is who to do it with. Let me go a little further. Thirdly, who does it? You who are spiritual. Watch out. That's not what you think. See, somebody's going to read that and say, ah, you who are spiritual. Yes, the experts. I've only been a Christian for 17 years. I'm really not ready for this. No, you who are spiritual means anyone with the Holy Spirit. This is actually a way for Paul to say, not just the elite, not just the experts. Anybody who has the Holy Spirit. Now, then, what do you do? What is the ministry of truth? It's this great word, restore. And this is one of those places where, unless you, there's no way to put this into English just right. The word restore is a very, very clear and specific word that means, in Greek, it meant to set a dislocated bone back into place. And by the way, that is so rich because it tells you all sorts of things. Paul is saying all kinds of things about what sin is, first of all. And I don't have time for this part. Don't you, when Paul says sin is like dislocated joints, a lot of us think that sin is like a bullet or a splinter, something that shouldn't be in the body at all. And somebody says, well, my biggest problem is I've got a drinking problem and I've got to get alcohol out of my life. And you do. And if you do get alcohol out of your life, that is tremendously hard. And that is a terrific accomplishment. But I want you to know that drinking is never anybody's major problem. It is a major problem. It's never the main problem. Sin is not like a splinter or like a bullet, something utterly far into the body that needs to be thrown out. Sin is like a bone that's dislocated. And a bone is something that belongs in the body, but it's not in the right place. And your main problem is never stuff you should stop just doing. That's superficial. Your main problem is always good things that should be in your life, but have become too important. Sex should be in your life, but not, it's dislocated. Career should be in your life, but it's dislocated. Family, relationships should be in your life. Power, control, comfort, approval. These things should be in your life, but they're dislocated. And everybody knows a dislocated bone. Just a wee bit off is a searing pain. Incredible. But the word restore means this. If you go to somebody to talk about their sin, you're not going to wound. You're going to restore. You're going to heal. It will be painful because there's no way to put a dislocated bone back without it hurting. But you're there. Everything you're doing, your tone of voice, the way you say things, the time you choose to speak, the setting. Everything is designed to heal, not to wound. Everything. And then lastly, it says, do it gently. Well, we already talked about that, but more than that, it says, do it gently. And what else does it say? Watch yourself, for you also may be tempted. Target. 單磊 you feel just as weak spiritually as that person. If you ever come after somebody and deep in your heart, as you're trying to tell them about their flaws and their faults, if in your heart you say, but I'm a better kind of person, I would never do anything like this. Now, you know, you're not saying that out loud. Christians don't let them say those things out loud. But if you're harboring that in your heart, this will be a failure. Don't even try it. Be better if you didn't. The ministry of truth. Okay, but then the ministry of tears. And look at what we learn here. Carry each other's burdens, and in this way you will fulfill the law of Christ. Now, what is that? Again, an incredibly beautiful picture. First of all, think about this. How do you carry somebody's burden? First thing you have to learn, if you really want to be a good comfort to people. Do you want to comfort people? Do you want to help people? Here's three things. Number one, first of all, imagine somebody, you know, underneath this huge crushing weight. How do you bear that burden? You have to get almost in their shoes, right? You have to get practically right next to them. And you know, the word understand comes from the word to stand under. And the first thing to bear somebody's burden is you have to listen to them until you understand. And you feel their feelings. And you see what they see. And you let them know it. And if anybody has ever come to you and listened to something, listened to you, and then said things that make you feel understood, you know what's amazing? You may have this horrible burden, and you may have this terrible thing on you. Who knows what it is? A sickness or an illness or a terrible relationship or a financial problem. Somebody comes and sits down and gets in your shoes, actually. And you open up your heart, and that person understands you. And you feel like you've just been lifted up, and nothing's changed. Not a thing. You know, your debt is just as bad. You know, the illness is just as bad. Not a thing. And yet you feel great. Why? Because the burden has begun to get borne. Why? Because somebody's gotten practically in your shoes. That's the first thing. You have to listen until the other person feels understood. But then secondly, you've got to let some of the weight actually become yours, which means you've got to suffer a little bit. You've got to suffer. There's a great place, an incredible place, where Jonathan, see, one of the ways in which you bear people's burdens is if you're willing to give financially to people in need. And Jonathan Edwards, in one of his treatises on giving, he says this. He says, some people say, well, I can't afford to give. I would love to help this poor person. I would love to help with this ministry. I can't afford to give. And then this is what he says. This is great. He says, if our neighbor's difficulties and necessities be much greater than our own, and we see that he is not likely to be otherwise relieved, we should be willing to suffer with him to take part of his burden on ourselves. How else is that rule of bearing one another's burdens to be fulfilled? Listen, if we are never obliged to relieve others' burdens, but when we can do it without burdening ourselves, then how do we bear our neighbor's burdens when we bear no burden at all? And what he means is whenever you say, I can't afford the time, what you mean is, I don't want any of that person's suffering to slide over on me. When you say, I can't afford to give, what you mean is, this person has got all these problems, and I don't want any of them on me. Because if I give to the point where I actually am not able to do certain things, what does that mean? All it means is you're bearing the burden. Emotionally, financially, it means to some degree, you let it on you. You suffer. If you're not engaged in people's lives to the degree of suffering, you're not bearing their burdens. But quick, quick, quick. Number three, not just, don't stop now. Nobody leave. If you heard number two point, you've got to hear number three point. You have to understand them. You have to suffer with them. But number three, you've got to carry their burden. Now, this does not mean, it's to carry one another's burdens, which means if you sink, if you get involved so much in people's lives that you don't carry their burdens, but they just crush you. So you're no good for anybody. That's not what you're supposed to be doing, and here's why. When a person, and here's how I have to end, how can you possibly hit it just right? How can you get the strength to understand people and let the burden fall on you, but not go to the place, the other extreme, where many people go, and that is they get just so involved. They get drained, and they get depressed, and they get crushed by other people's burdens. How do you get that? Fulfill the law of Christ. What is the law of Christ? The example of Christ. And here's what I mean by that. The reason that we can bear each other's burdens. not avoid each other's burdens, but bear each other's burdens, is because Jesus Christ was crushed for our iniquities. You know, Psalm 37. Is it 37? I better quickly look. Psalm 34, verse 18. The Lord is close to the brokenhearted, and he saved those who are crushed in spirit. But oh, the psalmist had no idea why. He has no idea how close Jesus Christ got to the brokenhearted. In Isaiah 53, verse 4, we read this. Surely he took up our infirmities, and he carried our sorrows. He was pierced for our transgressions. He was crushed for our iniquities. Punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed. Now here's the point. There's one thing you must never try to bear. There's one thing that if you try to bear, it will crush you, and that is your own salvation. Your salvation will crush anybody who bears it up, and one person already has done that. Now what I mean is this. If you overdo it, if you get into people's lives and you find yourself always just getting overwhelmed, you give and you give and you give and you give too much. You open up, and you open up, and you open up too much, and you're getting depressed, and you're falling under. You know why? You are not really helping that person. You're using that person to prove to yourself that you're worthwhile, which means you're not bearing their burdens. You are trying to bear your own salvation. You're saving yourself. You're not helping that person, and that's why you're crushed, because you're not being really crushed by their burden. You're being crushed by the burden, the burden that Jesus Christ, he came for, and if you take it, it's a double insult, a double insult. It's disobeying his command to bear each other's burdens, not just be crushed into the ground by them, but worst of all, you're saying, well, what you did doesn't count. He was crushed for our iniquities so we can bear each other's burdens. So fulfill the law of Christ, the ministry of truth, the ministry of tears. It's amazing, isn't it? Christianity must be true, because nobody could have thought this up. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that Jesus Christ came to bear our burdens, so now we don't have to avoid burdens or be crushed by them. We thank you that if we come to you through the gospel, we can become people who do ministry of truth and ministry of tears, make us a church filled with people like that. Fill our churches in New York City with people like that, and the world will know that you sent your Son, Jesus, Son of God, Savior of the world. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
