TITLE: Spiritual Warfare (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 6:10-20
TOPICS: Spiritual Warfare
SERIES: Spiritual Warfare – The War
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/spiritual-warfare/

============================================================

Some of you may remember that about when we started this series on Ephesians about 37, 38 years ago, we moved through very slowly and we now come to a new section. And I would like to spend a number of weeks on it. It's Ephesians chapter 6, verses 10 to 20. I'd like to make some, actually, some introductory remarks about it. The subject of it's spiritual warfare. And actually, you've got on your hands another series. It's not as, oh, I don't know. To me, in some ways, it doesn't seem to be as marketable as the series on marriage. It doesn't seem as warm and as sweet and as romantic as the series on marriage. And yet, it's no less crucial for you to know. So, this is the last passage, the last section in the epistle. It's the last major thought unit that Paul gives us. And we're going to start looking at it tonight. And I want you to know how urgent it is, not just for you individually, but for our church at our stage and age to understand and grasp this material. Let's look at this. Read with me, Ephesians chapter 6, verse 10 to 20. Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes. For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world, and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms. Therefore, put on the full armor of God so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground. And after you have done everything, to stand. Stand firm, then, with the belt of truth buckled around your waist, with the breastplate of righteousness in place, with your feet fitted with the readiness that comes from the gospel of peace. In addition to all this, take up the shield of faith, with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one. Take the helmet of salvation and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and pray in the Spirit on all occasions, with all kinds of prayers and requests. With this in mind, be alert and always keep on praying for all the saints. And pray also for me, that whenever I open my mouth, words may be given me that I will fearlessly make known the mystery of the gospel, for which I am an ambassador in chains. Pray that I may declare it fearlessly as I should. This is God's word. All right. Spiritual warfare. Paul says, finally. You see, up to now, Paul, in a sense, has been talking about the constructive side of the Christian life. If you really stand back and look at the whole book, you'll see that in chapter 1, 2, and 3, Paul lays out what God is going to do about the mess that the universe is in. Chapter 1 is actually about the fact that the disintegration that we see, the disorder, the confusion in the universe, is going to be solved by Jesus Christ being made king over all things and under his dominion and kingship. That which disintegrates, integrates. That which is in confusion, coheres. Then in chapter 2, we're told how through the blood of Christ, Jesus brings that kingdom power into our lives when we trust in him. That's in chapter 2 and 3. We get to chapter 4, 5, and 6. Paul begins by saying, now, if this is true, how should we live? And he gives you a lot of detailed teaching about what it means to live the Christian life or live in accord with the realities of who you are in Christ. The whole point of chapter 4, 5, and 6 is, because you've got it in you, because you've got it true of you, live it out. And so we looked at 4, 5, and 6 and saw all kinds of great things that Paul talks about, what it means to change, what it means to put off. The old life to put on the new, in the renewal of your mind. What it means to be filled with the Spirit and how to take that Spirit-filledness and work it out into our relationships in every area of our lives, in our marriages, in our dating relationships, in our family life, in our work life, and so on. But then, Paul, instead of saying, sincerely, your friend, Paul, instead of that, he says, finally. What he means is, unless you see the context in which you're working, you're going to make a mistake. If, for example, you sent a group of people to build a fort, and you sent them off with a blueprint, and you said, now, you're the masons, and you're the carpenters, and you're all the people, and you all know what you do, and here's the blueprint, and here's the material, go out there and begin to work. you're the most part. You're the key. they went up there to begin to work at the town or in the place and the location that you had outlined for them. That wouldn't work if you didn't at least say, oh, in addition, I forgot to tell you, it's enemy territory, so while you're working, people will be shooting at you and trying to kill you. And they would all say, important safety tip. Yes, that's helpful to know. As a matter of fact, I think we're going to go about our work. We're going to still get the work done, but I think we're probably going to go about our work a little differently now that we know that. That's exactly what Paul is doing here. He's saying, here's the Christian life, and here's what it means to build it. But you have to realize that you're doing it in a context surrounded by an array of very powerful forces who are out to get you. In fact, Paul is, let's be real concrete here. Paul says, and the only part I'm going to look at tonight with you, he says in verses 10, 11, 12, and 13, he says, finally be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. Put on the full armor of God. Why? So that you can stand against the devil's schemes, for our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, authorities, powers of this dark world, against spiritual forces of evil, heavenly realms. Put on the armor of God, and here's why. So that you may stand in the evil day. Now, I think everybody in this room, if for a moment you take off your biases and your prejudices and your blinders, you know what he's talking about. There are some days which are just doggone evil. What is the evil day? In the evil day, we sense that there is some power, there is some force that's coming around, shadowing us like a cloud, taunting us and jeering at us and undermining us and making us feel guilty and making us feel tempted and making us feel bad and egging us on, and essentially, something's out to get us. You know those days are there. You cannot believe the way everything seems to be coming together. To make things as bad as they possibly could be. You've been through some. Maybe some of you, this is one of them. Now, what are you going to do? One of the things you can possibly do, and this is what a lot of people will say, is you shrug it off and dismiss it as just a series of coincidences. All right? Now, maybe, maybe not. You know, if a bunch of guys got up there to start to build this fort, and they hadn't been told that somebody's out to shoot them, hey, no, at one point, you know, they get up and they're laying a brick down. All of a sudden, the brick splits. And you say, well, what was it? Did the brick split, or was that something that hit the brick? And then the next time, you know, a lot of little things happen, and you say, now, is this a series of coincidences? Maybe. But what if somebody's out to get me? What if somebody's trying to kill me? You know, a lot of situation comedies are like that. Somebody's out to get, and for the, you know, the first three or four incidents, the oblivious person's walking around and doesn't realize what's happening. Maybe it is a series of coincidences. That's one way to approach it. Another way to approach it is to get paranoid, and to start to say, my life is going so badly because of this person, or this person, or this force, or it's the Republicans, or it's the Democrats, or you blame it on somebody. The other possibility is to start to feel bad about yourself. Well, the reason everything goes wrong is, I must be a bad person. I must be a failure. I should have anticipated this. And what's the fourth thing? And I'll tell you what the fourth thing is, and it's the most practical thing of all. You can get down on yourself. You can get paranoid. You could try to talk yourself out of this series of coincidences on these evil days, or you can say, this is a day in which the forces of supernatural evil are in particularly arrayed against me, and I've got to put on the armor of God and stand. And what Paul is telling you is how to do it. Now, we're not going to do it all tonight. You're going to have to come back. But the point is that that's what Paul is saying. Paul is saying, on the evil day, when you feel like somebody's out to get me, maybe somebody is out to get you. All right? When you feel like, it seems like everything's out to get me, maybe you're not being paranoid. You are being paranoid if you blame, Paul says, if you blame the problems in your life strictly on your own failures and strictly on other people, you will either hate yourself or you'll hate the world. Or the most psychologically healthy thing you can do, to avoid bitterness, to avoid unnecessary guilt, to avoid all these things, is to say, there's more to this than meets the eye. Or as Hamlet said to Horatio, there are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio. Hamlet, your problem is you've got a way of filtering out. You've got a way of filtering out, you've got a little filter on. So when you look at situations, you filter out supernatural evil. You assume there are no powers and principalities. You assume you are wrestling only with flesh and blood. It's either my flesh and blood or their flesh and blood. That makes you either feel down on yourself about the troubles in your life or it makes you feel paranoid about other people, but maybe there's something else involved. Paul says, on the evil day, put on the full armor of God, realize you're struggling with more in flesh than blood, and you will stand. There is nothing more practical. At least a couple times a month, anybody who's trying to live the Christian life has the evil days. What are you going to do? There's nothing more practical than this. You put on the armor of God and you say, the fiery darts are the evil one. You put on the armor of God and it says, there's supernatural evil out there, and you deal with it. Now, let me just show you three things that this first verse tells you. And these are kind of basic introductory principles from which we're going to move and get into a more detailed application as the weeks go by. Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. Put on the full armor of God so that you can take your stand against the devil's struggles. Here's the principles. Number one, Christianity. Real Christianity is a fight. Number two, the fight is the Lord's. Number three, but the battling is ours. It's a fight. The fight is God's fight. But the battling is something that we have to involve ourselves in. Let's just look at these three things because they're immensely practical and they lay the basis for everything else we're going to see. First of all, Christianity is a fight. Hey, listen. The point is, this text tells you that you can tell a genuine Christian as much from the warfare and conflict in your life as from the peace. See, lots of people say, one of the ways you know a Christian is inner peace. Doesn't it say in Philippians 4, the peace of God that passes all understanding will keep your hearts in mind? Doesn't it say in Romans 5 that now that we are justified by faith in Christ, we have peace with God? Isn't it true that peace is a fruit of the Spirit and peace is a characteristic of a Christian? And that when you come into the Christian life, you're no longer at war with God. So you have peace in the conscience. And you have peace when you consider the future. And you have peace when you realize what God has done for you. Sure, the Bible is just as insistent that when you become a Christian, new warfare has started, new conflicts have started. Because, you know, when you go into a war by allying with one person or one body or one country, you immediately make enemies of all the people who are arrayed against your new ally. And therefore, the way you know you're a Christian is not only through peace but also through conflict. Real Christianity is a fight. Years ago, almost a hundred years ago, the Anglican bishop, J.C. Ryle, bishop of Liverpool, maybe not when he wrote this, but he was eventually the bishop of Liverpool, wrote these words. Now listen. Let me talk to you about true Christianity. There's a vast quantity of religion current in the world that is not true genuine Christianity. It passes muster. It satisfies sleepy consciences. But it is not good money. It is not the real thing which was called Christianity 1,800 years ago. There are thousands of men and women who go to chapels and churches every Sunday and call themselves Christians. Their names are in the baptismal register. They're reckoned Christians while they live. They're married with a Christian marriage service. They mean to be buried as Christians when they die. But you never see any fight about the religion of spiritual strife, of exertion, of conflict, of self-denial, of watching and warring. They know literally nothing at all. And then he says, just a little further down over here, he says, let's consider these propositions. The saddest symptom about many so-called Christians is the utter absence of anything like conflict or fight. They eat. They drink. They dress. They work. They amuse themselves. They get money. They spend money. They go through a scanty round of formal religious services once or even twice a week. But the great spiritual warfare, its watchings and strugglings, its agonies and anxieties, its battles and contests, of this they appear to know nothing at all. And then he finally sits down and says, do you find in your heart of hearts a spiritual struggle? Are you conscious of two principles within you at contending for the mastery? Do you feel anything of war in your inner self? Well, let's thank God for it. strongly probable evidence of the great work of becoming like Christ. All true Christians are involved in a fight. A real Christian can be known as much by his inner warfare as by his inner peace. Now, somebody says, well, you know, I think you're exaggerating. You're coming on too strong. Not necessarily. I've seen three babies born. I'm not a doctor, and I'm not sure. I haven't seen, like, if you're a doctor, you may have seen hundreds of babies born. This is what I can tell. Being born is a serious situation, and the only right response to a serious situation is violence. Look, if you're in a house and it's beginning to burn and your life is in danger, you don't say, hmm, I wonder which way out. It's clear that you have not grasped the situation. It's clear that your mind is not alive to the serious situation. If it's alive, there's kicking. There is running. There is fighting. There's a violence. Anytime you're really alive to a serious situation, there is violence. There's a fight. There's a conflict. When a baby is born, there should be kicking. There should be crying. There should, in many cases, be, you know, just a flailing of the arms and a screaming. Why? Because the child's got to take the first breath. It's very traumatic. And if a child just comes on out and lays there and says nothing and does nothing, what's that mean? Does everybody say, ah, phlegmatic temperament? Is that what they say? They say, ah, well, here's somebody who really knows how to take life, you know, as it comes. Not a bit. You say, something's wrong with this child. The child's not alive or the child is not alive to the situation. There's something wrong. We've got to do something. We've got to alert it. We've got to wake it up. Matthew 11, verse 12 says, from the days of old to the time of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of God suffereth violence and the violent take it by force. That's Jesus talking. A modern translation would go like this. The kingdom of God advances through violence and the violent take it by force. Do you know what that means? It means when you're anybody who has got any spiritual life in him or her is alert to how urgent the situation is. For example, one, the only thing you know about your future is you're going to die. And the only thing you know about anybody around you is they're going to die. Now that's, that, that creates urgency. You know, some of you remember one of the, it's a very funny thing what you remember. I remember a teacher who told me this little story 22 years ago that I've never forgotten. He, he was a pastor in a church. Some of you know this one. He was a pastor in a church. And he had two young college women who went to his church. And those two young college women decided instead of going into graduate school, they were going to go into the mission field. And they were fine Christians, but their parents were not. And when they, when their parents found out about it, they, they, they came to see the pastor and they assumed that this guy was a fundamentalist Looney Tune or their, their daughters would not have been in this terrible situation of thinking that they could run off and become missionaries instead of looking for some security in life by going. And they said that they said they should go to grad school. They should go get a job. They should find some security in life. They shouldn't run off in the blue and be missionaries and who knows where. And that's where Dr. Leach, his name was Addison Leach, who's now dead. He's Elizabeth Elliot's second husband. And what he said was he looked at them and he says, okay, let me get this straight. Every one of us is on a little ball of rock called earth. And this little ball of rock is spinning through space at a zillion miles an hour. And if it, if it, even if it doesn't ever run into anything, someday out from under every single one of us, a little trap door is going to open and everybody in, everybody here is going to fall off. And underneath there will be the everlasting arms of God or nothing at all. And maybe you can get some security by getting a master's degree. And I said, have I got you straight? He said. Now, what was he doing? Here's a couple of women. Here's a couple, here's, oh, actually, here's a couple of parents. That's a parents. They said, we're Christians too, but you know, you can go too far with this stuff. There was no fight about their lives. They were, you see, what sin does is, sin is a narcotic. Sin puts you to sleep. Sin makes you say, well, there's always tomorrow. Sin makes you think, you know, moderation in all things. Real Christianity says, wakes you up to the seriousness of the situation. It's like a baby who's being born. Parents is serious. So if the child is alive, the child is fighting. life is in danger and there's fire coming up all over around you, there's violence. In the same way, the Scripture says, the way you know you're really a Christian is there's a fight going on. Let me embarrass you a little bit in some of your cases. Some of you have been Christians for a while. Do you remember in the beginning, you said, I'm going to fight against this habit. I'm going to fight against my laziness. I'm going to get up every day. I'm going to pray. I'm going to read the Scripture. I'm going to find one thing that I'm going to practice every day that I'm not doing. I'm going to work it into my life. I'm going to be accountable to other people. Just think about it. That's a very small little discipline, isn't it? You are alert enough. You are awake enough. You are violent enough. To see what the kingdom of God meant. So you said, every day I'm going to get up, I'm going to, for 30 minutes, I'm going to read the Scripture and pray. I'm going to find one thing in that text that I'm not doing. So if, for example, I snap at people at work, I'm going to say something about that. If, for example, I always chicken out, when this opportunity to say something comes up, I'm going to do something about that. If I find I'm getting criticism from people over here, I'm going to forgive. And I'm going to find somebody else who I can talk to about this and be accountable to them and so forth. And every day I'm going to do that. Do you remember how hard that was? Do you remember what incredible difficulty you experienced just getting up and praying and doing it? Do you remember how many times that you had to get, the first thing you had to do on a Tuesday morning, the first thing you'd do when you finally got to talk to God on Tuesday morning is to confess the fact you hadn't been talking to Him for two weeks? Do you remember how much work that was? Do you remember what fight there was to your life? Is there any fight to your life now? If you say you're a Christian, and there's not the warring and there's not the exertion, it's because you're going to sleep. You know, I'll tell you something. If I send guys over into enemy territory to build that fort, and I know that there's a whole army arrayed against them to kill them, and I get in the car and I start driving out toward there, and I don't hear anything. I don't hear any fighting. I don't hear any shooting. I don't hear any loud noises. You know what? I know what's happened. They're either all dead or they're all tied up or they're all drugged or they're all knocked out. Now, you see, if there's no fight to your Christian life, you're either not alive spiritually, that means you're not really a Christian, or you've really been knocked out. That's the first thing we learn here. The second thing we learn here is that there really is such a... The first thing was Christianity to fight. We need to be very serious about that. The second, you know, think about all the things the Scripture says. It says, strive to enter in, press into the kingdom, watch ye, stand ye, be strong, labor for the meat that endures, endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ, fight the good fight of faith. Do you realize how many times that kind of language is being used? Is that happening to you? Okay, the second thing that I want to tell you about is that this proves that the devil is real. Now, we're going to talk more about this next week. I know there's people out there who are looking at me, and they're saying, come on. And there's people almost continually that come up to me, and you say, you know, you seem like an intelligent person. You seem a lot like me. You seem to think like me. And then you come out, and you act like everything the Bible says is true. Or, now you come out and say, there is such a thing as the devil. Here's my... Let me clear the ground. Not so much to teach about this, but to clear the ground so we can. If you have a lot of struggle with the idea of the reality of the devil and of supernatural evil, I'd like to ask you on what grounds you object. First of all, do you believe in God at all? Do you believe in heaven at all? Do you believe in a meta-nature, a supernature? Do you believe in supernatural at all? Do you believe in a personal good supernatural? Then on what basis could you possibly deny the idea of the bad supernatural? Do you believe anything that Jesus says? Do you like what he says about loving your neighbor and about the golden rule, all those things? Then what do you do when Jesus says, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning? Now, you know, come on. This guy is crazy. If he says, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning, if it didn't happen. You just can't get off picking and choosing like this. You can't get off saying, well, there's some things Jesus says that are embarrassing to me, and other things are not. So I'm going to follow what's not embarrassing. I'm going to follow what's not embarrassing. do you deny the reality of supernatural evil, and yet at the same time, you want to believe in the idea of supernatural good? Or secondly, some of you deny the existence of supernatural completely. You know, that's why you can't believe in the devil. You have trouble believing in God, too. That at least is more consistent, but let me just say this to you. For 200, 300 years, Western civilization has pretty much been under the influence of what we call an Enlightenment consensus. And the Enlightenment said, faith, belief in God and devil and so on, is subjective. But we know now that the way to really find truth is through reason and through the scientific method, which is objective. And we know now that the universe is a closed system. That means that you don't have supernatural miracles and things coming in from the outside. Some people believe in supernatural if you want to use faith, but if you use reason and you use science, you know that there is no such thing as a miracle. My friends, if you then say, I'm a modern person, but you up there believing in the devil, you're living in the Middle Ages, I'm sorry, look out. You're the one who's going to be out of date pretty soon. When I was in college, people didn't... When I was in college, which is... If you're over 40, you probably didn't have to read Michael Polanyi or Thomas Kuhn or those people. But today, the fact is that people will tell you at the highest levels of philosophy that everybody... Something that we should have known all along. You can't prove that there's no such thing as a supernatural. To believe that the universe is a closed system is a faith assumption. There's no way you can prove that. When you say, I know that miracles can't happen, therefore this couldn't have happened, what you've done is you... That's a religious commitment. You can say, I don't believe in the supernatural. But you can't sit down there and say, and therefore you believe in the supernatural because you're religious. I don't believe in the supernatural because I'm not religious. You can't say that. I'm not denying that you can deny the supernatural, but you have to see this. You are in the same boat that I'm in. You also are making a faith commitment. You also are making a religious commitment. And what post-modernism is, which is something that you read about all the time, the one thing that's happening now is people are saying there is no such thing as an object of neutral science. You can't prove the absence of the supernatural. And you better watch out because you're going to find that the people who believe in the old closed system, you're the ones who are going to be left in the dust. It's already beginning to happen. You may not sit down there and say, if you believe in the supernatural, you're living in the Middle Ages. I'm a modern person. I'm rational. I'm objective. See, that's ridiculous. You have your right to your belief, but it's a belief. You have your right to your religion, but it's a religion. You can't possibly doubt anything unless you do so from the stance of faith. You can't doubt everything at once. Because, you see, in many of your cases, you refuse to doubt your doubts. And you know what the first step to faith is? Start to doubt your doubts. Why doubt me and never doubt your own faith assumptions? My dear friends, if Jesus is who he said he is, and I don't know how else you could possibly explain who he is, other than to see what he said he is, then you have to listen to what he says when he says, I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning. Now, the last thing, the first thing is that Christianity is a fight. The second thing is that there is a reality of supernatural evil. We'll talk more about it. The last thing is, it says, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. What it means to be a Christian is to fight a battle, but fight it in the power of the might of the Lord. That's the secret. That's the thing we're after. That's what we're going to be talking about for a number of weeks. But right now, I can probably summarize it using this illustration. Imagine that you're... Listen, I don't like military terminology either, but this is what the Scripture uses here. Imagine that you're a soldier, and you're on the front lines, and a great commander comes down to you and says, Tamara, Tamara, guys, what we're going to do is we're going to attack that fortification. And what I want you to do is I want you to stand up, and I want you to run and charge. Now, the one thing you've got to realize is that behind you, over you, around you, and through you is going to come immensely superior air power. There's going to be all kinds of air power and artillery power that's going to come over, around, and through you. It's vastly superior to your enemy. What you're going to have to do is you're going to have to stand up, and you're going to have to charge. That will draw them... get up and charge even though you know that man to man, they've got two or three times more people than you do. What you have to do is you have to live, you have to charge on the basis of the greatness of the power that is not yours but that will come over and around and through you. If you don't charge, we can't beat them. If you do charge, counting on that, assuming that, acting on the basis of what I tell you right now, you will win. You know, you sit there and you say, I'll tell you what, it would be a lot easier if before I got up out of the trench, you know, you could have several squadrons of airplanes go in front of me and drop a lot of bombs over there and I'd really like to see, you know, I'd like to sort of see, you know, people you know, running all around in retreat before I charge. Would that be all right? I'd like to see a few, you know, a few white flags. That would really help me. Okay, General, would that be all right? Why don't you send your power out before me and let it work on there and then, then I'll be very happy to charge once I see that the way is clear. The General says, I'm sorry, it's not going to work that way. They won't come out unless you charge. I'm sorry, what you've got to do is you've got to get up and you have to fill your mind with the magnificence of the power that I will bring around you and over you and through you. You have to revel in it. You have to fill your mind with it so you're ravished by it. So you're full of strength when you think about it and in the knowledge of that might coming over, around, and through you you have to go out. That's why it says in Philippians 2 work out your salvation in fear and trembling for it is God at work within you both to will and to do your good pleasure. The power of the Lord comes as you step out. And so what you do is this you say, I am going to trust Him. You don't wait and say Lord, show me you're trustworthy before you trust Him. You say, I'm going to stand up for the truth. You don't say, Lord prove your truth before I stand up for it. You don't say Lord, why don't you go over with the squadron and sort of, you know I like to see, you know bodies jumping around over there I like to see white flags before He never does it that way. Because you see at that point then you wouldn't be strong in His power He would just simply be doing it. Don't ask me why He does it this way I think I know why He does it this way I'll tell you why I'll tell you why Have you ever seen have you ever it just occurs to me have you ever seen a mother a mother carries around a six month old kid a four or five month old kid because the kid isn't he can't walk and of course the mother's whole goal eventually is to put the kid down I mean, you know the first four or five months of your life those of you who are mothers and know that you know, what you say is I get up in the morning knowing that someday I'll be able to put this child down I don't want to have to carry this child forever and one day you realize this child's ready to walk so what do you do? You stand the child up and you get back and you say come to me the child feels like for the first time there's no mother there's no parent there's nobody here my parent has been removed from me I'm teetering I'm tottering I'm ready to fall right on my face how could my parent do this to me? and yet the mother you see the parent is saying I'm right there I'm not going to let you you know knock your little you know your nose up if you start to totter I'll grab you but the point is that you have got to come to me you've got to step out you've got to step out or you'll never learn I don't want to be carrying you around when you're 16 kid right now in some cases that's how you feel you feel like God's withdrawn you feel like there's temptations around you feel like you're being asked to do things that you've never been able to do and you don't feel God right at your side you don't feel him holding your hand you don't feel his power and you say God why can't you pick me up and carry me God why can't you send the squadrons over top Paul says be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might that means you step out filling your mind full of the things that he's promised you obey and his power comes in through you you obey thinking about his greatness are you ready to do that that's the most simple thing Christianity is a fight is there a fight about your life there's supernatural evil there's more than flesh and blood operating are you willing Horatio to see there's more in heaven and earth than is dreamt of in your dinky little philosophy and lastly do you understand what it means imagine what he is but he can't what he means he can't Thank you. Are you willing, Horatio, to see there's more in heaven and earth than is dreamt of in your dinky little philosophy? And lastly, do you understand what it means to be strong in the Lord and the power of his might? It's simpler than you might think. It's not that big a secret. You see what he calls you to do, and you step out and do it, even though you don't feel you've got the power to do it. Your parent is there. Your general is there. The power of your parent will come over, all around, and through you. The power of your general will come through you. He will not let you fall. Him who comes to me I will in no wise cast out. The soul that on Jesus has leaned for repose, I will not, I will not desert to his foes. That soul that all hell should endeavor to shake, I'll never, no never, no never forsake. Let's pray. Father, we ask now that you'd help us with the music we're about to sing. We pray that you'd help us to respond to you spiritually in our hearts. Some of us realize that we're not having, there's no fight because we're not fighting against things in our lives we ought to. Some of us realize that we are not putting on the armor of God and not stepping out and obeying you and assuming and trusting in your power. We pray now that you would make us bold, you would help us to depend on you, and that while we sing and while we think about these things, that you would actually undo us with your power. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
