TITLE: Spiritual Gifts and the Steward-Leader
SCRIPTURE: 1 Corinthians 12:4-7
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Steward Leadership (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/spiritual-gifts-and-the-steward-leader/

============================================================

Okay, take out your handout, and in the next 35 minutes between talking, questions and answer, we will get a grip on everything the Bible has to say about spiritual gifts. It'll be a historic occasion. It's never happened before. I'm hoping that you write it down in your diary, and you can tell your grandchildren you were present. Actually, however, I do hope, in spite of a couple of very key and stupid typographical errors, I do hope you take a look at this handout after an awful lot of years of working on this subject. I'm hoping that this actually is a, maybe not a 30,000 foot, maybe like a 10,000 foot view of this subject, which is a subject that divides the church and is very, very practical and yet very, very exciting and also very divisive. So, let me give you an overview of the subject of what it means to be a steward of your spiritual gifts. Now, we start with 1 Corinthians 12, 4, 5, 6, and 7, which is probably the classic text on this. There are different kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit. There are different kinds of service, but the same Lord. There are different kinds of working, but the same God works all of them in all men. To each one, the manifestation of the Spirit is given for the common good. Okay, there's different kinds of gifts. There's different kinds of service. Spiritual gifts are the way we do service in the church. Now, I'll get back to what gifts are, but first I'd like to start with that word service. Spiritual gifts are a way of serving. What is serving? Jump down to the second paragraph, and I'll say, in a consumer culture in which the purpose of life, in fact, what really fuels everything here is you getting your needs met at a cost that's beneficial to you. For you to get your needs met at the best cost, cost of time, cost of money, money, that's really what makes everything go. But the Bible says that in the church, the thing that makes the church go is the opposite. Service is putting the needs of others ahead of your own. Service is putting the needs of the community ahead of the individual. Okay? As Mr. Spock once said, the needs of the few are more important than the needs of the one. Star Trek. I think it was at the end of, what was it? It was at the end of number two, wasn't it, or something like that? Service is putting the needs of others ahead of your own. Now, here's a paradox with service. When you put the needs of others ahead of your own, the paradox goes like this. There are benefits to service, and here's three of them. They're in the paragraph. It's only as you humbly serve and just pick up the mop and do all kinds of stuff around the church that needs to be done, just because it needs to be done. The first benefit is self-knowledge. Until you do all kinds of stuff, you really don't know what you're good at. You really don't know who you are. You don't know what your aptitudes are. The second benefit of service is community. Consumerism is solitary. To come and get your needs met makes you alone. As soon as you begin to serve in the church, as soon as you begin to do things in the church, you start to get connected to people. So the first benefit is self-knowledge. The second benefit is community. The third benefit is the fulfillment, because when you serve, you see you're part of something that's touching people and changing people's lives. Even the simplest thing, setting up chairs, you know, but you know that in that room people's lives are being touched, so you're just setting up the chairs. Somebody else is, you know, doing the music. Somebody else is preaching. But you're part of touching people's lives. Now, here's the paradox. There are huge benefits to serving, but if you serve, in order to get the benefits, it's not service, so you won't get any benefits. Okay, got that, everybody? See, the benefits of service, service is not doing things because it meets your needs. The benefits of service, you don't serve because, oh, I'll get to meet people. Well, I know that we do do it that way because we're consumers, but the reason for service is not to meet people. The reason for service is not to feel fulfilled. The reason for service is not to get to know yourself. The reason for service is because Jesus served you, and if he hadn't served you at infinite cost, you'd be spiritually dead. And because he's done that, you turn around and begin to serve. And when you serve not to get your needs met, but just to serve, you'll get all kinds of needs met. But if you serve in order to get your needs met, you're not serving, so you won't get your needs met. Got it? Okay, can you say that? I mean, you don't, I don't mean, do you understand it? It's really very, very crucial. through spiritual gifts. So let's go back up here to the first paragraph briefly and say, what is a spiritual gift? Spiritual gifts are not quite the same as talents. I'll get to that in a second. Spiritual gifts are abilities that God gives to every Christian, every Christian, to each one, see, to each one is given an ability to build up the body of Christ. A spiritual gift is a way of working for the common good, but the common good here is not talking about New York City at this point. These spiritual gifts are ways of building up the body, the community. It's a way of serving the community rather than yourself. And spiritual gifts are a way of building people up so that you're making the church what it ought to be. Now, how are spiritual gifts distributed? How do I find my gifts? Well, first of all, we have to, before we get there, we have to say, what are the spiritual gifts? What are the different possible constellations of gifts? And there's actually an infinite number. Here's why. Now jump down to where it says, how are spiritual gifts distributed. First of all, there is a variety of individual gifts. And I would like briefly to run through the list. You find the list of spiritual gifts in Ephesians 4, 1 Corinthians 12, 1 Corinthians 14, Romans 12. There's a tiny little list in 1 Peter 4. It's only got two in it. But if you look at all the lists, one of the best ways for you to understand spiritual gifts is to cluster them into three basic categories. Now, they don't all exactly fit, especially like the gift of exhortation. But basically, you can cluster spiritual gifts into prophetic, priestly, and kingly categories. And most people's gifts tend to reside in one of those three. You tend to be prophetic types, priestly types, kingly types. Only all together do we actually reflect all of Jesus, Jesus's spiritual abilities and ministry abilities. Only together do we really reflect everything that Jesus can do. But individually, his abilities are distributed. And they tend to be distributed along the lines of prophetic, priestly, and kingly. What do I mean? Take a look. Prophetic gifts generally mean representing God to people. A prophetic gift means I'm coming to you and helping you understand God's truth or God's word or God's will. So in a sense, a prophetic gift person tends to come toward people from God. And here's the kinds of gifts you've got in the lists. Evangelism, the ability to help people believe. Teaching, the ability to help people learn. Prophecy, a little footnote. It generally, from what I can tell, is unusually dynamic and illumined truth-telling. Something like teaching, something like, you know, but something else. Speaking, which is just the ability to do evangelism or to do prophecy or to do teaching in a public speaking way, probably. Knowledge, discerning spirits, is insight, able to tell authentic from false. Second group, priestly gifts. Priestly gifts are abilities based on understanding and supplying basic needs and represents others to God and the world. You understand this one? A prophet tends to speak to God, to people for God. But priests actually speak to God for people. Priestly people are sympathetic. Priestly people are people who are advocates. Priestly people come alongside of people and help them deal with God and help them deal with the world. It's not the same. Prophetic gifts tend to be truth-telling. Priestly gifts tend to be sympathy and empathy. And here are some of the examples. Encouragement, which is the gift of exhortation. Parakaleia, which is a little bit of a cross of prophetic and priestly. It means motivating and counseling people, coaching people. Helps is, now here's one of my embarrassing typographical errors. Helps means the ability to give real assistance without usurping. I know it says down there, with R usurping, that's terrible. It sounds like the opposite of what I meant. Helps means the ability, a person with a gift of helps knows how to get help someone do something who can't do it, but do it in a way that you don't replace the person. See, helps is not, get out of my way, I'll do it. You're no good, so let me do it for you. That's not the gift of help. I mean, I give you a perfect example of this is when you're helping your third grader with math, and at a certain point you say, let me do it. Maybe it's just. anymore, you're just replacing the person. It's very difficult actually to help. But anyway, helps is the ability to give true assistance without usurping, healing, facilitating emotional or spiritual healing, pastoring, knowing and getting what a person needs to grow. Pastoring is not the same as preaching and teaching. Pastoring is much more sympathetic, coming alongside a person, helping them get what they need. Serving, which is probably like speaking, almost a category of all of the priestly gifts, but it means the ability to meet practical needs effectively. Sharing, in Romans 12, 8, is actually the gift of giving. It means the ability to use your money in a way that really, in unusual ways, builds people up. And then there's even the gift of mercy. And for, you know, I love this, love to preach a sermon on this, but in Romans 12, 8, it literally talks about a gift. It says, eleon et elat ro tatai, which means, literally, mercy and hilarity. It means the ability to not only be merciful, but you know how some people just are so, they're just, they're so sympathetic. You know, they just, they feel your pain. And it doesn't lift you up, it just makes you feel worse. This is different. This is a gift of mercy. This isn't just, this isn't just, this isn't just mercy. The gift of mercy is the ability to get into somebody's pain and when they're done, they feel happy. They feel lifted up. It's very interesting. Um, kingly gifts are abilities based on understanding direction and group needs. Um, this is different than prophetic and priestly. Kingly gifts are gifts of wisdom, gifts of leading, gifts of getting stuff done. Both prophetic and priestly gifts tend to be more me helping you and kingly gifts have more to do with how do we get things done. It tends to be a kind of a corporate gift. And examples, apostle, the gift of apostleship seems to be a founder gift. An entrepreneur, by the way, for those of you who like that, uh, plowing new ground. Leadership, the, the, the, the, uh, Greek word for leadership literally means leading in zeal and that's vision casting. The ability to get a bunch of people really excited and united around a vision. Administration is a, is the ability to organize a task and get it done. As we all know, some people who are great at catalytic leadership, getting people excited around the vision, have no idea, uh, how to set up the practical steps to actually get them there. And that's administration. Wisdom is problem solving. Uh, faith is probably not saving faith. Well, it's not definitely not saving faith, but the ability to envision a goal very, very clearly. Now, when you consider not only that you've got, that's a lot of different gifts, is it not? But now turn over to the page. And on top of that, these gifts come in clusters. How do we know that? Well, in Ephesians four, we're, we're told about a pastor slash teacher, pastor teacher. The two gifts are put together. But in first Corinthians 1239, we see the gift of just teacher. So it's possible that individual gifts can be clustered and they usually do cluster and then they modify one another. Somebody might say, why isn't there a gift of preaching? I'll tell you why there isn't a gift of preaching. Because some preachers are really exhorters. Some people are teachers. Some people are evangelists. There's no such thing as a preacher who is able to, uh, unite all the gifts and therefore reach everybody. Why isn't there a gift of counseling? You say, well, you know, some counselors are mercy types. Some counselors are teacher types. Some counselors are wisdom types. You realize every one of those is it makes you a different kind of counselor. And therefore there's different ranges of people's problems that you're good at solving and someone else will have to counsel that person over there because you're not very good at that. And when you put all this together along with the fact, look at these other paragraphs, that you might be better with children than adults or better with large groups than small groups. And then on top of that, there's different levels or powers. You know, here's a person who's awfully good at, at, uh, this gift, but here's another person who's twice as good at that gift. And yet you're, they're both gifts. You put it all together. Your gift matrix is almost as unique as a snowflake or a fingerprint. And what that means is there are certain people out there that only you can help. And there are certain deeds to do in the life of the church that only you can do. And they're just waiting for you. Ephesians 2, 8, 9, and 10 says, uh, you are God's workmanship. You've been crafted. You're a work of art. And he says, you've been prepared for good works that God has prepared beforehand for you to walk in. There's things that only you can do. Kind of exciting. Ah, you say, how do I find what those things are? Okay. Five minutes on that. And then we'll just, and then we will, uh, take questions. gifts first you have to understand two other things very crucial and these are very important first of all you have to understand the difference between gifts and fruit whenever you see in the bible fruit of the spirit love joy peace patience kindness goodness meekness self-control you're supposed every christian is supposed to have all of the fruit it's all supposed to be there you can't say well i've got love but i have no self-control sorry that's not the way it works if you're growing in one of those fruit you're growing in all of them they come together spiritual growth happens symmetrically that's a long that's a big subject we can't get into it tonight maybe maybe next month okay just had an idea but anyway however no one has all the gifts and ultimately you have to be very careful not to mistake fruit for gifts this is so crucial what do i mean by that well let me be really frank about it my spiritual fruit could be in the toilet i could be alienated from my wife my prayer life could be horrible i could be actually spiraling down spiritually but as some of you may have noticed i'm a good public speaker so i may go to a conference and there's something about the situation that draws out my gift and so i preach or i speak and i speak really well and some people have their lives changed and they constantly say oh thank you that really helped me and you know what both they and i mistake gifts for fruit in other words i feel like hey god's really with me when actually he's not it's just my gift and they think oh you must be really godly but things could be terrible be very very careful not to mistake the operation of a spiritual gift for the growth in spiritual fruit gifts without fruit is like a tire without air and you are going to collapse it is more important for you to develop your character and just let the gifts fall where they may than to worry if you're too busy using your gifts or you're too desirous to be recognized for your gifts and you're not cultivating your prayer life and you're not cultivating your walk with god and he's not real to you you're cruising for a bruising first of all gifts and fruit secondly gifts and talents we talked a little bit about this last month and that is uh you have to be very careful not to assume that something you necessarily do well as a natural talent whether you're a christian or not like public speaking or like management uh necessarily will be used inside the church in that way one of the big problems for example is if you are a big shot manager and uh you know you're doing pretty well and you clearly have a talent you might walk into the church and say i can't just usher i can't just set up chairs i'm a leader don't mistake talent for gifts don't mistake talent for service i'll get to that in a second but there's two great problems with gifts that you have to keep in mind before i actually give you my little final spiel on how to discover your gifts look at look at page three middle of the first paragraph avoid two things gift cop-out and gift projection got it here's gift cop-out every single one of the gifts you know we went through the list over on page one every single one of the gifts is also a task there's a gift of evangelism and we also know that all christians are supposed to witness right there's a gift of mercy i just said there's some people who've got this gift of mercy that they sit there they listen to you they really seem to understand you and when you're all done you want to laugh you feel so much better you know it's a kind of it's a kind of counseling gift but it's not a gift in which you give much advice well but we're all supposed to be merciful every one of the gifts is also a job a task that all christians have got to have and that means you have to be very careful not to do gift cop-out gift cop-out is to say well i'm i'm sorry i'm not gifted at evangelism so i don't have to do it i'm not gifted at help so i don't have to do it i'm not gifted at service so i don't have to do it be very careful about that don't be so sure what you're good gifted at do it all i'll get to that in a second the second mistake is gift projection and gift projection is where you look at other people who've got great gifts and you feel guilty because you don't have them and one of the one of the problems you know most of you most of you don't really know bill bright anymore he's uh he was the founder and leader of campus crusade for christ for many many years and pretty much passed off the scene but one of the things i've been told by people several people who knew him pretty well was bill bright had this very interesting ability to evangelize he was unbelievable and uh when he would get on an airplane he'd always sit alongside of somebody and it seemed like nine times out of ten by the time he out of ten. The number of stories he had to tell were incredible. So you go ahead, you try it. You see how far you get. And then you can sit there saying, I'm not a very good Christian, I can't evangelize like Bill Bright. No, that's gift projection. And one of the problems, by the way, and we don't have it, I don't think, much at Redeemer, is it's so easy, if you have a gift, it's not just gift projection, it's not just I want that gift from somebody else, but it's also easy for you to take your gift and assume everybody else ought to have it. You might be so good at evangelism, or so good at helping the poor, or so good at this, or so good at that, and you think, if this church really cared, you'd all be doing what I'm doing. And of course, that would create a church in which everybody was doing the same thing. And over the years as a minister, I've run into this, where people see their gift and they assume that everybody ought to have it when it's a gift. So you see, gift projection, gift cop out, there are two opposite errors. Now, having said that, finally, how do you discover your gift? And you remember, last month, and in the past, I've always said that if somebody's looking for God's will or God's calling, look at three things. Ability, affinity, opportunity. Remember that? Your ability is what are you good at? Affinity is what do you want to do? What's your passion? Opportunity is that God opens a door, there's something that can be done. And only when all three of those come together can you be sure God's calling you to something. Nice and neat. I've been using it for years with people all over the place, for all kinds of things. You know, whether you should go to college, whether you should take that job, what your spiritual gifts are. But here's what I'd like you to consider. If you take that model, when it comes to the church, start with opportunity. When you come into a church like Redeemer, don't say, I know what my abilities are. You don't know. I think I told you this before. When I came to New York, I had no idea I was an evangelist. It wasn't until I had to try it that I came to find out I'm really pretty good. It was a latent gift. And if I had come to New York saying, I know what my gifts are, and wasn't forced to do something I didn't think I was any good at, I never would have found that out. Don't come into the church saying, I know what my abilities are. And don't come into the church saying, I know what turns my crank. I only want to do what my passions are. Because even that is, that's not really service, is it? See what the opportunities are. Start with the opportunities. Look around and see what needs to be done. Does ushering need to be done? See, are there volunteer ministries that need to be done? Are there problems that we've got because we don't have enough people to do it? Do it. Start that way. Start with the opportunity. And if you start with the opportunity, you'll find, first of all, lots of latent gifts. Secondly, you'll get the benefits of real service. There's a danger with starting with affinity, of kind of a consumerism creeping into the spiritual gifts area. Start with opportunity. And if you do, you will find your gifts. And as time goes on, you can specialize and say, I know what I'm really good at. There we go. Maybe someone wants to ask some questions about the charismatic gifts. But I've got a little appendix there, something to read that might help. But now it's time for questions. And so if you want to ask about that, go ahead. I'll try. I'll try to be brief if I possibly can. So there it is, everything you've always wanted to know about spiritual gifts, plus quite a few things you didn't want to know about spiritual gifts. But maybe there were some things you wanted to know and I never got to, so time's up. Justin, are you still roving with a mic? No. If you don't need to, just go to the mic. Okay. Somebody's got a question? Yeah. Because of the way we're set up now, we don't need to have the roving mic. So if you've got a question, go to the mic. Or if you're right here in the front, ask me the question and I'll repeat it. I've heard talk about starting some kind of volunteer portal at Redeemer so people could sort of be funneled through and matched up with opportunities that match their gifts. Is there any progress on that? You're asking the wrong guy. I'm afraid I'm the... Yes. Listen, it's not dormant. I know there's progress made. I don't know how fast and how far. The advantage... Listen, let me tell you the reason. In a small church, volunteerism is not a problem. You know why? Because whoever asks you to do something is someone you know. No one ever asks you to do something that isn't somebody you know pretty well. And it's almost impossible to say no to somebody you know pretty well. In a large church, the needs are known either impersonally like, you know, here is the bulletin, you know, or somebody comes and asks you who you don't know and it's very easy to say no. So actually, in a large church, letting people know what the opportunities are and attracting people into the opportunities has to be much, much more deliberate, much more well-oiled, much better. the other hand, of course, the smaller church very often doesn't have anywhere near the opportunities. So, but the answer is, yeah, there is a process by which we can attract and recruit and support volunteers better, yes. Other questions about spiritual gifts? Maybe this is more of a statement, but it would seem to me that to ascertain gifts would involve somewhat being in a community where people around you help you to identify your gifts by giving you feedback as you live in your small group and so forth and so on. Yes, absolutely, Ellie. In fact, if you don't, as long as I'm very careful, let me put it this way. I remember J.I. Packer, who was a, you know, kind of prominent British theologian. I heard him give a talk when I was like 23 years old, 22 years old, in which he said, it's the job of every small group to ordain itself. And what he meant by that was, uh, when a person is, goes through formal ordination, you don't just say, God's gifted me to preach. No, you, you, you know, remember the joke is, uh, um, you know, maybe you think God's giving you a gift to preach, but maybe nobody else has got the gift of listening to you. Right, okay. So the only way we can be sure that you've got the gift to preach is other people have got to listen to you and other people have got to question you. And so there's this rigorous evaluation done. And in the end, if we say, yeah, we think you're called to preach, we ordain them. Now, what does that mean? It means the church says, yes, we confirm what is in your heart and we say, well, now actually what J.I. Packer says, you realize that every single small group ought to be doing that. Everybody ought to be ordaining everybody. Not formally, not, you know, we're not talking about bestowing authority. In fact, I don't, you know, there is no actually, there is actually no Greek word, single Greek word in the New Testament, uh, for ordain. There's a, a cluster of them, some of which mean a point. And therefore, he's fair, it's fair game for him to say that in your small group, you actually ought to be going to each other and saying, you're really good at that. You ought to do more of it. And you ought to be giving each other feedback and encouraging each other and moving each other forward. And in a certain sense, informally ordaining each other. So absolutely, that's true. Totally true. So thank you. That was a statement, but I, you know, I just tried to, it was a, it was a helpful statement that I wanted to, uh, draw out. Thank you. Other questions? Yeah. Since there haven't been a whole lot of questions directly, can you touch on the, uh, charismatic gifts quickly? Well, wait a minute. Let's, could you help me a little bit by asking me a question about it? Um. Of any sort at all? Sorry. Touch on. How should we react or respond to people who believe that their gift is one of the charismatic gifts? Oh. What amazes me that in a place like New York City over the years, this has almost never been, uh, a problematic issue. We haven't had the conflicts. I don't know why. I mean, we've obviously had plenty of people in our midst who, here's, here's how you can look at this. Um, at one end of the spectrum, charismatic gifts are usually called prophecy, tongues, interpretation of tongues, uh, healing and miracles, uh, and of word of knowledge. Some people would say the, uh, that's almost like prophecy. So, and, and in charismatic circles, uh, the, the charismatic gifts would be God has shown me this about you, you know, and God is saying to me, to you, you need to, you know, get out of that and get into that. Uh, tongues, of course, ends up being similar. You, you pray in tongues and someone interprets it and it's a message. So by and large, if you think about it, charismatic gifts are essentially in the charismatic churches, very, very direct. God is saying this to you. God is saying to me this. At the other end of the spectrum are what you might call hard cessationists and hard cessationists would say that all of the charismatic gifts that were described in the Bible are over, that they were for the apostolic age. They were there as sign gifts. And there's some case you can make for this, a big case actually, where you can say that these gifts were signs that went out before we had a Bible, when the apostles were going out with God's word, it was in aural form. And in order to, to attest to the truth of what. And that's the hard cessationists that said that when the Bible is brought together, the age of miracles is over, and you don't have signs and wonders. That's hard cessationism. No more tongues, no more prophecy, no more miraculous healings. It's over. And at Redeemer, what we have done over the years is we're part of a, our denomination requires a mild cessationism, and that is, and I'm there too, our denomination says, whatever you think God is saying to you, however you want to express it, what you sense God saying to you cannot be put on the same level as the Bible. The Bible says, you shall not commit adultery, you mustn't marry a non-Christian, you, you know, that is objective revelation. It is absolutely certain. If I think God is saying to you through me, you should quit your job, whatever that is, that's illumination at the best. That's, that's wisdom. I hope it's true. It might be right, but you just can't, you just can't say this is continuing revelation on the same level as the Bible. Now, I believe that, that you can't, whatever, whatever those gifts are that you feel of exhortation and illumination and prophecy, whatever it is, it's not words right from God that are at the same level of the Bible. And there are charismatic, very, very charismatic churches where clearly people treat prophecy in tongues as essentially just a continuation of the very same gifts that you have in the prophets, Old and New Testament. So, I'm a mild cessationist at least. And Redeemer has been a mild cessationist. We say, you're not getting new revelation. The Bible has to be our final standard. The only way you know God is speaking to you is through the Bible. And anything else you say you think God is saying to you is iffy, possible, maybe, and shouldn't be, you know, one of the worst things you can possibly do, which is the problem in charismatic churches, is to say, God has said that you too should start dating. And God wants you to be married. And, you know, five years later, it was an absolute disaster. There's an awful lot of people, well, in many cases, they just predict things that just don't even happen. And that is horribly disillusioning. So, I'm a mild cessationist in that. Now, do I believe miracles are over? I think there's an awful lot of bogus miracles, an awful lot of bogus healings. I don't think probably miracles and healing are over. So, what Redeemer has done is it's sort of staked out a kind of mild cessationist, you know, middle of the road area. Hard cessationists live in Redeemer very happily. And fairly charismatic people have lived in Redeemer very happily. And for some reason, they haven't killed each other. I mean, this is one of the advantages of, I don't know. I'm not sure why. I mean, I constantly come across people whose views on this are, but they're happy enough with Redeemer. And they're able to operate here without getting into each other's hair. But officially, we would be, you know, we're not a charismatic church. Here's how I put it. We are a non-charismatic church, but we're not an anti-charismatic church. And I think that best sums it up. Does that help a little bit? I mean, you just want me to sort of express my cast of mind toward it. And that's it, I think. So, don't be too hard. Don't argue with people, basically, about it. But if somebody's saying, God told me this, tell them this story. When David Wilkerson, who's a charismatic, came to New York to start his church about two years before me, he said, God told me to start a church in New York. When I got here, and I said, I'm starting a church in New York, people asked me, are you sure God has called you? And I said, no. I mean, I have used this illustration, but you can use it, too. I said, no, I'm not sure. I said, what? You're not sure? Why have you come here? Why have you brought your children and your wife? In fact, why did you sign that three-year lease? And I said, the only things I'm sure of, God is telling me, are in the Bible. I can't kill. I can't commit adultery. You know, the Trinity. Jesus is God. I think he's calling me here, and there's one way to find out. I'm going to try to plant the church. I really do think God is speaking to me, but I can't be sure like I can of the Bible. And so, give me three or four or five years, and then I'll tell you whether I was right. But how in the world, before I actually plant the church, can I be as sure that God has told me to plant the church as I can be, that I can't commit adultery and that Jesus is the Son of God? I don't know how you do that. In that case, that's the reason why I'm not charismatic, because a lot of charismatics are as sure that God has just told them to go plant the church as they are of what they read in the Bible, and I don't believe you should. Okay. We have another question here, but I want to ask you one quickly. Well, it's 7.50. Oh, okay. So, I'll tell you what, I'll give two 30-second answers. My question was just about, as a community, you've taught that we should be exhibiting all of the gifts. I'm curious as to... exhibiting the most. Yes, okay, you know what, that's a good question, Justin. I didn't mean to say that every individual church can have all the gifts. Uh-uh, because I'm a Presbyterian, and that means I don't believe any one congregation necessarily exhibits all the gifts. We are just part of the city church. And I would be much faster to say that the body of Christ in the city shows all the gifts. But gifts tend, just like no one person has all the gifts, right? I doubt that in any one church has all the gifts. And my guess would be that we're not as priestly as a lot of other churches. You know, churches in the poor communities are so priestly and so good at service and so good at mercy and so good at healing. And, you know, the trouble with us is, you know, you've got these PhDs and MBAs. Do you realize that when we took a survey that 15% of everybody going to Redeemer either had a doctorate or was working on it? We took that survey about five years ago. That's a way too heavy concentration of prophetic gifts, people that think they know all about it. So, I mean, that's – but you know what? If you go into the inner city where these gifts – these people are so filled with gifts of healing and mercy and all that, and the teaching and the preaching is awful. So, almost no church that I know, you know, has all the gifts and balance. What's the other question? Yeah, Bev? How do you respond or what's your advice if you have an ability and an opportunity but you're not really feeling the affinity? Yeah. I would say you give it a shot, a real shot, because it's service, Bev. In other words, if you say, I know I'm good at it and there's a need for it but I really don't enjoy it, then I think it's very Christ-like and very servant-like to do it because it meets a need and because you can do it. But in the long run, I do think you give up and find something that brings it all together. But in the short run, don't be too quick because it's good for your soul. Okay, where are we next?
