TITLE: Spiritual Gifts (Part 4)
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 4:11-16
TOPICS: Spiritual Gifts The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership)
SERIES: Spiritual Gifts
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/spiritual-gifts-part-4/

============================================================

Alrighty, let's go this way. We're looking at verses 11 to 16. It's actually in verse 7 that the subject of spiritual gifts is introduced. In verse 7 it says, but to each one of us grace was given as Christ apportioned it. Now, the grace that Jesus is talking, or that Paul's talking about there, is not saving grace because in verses 1 to 6 he's talking about saving grace. He says there's one Lord, one faith, one baptism. We talked about that last week. And so, because he's talking about what it means to be saved and what it means to be a Christian, what it means to be a converted person, when he gets to verse 7 and he starts talking about grace, he wouldn't use the word but if he was still talking about the grace that brings us into the kingdom and into the family of God. Instead, the word grace here is referring to strength, ability. Jesus Christ has tremendous ability to serve people and transform them. And in verse 7 we're told that Jesus' grace, his own ministering ability, his ability to affect people, to serve them, to meet their needs in such a way as they're changed and transformed. That Jesus is dividing up that grace and dividing up that ability into us. And he's giving parts of it. He's breaking it down into constituent parts and he's distributing it as he will. Now, verses 8, 9, and 10 we looked at last week. There, Paul gets into a kind of parenthesis. He gets off on a tangent just for a couple of verses and how grateful we are. Because what he does in those verses is he explains why Jesus is in a position to give grace, give gifts to everybody. And what he does, Paul tells us, is because when Jesus Christ came to earth, he overcame all of the forces that bind us. He overcame evil. He overcame sin. He overcame death. Everything that keeps us in a state of bondage. Everything that keeps us from being what we should be. Everything that keeps us in a state of decay and disintegration. And therefore, Paul says, you know, he's saying to everybody, though we don't know because he lived in a different time. He says, you know how when a conquering king comes back to his city after he's conquered his enemies, that he takes the wealth that he won when he conquered those enemies. And instead of keeping it all for himself, as he goes back into a city, as he's bringing his captives back in his train, he throws out the wealth that he has won so all the people share it. He gives gifts. And therefore, Paul says, don't you realize what the gifts of the Spirit are? The gifts of the Spirit are abilities to liberate people. We are given power in our lives, and we're going to be exploring that tonight, just how that power divides up. We're given power in our lives to serve people, to minister to people, to give ourselves to people, to help people, but with a supernatural power that comes from Jesus. Because he liberated us, and now he is giving us out of his wealth, out of all that he won and conquered, he's giving us his conquering power. He's giving us his kingdom power. And therefore, when he ascended on high, when he came back after defeating death, he led captivity captive, and he gave gifts to men. That's what Paul's talking about. But now when he gets to verse 11, he gets back to the subject. That he introduced in verse 7. And that subject is the different gifts. And right away, he says, it was he who gave some to be apostles, some to be prophets, some to be evangelists, to be pastors and teachers. Verse 13, verse 12, to prepare God's people for works of service. Now, in the older translations, it says, it doesn't say prepare God's people, but actually it says, for the perfecting of the saints for the work of ministry. The old King James, the authorized version, says the perfecting of the saints. Now, the word perfect that's translated here, prepare, is a very, very specific word. You medical people might find it interesting. It means to take something that's out of joint and put it back into joint. You see, you know, if my arm is out of joint, it's fairly closely connected still to my shoulder, but it's not in perfect alignment. And therefore, there's great pain. And some of you who know how to do this, because you were trained, you can go up, then you can go, and suddenly, my dislocated, my arm is located. It's located, it's in proper alignment. And that is what Paul is saying. It's supposed to be happening. It's happening through equipping ministries, which I'm going to talk about in a second. But the thing that we should be striving for is to recognize that when people come together in the church, you're sitting alongside of each other, but the Bible here is saying you're dislocated. It's great to all be together, and you have some rough questions. really know how you should be serving. You don't really know yourself like you should. You don't really know how you should be serving here and how you should be fitting into the whole. We're so new that we are more dislocated, I would think, than the average congregation of people. But you see, the point here is we're all out of alignment, and what God wants is for every part of the body to get into perfect alignment for the work of ministry. And the work of ministry means every part of the body has a function. Everyone who's a Christian is a minister. And when we are located properly, every part of the body is ministering. Now, what's interesting here is Paul tells us that if you want to be located, if you want to be put into the right spot in the body, if you want to come to understand your gift, if you want to be properly aligned in the body of Christ, you have got to be subject to equipping ministries. And those equipping ministries are the ministries of apostles, prophets, evangelists, and teachers. They're the ones who perfect the saints, prepare God's people for works of service, for the work of the ministry. They're the ones that help everybody get aligned. Now, who are these people? Who are the apostles and prophets and evangelist teachers? Well, we've got to look at it, just briefly at least. First, I told you there's a lot to cover, so take a breath. Ready? Fasten your seatbelts. We go like this. Apostles. Apostles were a body body of men. There were 12 of them, or depending how you count, 13. And it was an office that was absolutely once for all and not possible to be reproduced. For example, Paul was an apostle and he says, no man ordained me, he says in the beginning of Galatians, but I was appointed by Jesus Christ. And the reason Paul says that is because Paul says in 1 Corinthians 9, am I not an apostle? Have I not seen the risen Lord? An apostle had to be someone who had seen the risen Lord. Not the way you and I have seen him, with the eyes of faith. Not even by a vision. Paul tells us in 1 Corinthians 15 that the risen Christ literally and physically appeared to a whole lot of people, to his apostles, to a bunch of folks. And then he says in 1 Corinthians 15, last of all, as to one untimely born, he showed himself to me, whom the least of the apostles. Now that is an extremely important verse for understanding this whole passage and even understanding what it means to get located. Because what Paul is saying is, I'm an apostle because I saw the risen Christ and I'm the last one to see him. An apostle was someone who could not be reproduced. It's true that when Judas was discovered to be a reprobate, they cast lots and they appointed a man named Matthias. Some people think that maybe the apostles blew it and God came and appointed Paul and he should have been in there. That's the reason why some people say 12, some 13. But the most important thing is that when James the apostle is killed early in the book of Acts, there is no effort to replace him because only Jesus can ordain an apostle. The reason it was so important is the apostles brought unadulterated, objective truth, revelation right from the mouth of God. In John 16, Jesus says that when I've ascended, I'll send the comforter, he says to his apostles in John 16, and the comforter, the Holy Spirit will help you remember everything I said, and he will lead you into all truth. Paul immediately says in Ephesians, earlier in Ephesians chapter 3, he says, you've heard of the teaching that was given to me by revelation. The apostles had got truth that came right from the mouth of God. And you know what's so strange is when you read the writings of Paul, you see here's a humble man, a very humble man. And yet, at the end of the book, there's places, for example, in the book of Thessalonians, where he says, now this is what I tell you, and if you don't believe it, if anybody will not accept what I teach, cast him out. Or, at the end of the book of 1 Corinthians, 1 Corinthians 14, and I'll get back to this in a minute, Paul says, when the prophets stand up and they begin to teach, he says, when they're all done, let them sit down and judge whether or not what they said was right, and judge them by what I have told you as an apostle. You see, Paul would never say, judge my, you know, read my letter and decide whether or not I'm right. He says we have to judge whether the prophets are telling the truth or not, but you never judge an apostle. The apostle was one. died how did the church form the scripture how did the church bring together the new testament scriptures so they were all together in a book they said we have got to have the writings of the apostles or the writings of their immediate circle their their amanuens their uh their uh their assistants their teaching assistants we've got to have the apostolic teaching because that's what scripture is and they pulled it on together and they formed the canon of the scripture and what you've got now the apostolic ministry that builds you up that edifies the saints it says here the apostles prepare god's people for works of ministry so the body of might be built up where is the apostolic ministry today it's in the word it's in the word of god the written word of god when jesus when paul left the apostles uh when he left the ephesians pardon me when he left the ephesians in acts chapter 20 he says i leave you with the word of grace the scripture which is able to build you up now he was only talking about the old testament at that point because the apostles weren't dead and the apostles were living revealers and teachers what's fascinating is the very thing he says the word of grace that is able to build you up is the very thing that the apostles are said to do here the apostles bring you the truth and the apostolic office is a non-repeatable thing in the history of the church there have been numbers of folks that have come along and insisted that the apostles have been restored and i'm one of them and here's the truth and we can now write new books of the scripture i can give you new revelation that goes on beyond the scripture every single one of those movements has ended in disaster and if you want to be located that means if you want to make sure you're being equipped that means you have got to make sure that you are sitting under ministries in which the word of god is being broken to you like bread is broken you can find yourself being built up you are fed with it the ministry of the word in small groups the ministry of the word in your own life of study but also the ministry of the word in the public teaching of it absolutely critical because the apostolic ministry is found in the word then you got prophets now what in the world were prophets what's i already alluded to this and this is a little bit harder to get a hold of but i'm i think i can make it clear when the prophets prophets were itinerating they were traveling preachers and teachers they were like the apostles and then they traveled around they didn't stay in one church but they moved around they came to churches and they would get up and they would preach several of them you'll notice something what the prophets were teaching was not at all at the same level as what the apostles were teaching because it because uh in first corinthians 14 paul says you make sure you judge the prophets he never allowed the apostles to be judged but the prophets had to be judged why because the prophets were not bringing the same kind of revelation that was unadulterated and had to be accepted as as if it was coming right from the words of god's mouth instead the prophets were giving very very uh they were taking the word of god they were taking the truth and they were applying it they were preaching it they were bringing it home with insight and conviction with power to people's lives but they could err they could make mistakes there are marvelous preachers and teachers but on the other hand paul says judge them make sure that they're judged according to the apostolic standard then you had evangelists now evangelists from what we can tell were very similar to prophets these were people with the spiritual gift of being able to relate people outside the faith to christ they too were traveling they were public speakers they enhanced the uh ministry of the uh the apostles and prophets but then lastly you come to pastors teachers and the pastor teacher now i'll explain this in a minute the pastor teacher was the main office or the main equipping ministry that was resident that stayed put that was in the church now you notice you're looking at your bible and it probably says pastors and teachers but the the problem with that translation is that there's no little word and in the greek there in the original language it's not there literally what paul says some to be apostles some to be prophets some to be evangelists and to be pastor teachers teachers and if you want to know what that is that's what i am that's what they quote the ministry now it's unfortunate that we have come over the years to be so dead and so uh uh ignorant about the teaching of this passage is that we the only people that we tend to call pastor teachers pardon me the only people that we call ministers are the pastor teachers is that fair you know the pastor teachers are supposed to equip people for the ministry for the ministry for the ministry I'll see you next time. form of clericalism. Clericalism is really a way of saying, just you ordained professional pastor-teacher types, you're the only ministers, the rest of us can sit back and watch and applaud you do the ministry. That, of course, is completely unbiblical, and we see it right here in this passage. But, on the other hand, let's not forget that this is an equipping ministry. And a pastor-teacher has obviously got two sides to the office. The pastor, the pastoral side means that a pastor guides people, gets involved in their lives, moves them along and nurtures them and helps them grow. That's the personal side. But then there's the teacher side, which is the public teaching of the Word of God. As you probably know, some of these people, some of the people in this office, pastor-teachers, some of them are a lot better teachers than they are pastors. Great at public communication, one-on-one guidance, nurture, not as good. Some people are far better as pastors than they are as teachers. Really good at personal working in your life and dealing with your life and applying the Word of God one-on-one. But when it comes to the public, keeping your attention, you know, in public teaching, not so good. But, both of those things are involved in the office. And a person who's got that office has got to have both those gifts. You put those four together, and today, as far as I can see, apart from the apostolic gift, which is in the Word of God, if you want to be perfected, in the sense of this word, for the work of ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ, you have got to make sure that you're not just a Lone Ranger Christian, jumping all around, reading books every so often. You've got to say, I have got to come under the equipping ministries. I've got to put myself under the equipping ministries, or I'm not going to be located properly. And it's very, very important. Now, for works of service, and here we go. Some people say, well, that's great. That's nice. It's very nice to know about those ministries, and it's great to see people who've got those kinds of gifts. Public gifts, teaching gifts, ministry gifts, great. What about the rest of us? Now, if you want to know about the rest of you, you have to go to other passages, and we can't turn to them, but I'm going to give you a little synopsis. In the scripture, you've got in Romans chapter 12, and in 1 Corinthians 12 and 1 Corinthians 14, and in 1 Peter 4, verses 8, 9, and 10, and in the passage right here, you've got lists of gifts. Let me give you, after a good number of years of study and pastoral work, what I think those different gifts in that list mean. I'm just going to give you a quick list of them, and just tell you something about all the gifts that are listed. And I don't want you to think that the gifts that I'm telling you about are all the gifts there are. They're just the ones that are listed in the scripture. My guess is that every one of these individual lists that Paul gives us is an illustrative list. It's not supposed to be exhaustive, and therefore, probably, if you put all the lists together, it's not exhaustive either. But here's the ones that are mentioned. One of the gifts is called the gift of exhortation. Para kaleo. You know what? It's pretty easy to tell what that word means. Kaleo means to call, but para means to come alongside. And to exhort means not to say, do this. That's prophecy or teaching. But para kaleo is the ability to encourage. It's a kind of a counseling gift. It's an ability to come alongside and to make people really feel like, hey, this person understands me, and to motivate that person to growth. Exhortation. Another gift is teaching. The gift of teaching is the ability to communicate spiritual truths in such a way that people retain them. If you're a teacher, people remember what you say. If you're a teacher, people learn. There's a lot of people who think they have the gift of teaching, but nobody learns from them. There's a lot of people who think they've got the gift of exhortation, but nobody gets better. If you have these gifts, there's real effectiveness. Thirdly, gift of prophecy. The way I'm explaining it, and I'll get back to this in a minute, as far as I understand, the gift of prophecy is just really, it's a cross between exhorting and teaching. It's the ability to apply the Word of God to people in a very convicting way, in a very applicable way. You know, when Nathan came to David, after David had married Bathsheba, and had her husband killed so he could marry her, and Nathan comes to him and says, David, let me tell you a story. There was once a man that had a hundred sheep, and there was another man who only had one little lamb. And the man with a hundred sheep coveted the lamb. And the man with a hundred sheep coveted the lamb. for his own. What should we do with that man, Nathan? And David, being as dumb as a person possibly could be, David says, Well, we string him up, you know, arrest him, draw and quarter him. And Nathan looked at him for about five seconds and said, Thou art the man. That's prophecy, buddies. That's prophecy. And if you have ever heard somebody say something to you that takes spiritual truth and to speak it, it doesn't have to necessarily be prophetic. It doesn't have to be in a public meeting like this. It doesn't have to be like that. And it just comes right home. You hear him saying, Thou art the one. That's prophecy. Another gift is pastoring. We already mentioned it. But listen, a lot of you have pastoral gifts. The word pastor means shepherd. It means it's the ability to maintain responsibility for someone else's spiritual growth. If you're a pastor, you may not be a good counselor or exhorter. You may not be a good teacher. You may not be the prophetic type, you know, the person who just has got that insight and can go right to the root of things. And yet, you've got this tender-hearted ability to move somebody along, to kind of take somebody under your wing and really see them grow. That's a pastoral gift. All right? Then you've got evangelist. The evangelistic gift is the ability to relate well to people outside. You know, a lot of you are Christians because you heard lots of people talk about Jesus Christ and Christianity, and they might as well have been speaking a foreign language. All that jargon. You just couldn't figure it out. And one day you talked to somebody who you said, you know, this person's a Christian. They believe all that stuff that I find so absolutely far-fetched. And yet, I believe this person. This person seems to understand me. This person is very believable. I want to talk more. I feel like I can trust this person. This person seems like they thought it out. This person was an evangelistic gift. They've got the ability to relate to people outside the fold. Then you've got the gift of discernment. What is the gift of discernment? It's the ability to judge motives. Now, let me tell you something. The people who've got the gift of discernment know something about their own motives. Everybody wants the gift of discernment. Everybody thinks they've got the gift of discernment. You know, everybody thinks, I know where you're coming from. It is one of the banes of my existence as a pastor are people who are sure they've got the gift of discernment. People that have got the gift of discernment do not get on their high horse about it because they also know about their own heart. They also know about their own motives. They also know about their own ego. Then there's the gift of, there's a missionary gift. In Ephesians 3, Paul talks about the fact that God gave him the gift of going to the Gentiles. You know what the missionary gift is? The missionary gift is the ability to do any of the things I'm talking about cross-culturally. There's some people that are wonderful in exhortation, but they cannot deal with a person from another culture and do it. And there's other people who can take one of their gifts and just go right across the culture and they're just as good in one culture or almost as good as they are in another. The missionary gift is the ability to exercise the other gifts in a cross-cultural situation. Now, those are talking gifts, prophetic gifts. Jesus was a prophet and a priest and a king. And therefore, we also can expect that we are given his gifts. So there's prophetic gifts, and I mention them to you. Exhortation, teaching, prophecy, pastoring, evangelist, discernment, missionary. These are yakking gifts, right? These are those of us who'd like to talk, you know, and that's the way that God has given us a gift. But that's not the only kind of gift. Then there are priestly gifts. And those are serving gifts. And they're listed in Romans 12 and in 1 Corinthians 12. For example, there's the gift of giving. What is that? Well, if somebody says, couldn't be me? I'm not very well off. I'm not rich. How can I have the gift of giving? It's the gift of giving, not the gift of earning. Some of you have not got the gift of earning. And you know it. But you've got the gift of giving. Because the gift of giving means the ability to spot very practical needs and meet the need. And when you give, you give in a way that bears tremendous spiritual fruit. Haven't you met people like that? Then there's the gift of service. The diaconal gift. That's the ability to meet spiritual, not spiritual, but physical material needs in a way that bears spiritual fruit. The person who says, there's nothing I like better than doing breakfast at St. Paul's Shelter for homeless men. I love it. Not only that, but it seems like when I do it, I can see that I'm able to encourage people and I'm building people up. That's a diaconal gift. That's the gift of service. There's the gift of helps. gift of assistance. Some of you don't like this, but you need to submit to your gift. You're born assistance. That means you have got the ability to get behind somebody else and free them up. You've got the ability to invest yourself in other individuals. It's not an upfront gift. It's not a spotlight gift. It's a critical gift. And it's so much like Jesus Christ. But more than Jesus Christ, it's like the Spirit. Because the Holy Spirit, Jesus says, when the Spirit comes, He will not speak of Himself. But He will testify of me. He will take of mine and glorify me. And therefore, a person with the gift of helps is a person very much like the Spirit. Who's like a floodlight. You know, a floodlight makes you see the building, but you can't even see where the light's coming from. You can't see the floodlight in the light of the floodlight. And so the people with the gift of helps. Then there's the gift of mercy. The gift of mercy is the ability to love the unlovely and to alleviate suffering. It's also a very practical gift. It's a gift of a person who doesn't mind changing the diapers in a nursing home. It's a person who can deal with people that most of us normal types don't have a stomach for. It's a person who can deal with suffering. Now, it doesn't mean that a person with the gift of mercy can't burn out. But it means you've got a desire and you've got a capacity that other people don't have. You've also got the gift of hospitality that's mentioned in 1 Peter 4. And that's the ability, again, you don't have to have a mansion to have a gift of hospitality. It means you can take not your money so much as your, not just your living quarters either, but your resources and you know how to refresh people with them. Those are priestly gifts, serving gifts. So you have your prophetic, you have your priestly, and then you've got your kingly gifts. And those are leading gifts. And there's four at least that the Bible mentions. First of all, there's the gift of governments or leadership that's mentioned in 1 Corinthians 12. And the gift of leadership means the ability, let me tell you something. A lot of people want to be leaders. I've been thinking about leadership for a long time. You know what leadership is? You want to hear the ultimate definition? A leader is somebody who gets people to follow. That's it. You can say, no, a leader is someone who talks loud. A leader is someone who's got poise. A leader is someone who's organized. Oh no, none of those things necessarily. The essence of leadership is you get people to follow. You have a goal, and you can unite people to get behind it and go with it. That's what leadership is. Then there's another gift called the gift of administration. And the gift of administration is a little different. In fact, the gift of administration, when it's described in 1 Corinthians 12, is a Greek word that means a helmsman. On a ship, the helmsman was the person who steered, not the captain. See, the person who would get the leadership is a captain. The captain says, we're going to this longitude. We're going in this direction. Let's set sail. The helmsman's got to decide how to get there. The helmsman has to decide, well, how's the wind going, and whether the sail should be up or down, and so forth. The helmsman is the person not so much who gets people to follow, as the helmsman is the person who knows the most efficient way to get from here to there. The helmsman is an administrator. The helmsman is a very organized person. A leader does not have to be organized, and in many cases, they are not. An organized person sees gray areas. An organized person is very sensitive and sees all kinds of nuances and all kinds of qualifications, and that might make you a bad leader. Because to be a good leader, you've got to see things in black and white. Very often, a leader is an impatient person, an administrator a tremendously patient person. And then you've got the gift of wisdom. Ah, what's the gift of wisdom, you say? Well, the gift of wisdom and knowledge, in my mind, is the ability to solve problems. It's like the sermon, only not for individuals, it's for situations. And lastly, there's the gift of faith. Well, somebody says, what's the gift of faith? The gift of faith is not saving faith. The gift of faith is the ability to set goals with tremendous confidence. And a person with the gift of faith is constantly being able to show the rest of us where God wants us to go. Setting vision. A person with tremendous optimism based on the truths of the kingdom of God. Now, when you take a look at that, don't you see, when you look at all that, don't you see that any effort to try to bring about unity in the church by making everybody the same is a tremendous heresy? The cults make everybody the same. In cults, cults are like cookie cutters. Everybody's got to look the same. Everybody's got to act the same. They use the same kind of language. They do the same sorts of things. But the glorious unity of the body of Christ is based on its diversity. At the Spirit of God pulls together... the whole body begins to work now somebody says ah there's some gifts you you uh you skipped you skipped a couple what about tongues and interpretation of tongues what about miracles and healing and and i'm not you know and that sort of thing these are what are these are gifts that are specially highlighted in the charismatic and pentecostal movement i haven't skipped them i'm just getting to them now i waited to the end because when people were starting to get tired and they're starting to get sleepy i wanted something to wake you up all right now i'm not going to uh i have put on four in eight point helvetic type on your on your handout a lot of information that i didn't want to go into verbally you can take it back you can take a look at it i'll give you the i'll give you the broad ramifications of it my own belief is that there are several sets of gifts that are highlighted in the charismatic movement and they basically surround three issues you've got the baptism of the spirit issue and in the in the old pentecostal movement and to some degree in the in the charismatic movement which are which are basically uh the same thing the pentecostal movement is the early 20th century original movement and emphasis on tongues and healing the charismatic movement is something that's come about in the last uh you know 20 years which is more trans-denominational it's not just in the pentecostal denominations like the assembly of god but it's trans-denominational so i'm using the word kind of interchangeably for a moment the baptism of the spirit the old pentecostal said tongues is a sign of being spirit-filled and interpretation of tongues is a sign of being spirit-filled that's one issue then you have revelation issue and there's a lot of folks that say that prophecy and the word of knowledge and the word of wisdom that are listed in the gift lists are ways in which we today can receive messages from god and we get up and we need to speak them to one another in our public assemblies and that's another group of charismatic gifts that are under the revelation issue then lastly you've got what i'll call the um uh the healing issue and that is what is the place of healing and miracles in the church today now what i'm going to tell you i'd like to give you a position in all three that as far as i understand is a balance and i don't some of you especially if you're newer christians you may have had very little real teaching on the subject a lot of you have had strong teaching on the subject from one point of view i can most guarantee you that wherever you've been before you didn't get this kind of teaching because whenever i give it people who have had strong teaching are mad at me from both sides from both sides let me show you why what number one i do believe definitely that beyond the work of of the holy spirit coming into your life upon conversion that we do need to ask for the fullness of the spirit i do believe and we've talked about this before we can't go into it tonight we talked about it several months ago that the spirit of god can come upon us when we ask for it and give us high assurance and an anointing with power and boldness you see it in acts chapter four you see it in acts chapter 13 you call for it you ask for it the spirit to descend on you and it does it can he can the spirit comes on down there is an assurance of who you are in christ you see there's an inferential assurance that we all have day in and day out if you're living a christian life if you've given your life to christ if you're if you're trusting in jesus christ and not in your good works you infer that you're a christian you ask me today do you know you're a christian and i say yes i'm sure i'm a christian and i and i infer it i get it out of uh the fact that i've seen myself grow i've seen myself for use i've trusted christ and not my works for salvation that's inferential but there's also intuitive assurance and intuitive assurance means the spirit bears witness with my spirit romans 8 16 the spirit comes alongside of me and says yes you are my son in whom i'm well pleased and you sense the love of god and you sense a high assurance of who you are in his economy and in his family and it brings you a boldness and it brings you a love and it brings you a power and and that is an experience that we need to ask for in the church and that's an experience that godly people receive and there is a real problem i find because because the charismatic churches emphasize that experience there's a problem that non-charismatic people become very anti that kind of talk and they don't like to talk about the fullness of the spirit and they don't like to talk about the anointing of power i think that's a mistake but i also know absolutely know that you cannot say that tongues that tongues to talk on their own that i think that tongues I like to talk about the anointing of power. I think that's a mistake. But I also know, absolutely know, that you cannot say that tongues is a sign, a necessary sign, an inevitable sign of that filling. It doesn't say so in the Bible. It says, Paul says, do all speak in tongues? And the answer to that, of course, is what? No. Do all prophesy? Do all pray in tongues? Do all do these things? Tongues is a gift, and it's a gift that has to do with me talking to God. It does not say in 1 Corinthians 14 that if it's God talking to man. I have heard many times people pray in tongues, and then somebody get up and give an interpretation in which God is saying, Oh, my children, I'm, it's almost, you know, all my children, I'm coming soon, love one another. And yet Paul specifically says in 1 Corinthians 14, verse 2, A person who prays in tongues does not speak to men, but is speaking to God. Right? You have to understand that. As far as I understand tongues, it's free vocalization. It's a way of praising God and praying to God in a language you don't know. But it is not revelation from God to man. It says so. All right? It's not a miracle either. There's no indication it's a miracle. And I'll tell you one other thing that some people are going to be surprised at. I don't see the Bible teaching that somebody else can interpret your tongue. It says very clearly in 1 Corinthians 14, If you pray in a tongue in public, and be very careful when you do, he says, you better make sure that you interpret it so people can understand what you're saying. The point is, tongues is not a miracle. When you pray in tongues, you're doing free vocalization. You're singing. You're singing in jazz. I have never prayed in tongues, but one of the first times I ever prayed with my wife, she prayed with me in tongues. And this is not my idea. This is our understanding of the Scripture. One person who's never done it, one person who has. When you're praying in tongues, you're singing. Just like if you sat down on a piano and began to play without music, you're singing to God, and you can interpret that. You can't translate it. Absolutely not. But you can interpret it. You can say, this is what's on my heart. Now, I see no indication in the Scripture that tongues is a sign of the fullness of the Spirit. But I see it as a gift. It's not for everybody. It's not revelation. It's not something through which God is speaking to us. All right? And that's a balance. Yes, seek the anointing. Seek the power. But don't expect it to be a sign of tongues being the sign of it. The second balance. I've got two, and I've got just enough time to get these in. The second balance is revelation. Dear friends, one of the biggest problems, I think, that has come up in the last 20 years is people who believe that the gifts of prophecy and the gifts of wisdom and knowledge are messages from God, object of revelation, the sort of thing that only the apostles have ever had. And that when I feel in my spirit, God telling me something about you or you, I can get up and I can say, I've got a word of prophecy. I've got a word of knowledge. You should get married to this person. We need to sell the building. This is God's word. Now, there is no indication anywhere of that sort of thing. Even the prophets in the New Testament, whatever you think about prophecy, they had to be judged when they got up and said something. They were not supposed to be, nothing they said was supposed to be received as God's word in the same way that the apostles did. Friends, you can be illuminated. You get illumination, but you don't get revelation. God can work on your heart and lead you in some powerful ways, but you must always make sure that you carefully test that out. Let me give you a quick example. George Whitefield, one of the greatest men in history, saw thousands of people come to Christ under his ministry. He had one son born to him, a little baby John, and he preached several days after John was born, and he got up and he said, God has shown me that John is going to grow up to be a great preacher. Six months later, John died of pneumonia. And Whitefield went into a tremendous time of reflection, and he said, you know what? God leads me. God shows me these things. God gives me illumination. But it's not the same as revelation. I've got to test it out. I was carried away with my ego. I made a prophecy, and I brought God into disrepute because of it. I acted as if I'd had a message from God. He repented of that, and a lot of us have got to repent of that. When somebody asked me, were you called by God to come to New York City? I can tell you when God called me, but I wasn't sure about it until just a few months ago, even though it was years ago that he called. He came, and I began to say, hey, I think God's calling me to New York. But if I'd gotten up the day after that first sensation and said, God's called me to New York City, I'd be doing exactly what Whitefield said. How do I know it's not my ego? How do I know it's not my indigestion? I have got to take the word... standards, and I've got to test the spirits. Now, some people will say, I was called by God to go to New York City on October 21st, 1984, and I went. He got up on October 25th and told everybody about it. But, I think, that definitely is taking to yourself apostolic prerogatives. On the other hand, do I believe God calls? Do I believe God gives us leading? Do I believe He guides us? Absolutely. Absolutely. Do I believe God can put strong impressions on my heart and give me burdens that I have to test out and say, I think God's leading me in this way? Absolutely. A lot of people don't like to hear me say that. It's a balance. Last balance. Final balance. A lot of people say, hey, don't tell me that God spoke to you and told you to go to New York City. Well, there's a sense in which He did. I don't like to use that language because I don't want to take apostolic prerogatives, but I know He leads like that. On the other hand, it's illumination, not revelation. It's subjective. It's inward. It's easily mistaken. It's easily mixed up with my flesh. I've got to test the spirits. Lastly, healing. Healing. Dear friends, do I believe, does the Bible teach that we should pray and expect God to heal people physically and to do miracles like that? Of course. James chapter 5 says, it commands us when a person is sick to call for the elders of the church, to lay hands on him, to anoint him with oil, and to pray that he be raised up. On the other hand, listen, what makes anybody think that the gifts and the miracle of healing are to be operating within any other framework than the framework of prayer? Prayer. The framework of prayer is that if you ask God for something, God will either give it to you or He'll give you something better. But He does not always give you what you ask for. Or I'll put it this way. When you pray to God, God will always give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything He knows. God will always give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything He knows. And what makes you think that healing would be any different? What makes you think that you can command God and say, we've got to do healing? God, you have to do it. And if it doesn't happen, it's a lack of faith on your part. Why would that be any different than anything else? The Bible tells us that Jesus was turned down on a prayer. That Paul was turned down on a prayer for healing when he said, let this thorn pass from me. Remember? He prayed for the thorn in the flesh, which was for sure some kind of physical malady. And God said, no, because I've got some purpose for it in your life. Do I believe in healing? Should we say that healing miracles have ceased? No way. But on the other hand, do we believe that healing operates differently than prayer? No, it operates inside the framework of prayer. Now, did you get that? The glory of the body of Christ is the diversity of the gifts. We have got to have them working. You have got to get located. You've got to find yourself out. And the way to do that is to grow under the word of grace, which is able to build you up. Let's close. Our Father, we thank you that you tell us so much. So much about who we are. We've just taken a helicopter ride, a breathtaking look at all of the various ways in which you might be working in our lives. Help us to locate ourselves. Help us to find our gifts. Help us to have, in this particular congregation, a balanced understanding of your revelation, of your healing, and of the anointing and power of your spirit. Help us to enable us to be a church that celebrates and lifts up the gifts of the spirit. And we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
