TITLE: Suffering and Glory
SCRIPTURE: Acts 7:1, 35-39, 51-8:1
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Acts: The Gospel in the City
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/suffering-and-glory/

============================================================

Our scripture reading this morning is from the book of Acts, chapters 7 and 8. Then the high priest asked him, are these charges true? This is the same Moses whom they had rejected with the words, who made you ruler and judge? He was sent to be their ruler and deliverer by God himself, through the angel who appeared to him in the bush. He led them out of Egypt and did wonders and miraculous signs in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and for 40 years in the desert. This is that Moses who told the Israelites, God will send you a prophet like me from your own people. He was in the assembly in the desert with the angel who spoke to him on Mount Sinai and with our fathers, and he received living words to pass on to us. But our fathers refused to obey him. Instead, they rejected him and in their hearts turned back to Egypt. You stiff-necked people with uncircumcised hearts and ears, you are just like your fathers. You always resist the Holy Spirit. Was there ever a prophet your fathers did not persecute? They even killed those who predicted the coming of the righteous one. And now you have betrayed and murdered him. You who have received the law that was put into effect through angels, but have not obeyed it. When they heard this, they were furious and gnashed their teeth at him. But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked up to heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. Look, he said, I see heaven opened and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. At this, they covered their ears and yelling at the top of their voices, they all rushed at him, dragged him out of the city and began to stone him. Meanwhile, the witnesses laid their clothes at the feet of a young man named Saul. While they were stoning him, Stephen prayed, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit. Then he fell on his knees and cried out, Lord, do not hold this sin against them. When he had said this, he fell asleep. And Saul was there giving approval to his death. On that day, a great persecution broke out against the church at Jerusalem and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria. This is the word of the Lord. So we're in the book of Acts, of course, and the book of Acts is about the beginnings of the Christian church. And we go there to learn what it was that gave the early Christians and the early Christian church its power, so much power. And one of the things we're learning, we've seen it before, but again, we come up against it today, one of the things that gave the early Christians such power was how they faced suffering. Their ability to face suffering was a big part of their power. Recently, I've been reading books about how different cultures in history and different cultures in the world equip their members to both understand and respond to suffering. Peter Berger, who's a famous sociologist, says that every culture in history has provided its members with, here's his quote, quote, an explanation that bestows meaning upon the experiences of suffering and evil. Hear that? Every culture has always given its people an explanation that bestows meaning on the experiences of suffering and evil. An explanation so that when you do face terrible pain and suffering, you can respond to it, you can face it, you can get through it. But the one thing I found interesting was that the sociologists and the anthropologists I was reading all said that modern Western culture, what we're living in here, was one of the worst cultures in history at giving people equipment for handling suffering. Essentially, Western culture gives people no explanation. And therefore, we're on our own. And this comes up, actually, this was evident in a column in the New York Times on Christmas Day, the Maureen Dowd's column, after the Newtown shootings. And it was entitled, Why God? Why God? Question mark. And it was about the Newtown shootings. And she actually, most of the column was printing something that a priest that she knew had... there. And of course immediately there were hundreds of hundreds of comments immediately came in. And most of them disagreed with the priest, what the priest said. But what was most interesting was they all disagreed in such wildly divergent ways. Some people talked about karma. That's how they understood and faced suffering. Some people evoked Buddhist approaches to the illusory nature of reality and suffering. Some people talked about the fact that the afterlife and reunion with our loved ones was how you faced suffering. And some people said this world is all we got. And so the only response to suffering is to make the world a better place in the future. In other words, just what the sociologists and anthropologists said. Western culture doesn't give, our society doesn't give us a coherent way to understand and face and respond to suffering. So what we do is we go to all these other different cultures and religions and everybody's on their own. We're pulling it from here. We're pulling it from there. Our culture does not help us face suffering. It's one of the worst in history. In medieval Europe, 17th century, 16th century, 15th century, in medieval Europe, one out of every four or five infants died before their first birthday. And one out of every two children died before they reached the age of 10. And that was normal. Half of your children you buried when they were still little. And yet we know from the journals, from the diaries, from all sorts of documents, that our ancestors took suffering in stride way better than we do, even though they had a far more difficult life. Why? Why are we so bad? Well, that's a big subject. And actually, I'm only going to get back to it briefly at the end of the sermon. I'll give you some ideas on that. What's most important and what was most gratifying to me was that all these cultural anthropologists and sociologists, you know, being scientists, they were trying to be very objective. But all of them admitted that Christianity has been one of the very best of all the systems of thought in helping people deal with suffering over the ages. Why? Only Buddhism and Christianity make suffering at the very heart of their teaching about reality. And Buddhism actually tries to help you escape suffering. Only Christianity basically says this is the way that you enter glory and greatness, and here's how you can defeat it. So Christianity has always been very good at helping people understand and respond to suffering. And one of the ways we'll understand those great resources, Christianity gives us to look at the story and the speech of Stephen, who's the very first person to die for his faith in the book of Acts. And let's look at this passage by noticing what Stephen said, what Stephen saw, and then what Stephen did. What he said, what he saw, what he did. Now, what Stephen said, Stephen was one of the very first deacons, if you remember, or whatever we're going to call those people in Acts 6. I wasn't here last week, but if you were, you know that there were seven men that were put by the apostles over the daily distribution for poor widows, and Stephen was one of them. But he was also a dynamic preacher, and he began a preaching ministry, and he was arrested, and he was pulled up before the Sanhedrin, the ruling council. And that's where he is when this passage starts. And he was accused. The accusation is back in chapter 6. But in chapter 6, 13 and 14, he's dragged before the council, and the accusation is this fellow speaks against the temple and the law and says that because of Jesus of Nazareth, we don't need the temple or the law of God anymore. And that's why verse 1, you see here, chapter 7, verse 1, then the high priest asked him, are these charges true? And he begins a speech. Now, this is, by the way, I want a little sympathy because the hardest thing about preaching on the story of Stephen is that this is an incredibly long speech. It's the longest speech in the book of Acts, and you couldn't possibly print it all and go through it line by line. So what I'm about to do is try to summarize it for you. It's also a hard speech to summarize because it's so long. I've been working on it all my career as a minister. But I feel, in many ways, I am more clear on it than I've ever been today. That's good for you. He was asked, I'm going to recap it. I'm going to summarize it, okay? And then we're going to get down to verse 51, 52, and 53, which is his summary of this, his final point, his summary of the whole, where he brings it home. And we'll look at that. But throughout this long speech, and I hope you would read it. the temple, and are you speaking against the law? And as he goes through the history of Israel, almost the whole of the Hebrew scriptures, he first of all says, well, I don't think we need the temple to find God. He says, Abraham met God, and Abraham didn't have a temple. God was with Joseph in Egypt, and Joseph didn't have a temple. God met Moses out in the wilderness, the burning bush, and there was no temple. And even after the temple was built, he quotes Isaiah 66, where Isaiah 66 says that God does not dwell in a house made with hands. He's not a tribal deity. He can't be confined to a box. And so, the first thing he does, if you look through the speech, he's saying, no, you don't need the temple in order to find God, in order to meet God. Well, now, by the way, that creates a problem, and it mainly has to do with the law. Because the accuser would have been sitting there saying, well, wait a minute, in the temple you have the sacrifices. So, how in the world can you possibly meet God unless you obey the law, and then when you don't obey the law, you know, there's the sacrifices. So, then he turns to the law. And as he goes through, again, through the whole history of Israel, first of all, he says, under Moses, you didn't obey the law. Under Aaron, you didn't obey the law. Amos says you didn't obey the law. He's going through all, and he's saying, look, the law's good, says Stephen. I believe in the law. The law of God is important. It's inviolable. You can't put it aside. You can't ignore it. But the problem is you've never obeyed it. You've never obeyed it, and you never will obey it. So, if we're saved by obeying the law, we've got a problem. And so, he answers, no, you don't need a temple in order to meet God. Number two, yes, you do need to obey the law in order to meet God, but you can't do it. And then number three, he brings up something that he sees in the history of Israel that he wasn't asked about, but in many ways is the key to everything he says. And that is this. He says, I've noticed a pattern in the history of our people, that every time God sends a deliverer, that deliverer is rejected and persecuted by the very people that he was sent to save. So, he says, look at Joseph. Joseph was appointed by God to save his family, and yet he was sold into slavery by that very family into Egypt. Moses was appointed to deliver his people to bring them out of Egypt. But when he first asserted himself, they rejected him, and he had to flee into the wilderness to save his own life. Later on, David is appointed to be the true king, to lead the people. And yet, for big parts of his life, he's in the wilderness. He's a fugitive. He's fleeing for his own life. Every single time God sends a prophet or a deliverer or a savior, the person's rejected and the person's persecuted. And so, now that he's talking about the temple, now he's talking about the law and the problem of the law, now he's talking about that pattern of how God always delivers. He brings it all together. He brings it home in verse 51, 52, and 53, which is printed and was read to you. 51 and 53 tell us the problem and 52 the solution. 51, look, you're a stiff-necked people with uncircumcised hearts. What's an uncircumcised heart? It means a spiritually hard heart. Here's what he's saying. He says, you do all the external rituals. You're concerned about all these laws and compliance and you're circumcised and all that. But your hearts are filled with fear and pride and cruelty. It hasn't worked. And verse 53 says, you haven't kept the law. You haven't kept the law and your hearts are still filled with cruelty. You need a new heart. You need to be born again. You need something that you don't have. What's the solution? It's right here, verse 52. This is actually the summary of everything he's been saying. Was there ever a prophet your fathers did not persecute? They even killed those who predicted the coming of the righteous one. And now you have betrayed and murdered him. Now, what's going on? Here's what Stephen is saying. Stephen is saying, okay, I'm all for the law too. We need to fulfill the law. We can't be saved without fulfilling the law. And yet you can't fulfill the law. What's the answer? The answer is the righteous one. Do you know how weird it is for Jesus to be called the righteous one? Very unusual. It's a one-off of all the things. one? Very seldom is he called the righteous one. It must be the climax of the whole speech. What does it mean to be righteous? The righteous one fulfills the law. To be righteous, it means you fulfill the law. But how do you fulfill the law? And the answer is Jesus fulfilled the law by being the climax to that whole pattern of saviors always being rejected. And here's why he is the climax. Every other savior, Joseph, Moses, David, delivered their people in spite of rejection and suffering. But Jesus Christ delivered his people through the suffering and rejection. And even through the death. Why? Because through the suffering and rejection and his death, he fulfilled the law. He's the righteous one. He fulfilled the law for you. How? Well, how do you fulfill the law? How do you fulfill any law? You either obey it or you pay the penalty. So out here, by the way, there's a stoplight right out here. And there is the law against going through the stoplight. The red light. So there's only two ways to fulfill the law of the red light. One is you can stop, which is the way I recommend. The other way is you go through it, you get a ticket, and then you pay. And if you paid it, see, if you pay the ticket or if you obey the law, the law has no more claim on you. So what Jesus is doing here is this. He's going, first of all, and living a perfect life. He was righteous in that sense. He lived a perfect life. He loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind. He loved his neighbors himself. No other human beings ever lived a perfect life like that, but he did. And so he was righteous in that sense. And he earned the blessing of eternal life, the blessing of obedience. But then he went to the cross. He was rejected. He was betrayed. He was denied. And he suffered and died. And when he did that, he took the penalty that we deserve for our disobedience so that when you believe in him, he becomes your righteous one. In fact, he becomes your righteousness. It means that at the moment you believe, all of the penalty for your disobedience is imputed to him. And all of the blessing that he earned with his perfect righteousness comes to you. And now he's the temple. The temple's not, in a sense, done away with. He fulfills it. Why? He's the final sacrifice. He's the bridge between God and humanity. He is the final temple. He is the righteous one, the fulfiller of the law. And he, if you believe in him, will give you that new heart. Now, why is this such a long speech? I've always wondered, why in the world is this like five, six times longer than any other speech in the book of Acts? And I think I realize now, where would Luke have gotten this speech? Luke says in the beginning of the book of Luke, the book of Acts, he wrote the two, that he was very careful to put together everything that he knows, everything he puts down, he puts that down through eyewitnesses. Where would he have gotten this speech? Do you think one of the members of the Sanhedrin that killed and stoned Stephen to death? Probably not. I'll tell you who would. It was a young man who the text very carefully tells us was there. His name was Saul at the time, but later on, we got to know him. We got to know Miss Paul, the Apostle Paul. He was consenting to his death. He was part of the execution squad. He held the coats of the people who were killing him. And he absolutely gave approval to his death. And yet, the only possible explanation, the only possible source of this incredible speech is if Paul remembered it. It must have sunk deep into his heart. And the reason we know he must have remembered it is because many people have pointed out that all the themes of Stephen's speech are basically the themes of Paul's theology. He developed with incredible power in all of his writings, which essentially changed the history of the world. Stephen did not have a very long life. He did not have a long career. And in a certain sense, maybe this might be his only sermon. He had to change the world. But why? Well, because it passed into Paul. And even though we're going to see, it didn't immediately, by the way, make Paul a better man. Actually, in many ways, Stephen was an incredible, convicting, shocking experience for Paul. It must have moved him, but he didn't immediately get converted. We'll talk about that later. But eventually, it did. It was the thing that showed him that he was wrong. And therefore, we could say that Stephen changed the world. But how did he change the world? Not just through what he said. That wasn't all. It was also how he suffered. and again, this is the problem with not being able to print this entire long passage, which goes back into chapter 6. We're told at the end of chapter 6 that when he was speaking, his face was like the face of an angel. Isn't that something? While he was speaking, while he was on trial for his life, his face was like the face of an angel. He wasn't snarling. He wasn't trembling. And even though he was incredibly bold, I mean, he's looking at people who have the power and the desire to kill him. And you know what he says to them? You stiff-necked people. You're just like your ancestors. You always resist the Holy Spirit. He was not afraid of telling people the truth. And yet there's no ill will, because as they're actually killing him, he's praying for them. His heart's filled with love. Paul never saw anybody die like this. Paul never saw anybody suffer like this. It wasn't just what he said. It's how he suffered and the brilliance of it that cut Paul and eventually changed the world. Well, how did he suffer? What's the secret of how he suffered? It wasn't just what he said. It's what he saw. It wasn't just what he knew. It's what he saw. Well, what did he see? We're told that just as he was about to die, and he knew he was about to die, they were furious. They were gnashing their teeth at him. But Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked to heaven. And what did he say? Look, he says, I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. Now, the right hand of God is the throne room. And because it's the throne room, it's the courtroom. We Americans believe in separation of the various powers. But you've got to remember, for most of history, the throne room was the courtroom. Most nations, most kingdoms, the throne room was the courtroom. And here's something that's important to see. Jesus is not just seated at the right hand of God. There's many places in the Bible where we're told that Jesus Christ ascended to heaven after making atonement for sin, after dying on the cross. He ascended to heaven, and he's seated at the right hand of God. And that he's seated because he's done. He's finished. The idea that Jesus Christ is seated at the right hand of God means that his salvation work is over. There's nothing else to be done. And we talk about him being seated at the right hand of God, even in the Apostles' Creed. But this is one of the few times, in fact, as far as I know, it's the only time where Stephen has a vision of that heavenly courtroom, and Jesus is standing. Very unusual. Well, anyone who's standing before a throne in a courtroom is doing what? Before the heavenly bench? He's talking. He's arguing. He's making an appeal. He's being an advocate. F.F. Bruce, who wrote a great commentary on the book of Acts years ago, puts it like this. F.F. Bruce says, while Stephen was confessing Christ before men, he sees Christ confessing Stephen before God. Or, 1 John 2, verse 1, we have an advocate with the Father. Hebrews 7, Jesus Christ ever lives to intercede for us. Do you know what Stephen was seeing? Stephen was seeing depicted visually to his vision, to his heart, what he's just been talking about principally. And what is that? When you believe in Jesus Christ, when you're in him, when your sins have been imputed to him and his righteousness has been imputed to you, when the Father, the righteous Father on the throne in that heavenly courtroom looks at you, what does he see? Now, by the way, let me stop and interrupt. Surely there's somebody here saying, well, you know, I don't even believe in this heavenly courtroom stuff. You know, this is, I'm not even sure I'm with you on that. Well, okay. Okay. But do you know the implications? Let me do a little detour. It'll be fast. If you say, well, I don't even know there is a heavenly courtroom. Just realize the implications of that. Arthur Miller did. Arthur Miller, in his great play, After the Fall, has a character who was a lawyer, by the way, who at one point is trying to explain to everybody else why, somebody else, why he's depressed and why he finds life so hard. And at one point he explains it like this. He says, for many years I looked at life like a case at law, a series of proofs. When you're young, you prove how brave you are or how smart. Then later on, what a good lover. Then a good father. Finally, how wise or powerful or whatever. But underlying it all, I see now there was a presumption. That presumption was that I was moving on. elevation where God knows what. I'd be justified or condemned a verdict anyway. I think that my disaster really began when I looked up one day and the bench was empty. No judge in sight and all that remained was the endless argument with myself, oneself, this pointless litigation of existence before an empty bench, which of course is another way of saying despair. Now, you see what he's saying? He says, when I realized there was no God and that there was no heavenly court, the bench was empty, as it were, the bench of the universe. What I realized was that it didn't matter what you did. You're here by accident. You're not here for any purpose. Someday you die and then you rot. Someday the sun goes out and there won't be anybody around to ever even understand or know whatever happened. What it really means is despair. All the bad things that are happening, all the terrible things that are happening, they'll never be put right. See, so if there's nobody on the bench, if there's no heavenly courtroom, what hope is there for the world? Oh, but if there is a heavenly courtroom, what hope is there for you or me? Because none of us live like we should. You know, you know, if there was an invisible MP3 player around your neck and all it ever, ever did was record when you told somebody else how they ought to live. And at the end of your life, if somebody would take that thing off and set it down and say, guess what? We're going to judge your entire life and we're going to be as fair as possible. We're going to just judge you on the basis of your own standards. There's not a person on earth that wouldn't stand condemned. You see, if there is no bench, no heavenly bench, what hope is there for you, for the world? But if there is a heavenly bench, what hope is there for you and me? But Stephen knows because Stephen sees the righteous father looking at him and Jesus standing. And here's what Jesus is saying. Father, my people have sinned. That's right. And it needs to be punished. But I have been punished. I've paid for it. Here's my blood. And for you to take punishment from any of my people now would be unjust because you'd be getting two payments. And therefore, they must never be condemned. There must never be any condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Put it this way. The moment that Stephen, was in a earthly courtroom that was condemning him, he knew that the only true courtroom there, he was being commended. See, as he was in an earthly courtroom condemning him, he saw the heavenly courtroom commending him. There was nobody on earth speaking up for him, but Jesus was. And you know what that meant? The earthly courtroom wasn't anywhere near as real as the heavenly one. The heavenly one's forever. The heavenly one's the real one. The earthly one is not. And as a result, his face was like the face of an angel. It didn't matter what anybody else said down here on earth. Who cares what they think? I'm commended. See? And that's the reason why he was able to face what he faced. And notice, by the way, he didn't just know this with his head. The Holy Spirit helped him to sense it with his heart. And to the degree that you don't just know that you're loved by God in Jesus Christ, but you are rejoicing in and you are in awe of how much you are loved, how much you're delighted, how much you're honored by God in Jesus Christ. To that degree, you'll be able to face anything. And that's the secret. He saw the ultimate courtroom, and there he was being commended. Now look, we're at the end, because now I can tell you, why is it that our secular culture just doesn't give us anything like this to handle suffering? Nothing like it. Another book that I love very much, Andrew DeBanco, he's a secular writer, not a Christian writer, but he wrote a book some years ago on the history of American culture called The Real American Dream. And in this book, he says that every culture tells its people what you should live for, and therefore, what is your meaning in life? Every culture says, this is what you should live for, this should be your meaning in life. He says, in the history of America in the 18th century, that thing was God. In the 18th century, American culture says, what you should be living for is God. In the 19th century, he says, the American culture said, what you should be living for is the nation, your country, tis of thee, or your family, or the community. But he says, in the 20th century, in the 21st century, in the 21st century, Western culture says, the meaning of life is to be living for the children. to live. And therefore, the three chapters in his book are God, nation, and self. God, nation, and self. Now, do you realize if your meaning in life is the kingdom of God and the glory of God, and you face suffering and death, as hard as that is, it can't get at your meaning in life. It can't destroy your meaning in life. Because your meaning in life is God. In fact, if you're living for your community, or your tribe, or your family, or your country, even then, it's easier to handle suffering. Because when you're suffering, if you're facing suffering and death, that can't get to your meaning. But if you're living basically to be free, to live as you want to live, and to craft your own life, and to decide what is right or wrong for you, if basically the highest thing in your life is your own personal freedom and happiness, then when suffering comes, that destroys your very meaning in life. It decimates it. It takes it away. You completely melt down. You have no strength. You have no ability to face the suffering. All you can do is run. Avoid it. Do anything to get away. Okay. Augustine understood. St. Augustine says, basically, life is about ordering your loves properly. Do you understand that? He says, we all love things. But do we love things in the proper order? Do you love God first, and most of all, and then other things after that, and other things after that? He says, basically, all of life is about reordering your loves. And all your problems come from disordered loves. And somebody once summarized all the teaching of Augustine in one statement. Only love of the immutable can bring tranquility. I'm going to say that again. Only love of the immutable will bring tranquility. Only if your highest love, only if the thing you love most in life is something that can never be taken away from you. Death can't take it away from you. It's not based on your performance, your ups and downs. It can't change. Only if the thing you love most, only if the thing that is your real meaning in life is something that can never be taken away from you, can you possibly face life with tranquility. Only the love of the immutable can bring tranquility. And everybody else, including you, is setting your hearts on other things, and suffering will destroy those things. But you must set your heart on the one thing that suffering can't destroy. And then you'll be able to handle the suffering. Finally, we've seen what Stephen said and what Stephen saw. Now, what Stephen did? What did he actually accomplish? Well, we've already told you, I've already said, that we know from history that Stephen's speech changed the world because it changed eventually the life of one man who changed the world, St. Paul. But notice at the very end, on that day, this is chapter 8, verse 1. Luke makes it very clear. On that day, a great persecution broke out against the church at Jerusalem, and all except the apostles were scattered throughout Judea and Samaria. You see how God used it? Jesus had told the disciples over and over again, the gospel's not just for Jerusalem. It's not just for the Jews. It's for all people. But they hadn't left. Jesus had said, I want you to go to Samaria. I want you to go to the uttermost parts of the earth. I want you to go to different cultures, different places. They hadn't gone. And now God uses the death of Stephen and the persecution that comes to just push them out. And therefore, Stephen's death leads to an explosion of resurrection life. Stephen's suffering leads to the growth of God's glory, as it were, you know, in the eyes of people. Just as Jesus' suffering led to glory, and I'm telling you, your suffering will lead to glory. If you know how to do what Stephen did, if you know how to look to heaven and look to what Jesus has done, if with the power of the Spirit, the things that you know about the gospel get real to your heart, I mean, every time suffering comes upon you, you realize your loves aren't properly ordered. No, our loves are never properly ordered. We never love God like we should. But when suffering comes, if you do everything you can to reorder your love, and through the Holy Spirit, and through the word, and through worship, and through prayer, you just seek to see what Stephen saw, and see more of it with God's help, I tell you, as hard and as difficult as suffering is, it will turn to glory. Though you'll see some glory in this life, you'll certainly see glory later. When Joseph was talking to his brothers who had sold him into slavery, but it basically led to him becoming prime minister of Egypt and saving thousands of lives, including the families. 20, you meant it for evil, but God meant it for good. What they did was evil. It wasn't okay, but God used it. My suffering led to glory and your suffering will lead to glory. If you take hold of what Stephen said and then ask God to show you what Stephen saw, then you will do what Stephen did. You fearful saints, fresh courage take the clouds you so much dread are big with mercy and will break with blessings on your head. Let's pray. Our father, we are grateful that you have shown us that, uh, though this world is filled with pain and suffering and misery and you have tasted it yourself, you have done so so that we can triumph over it and someday see it ended. So we pray Lord that while we are here, you would show us how to, um, uh, love you and understand you and look to you the way Stephen did so that our lives, even our suffering can lead to, uh, glory. And we pray that you would help us understand this right now because many of us are trying to figure out how does this apply? Cause I'm in dark times right now. I pray that you would particularly aid with your Holy spirit. Anyone here hearing this that is struggling to see how in the world can I apply this to what I'm going through? But most of all, would you open their eyes to see your son, Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of the heavenly throne? And we pray this in Jesus name. Amen. Amen. Amen.
