TITLE: Suffering and Glory (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Glorification Suffering
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/suffering-and-glory-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now the most threatening moment of the evening, they all get to leave and I have to stand up here in front of you all by myself. But it's only threatening for me, not you. Why does suffering pose such a major intellectual and spiritual problem? Why? I can start off by saying I'd suggest that there's two reasons at least. One would be the universalness of suffering, one would be the indiscriminateness of suffering. The universalness is something that, it doesn't matter how normal your life is. In fact, it doesn't even matter if you've got really one of the more charmed lives you know. If you're just a member of a really good and fairly fortunate, use that term in the broadest sense of the word, if you're just a member of a fortunate family of five people and you are blessed with good health and long life, you get to bury every other one. And you're the fortunate one. You take a look at, look, death, addiction, divorce, chronic illness. If you're in any kind of family at all, even a good family, even a family that gives you comfort and stability, you're going to watch one after the other after the other of them, of the members of that family, even the best family, just go down to those things. Suffering is universal. Even the most safe country in the world, time in the world, experiences suffering. You can't keep it away. Gut-wrenching suffering belongs to all of us. And so Macduff says in Macbeth, each new morn, new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face. So there's the universalness of it. And secondly, there's the indiscriminateness of it. Now, what I mean by the indiscriminateness of it is not simply that it's out there for everybody, but it doesn't stack up equally on people at all. The suffering comes more tragically. It comes sooner. It comes in a more devastating way to some people than others. And there's no rhyme or reason. No rhyme or reason to it at all. Here's an account by Thucydides, an ancient Greek writer and historian. And he was writing about one of the terrible plagues that swept through one of the ancient cities of antiquity. And he said, he said, describing this, he says, the bodies of the dying were heaped one on top of the other. We could see half-dead creatures staggering about in the streets. The catastrophe was so overwhelming, you know, like half the population dying of the plague. The catastrophe was so overwhelming that men became indifferent to every rule of morality. As for the gods, they seemed not to matter when one saw the good and the bad dying indiscriminately. So you see, that's it, isn't it? He said, God or the gods or heaven, it made no sense. Here comes the plague and here's the good people, here's the bad people. Here's the kindest people, here are the cruelest people. They're all slapped down together. Or even worse, lots of the cruel people are spared. Lots of the kind and most wonderful people go down. And Thucydides looks out there, this is the problem, it's indiscriminate. There's no rhyme or reason, it's random, it makes no sense. So, suffering and evil, because of its universal nature, because of its indiscriminate nature, creates an enormous intellectual and spiritual and emotional, of course, problem for every human being. So how do we approach it? And what I want to do, because it's a little lecture, I would like to compare and contrast three approaches to suffering. Compare and contrast, like being back in school. Didn't you hate those questions? Compare and contrast, I hated those. Because you could go on forever. But I'm going to do it, and not go on forever, hopefully. I want to compare and contrast three paradigm answers, or I should say really approaches to suffering, that are out there in the world today. They're not the only ones, but they're probably the three most eminent ones, perhaps. Certainly many views, there are many approaches and views, but they collapse down to these three. The secular approach, the Buddhist approach, and the Christian approach. The secular approach to suffering says that evil, suffering, and death have the victory. The Buddhist approach says evil, suffering, and death will be replaced by victory. But the Christian approach says evil, suffering, and death will be swallowed up by victory. The secular approach says... because it says matter is all that there is. The Buddhist says that suffering and death can be replaced by victory because spirit is all there is. But the most complicated, the most complex, and ultimately I think the most radical of the three, the Christian approach to suffering says that death and suffering will be swallowed up by victory because matter and spirit are both equally real, but that spirit will eventually transform matter into its own likeness. Now I'm going to come clean right here at the beginning. This is a lecture, but every lecturer has a point of view. And I'll just tell you what my point of view is right off the bat. So you don't have to guess. In fact, some of you have already guessed it. That I see the secular approach as very unhelpful in general. I see the Buddhist approach as far more wise and far more helpful. And I see the Christian approach, however, as having, being the most complicated and actually also giving us the most resources for actually living in a world of suffering. Now, even though I've come clean and I've told you, you know, what my point of view is, this is a lecture, not a sermon, which means I'll make every effort to be informative and balanced and still make my points. Number one, let's look at the secular approach. The secular approach to suffering basically says that because this world is all there is, there is really no remedy for suffering and evil and death. In the Los Angeles Times, earlier this fall, the president of the American Atheist Society, which is a large atheist society, said this to reporters. She said, if that September 11th, pardon me, if September 11th wasn't a wake-up call to the religious nation of America, I don't know what is. September 11th said to me, there is no God. Where was he? On a coffee break? This is from the Los Angeles Times, October 12th. Now, like I said, I'm going to be informative and balanced. That's a very important point. Here's what I mean. Evil and suffering is the strongest and most powerful a-theological argument there is. Now, what's an a-theological argument? An a-theological argument is an argument against the existence of God, or at least of the traditional and classical view of God. I mean, even Thucydides, you know, the ancient Greek historian Thucydides had a classical view of God, or the gods, in that God has power and God is good. But evil and suffering is a very powerful argument against the existence of that God. It's strong evidence against the existence of such a God. And the president of the American Atheist Association was right in using it. He said, where was he? You want a coffee break? Now, but here's the problem. And I'll get to it quickly, relatively quickly, because I do see it as problematic. In a nutshell, to believe in God in the face of suffering and evil gives us great problems. But to disbelieve in God, to take a completely secular approach, to say, well, I don't believe in God because of evil and suffering. As far as I know, this world is all that there is. To disbelieve in God is even a bigger problem in the face of suffering and evil. In other words, both of them are problematic, but I would say the secular view has more problems. It's the cure, as it were, that's worse than the disease that it's trying to treat. Nobody has put this better. Now, I looked around for some other ways of somebody, other sources, but nobody has put this better. In a nutshell, of the problem that the secular person has in the face of violence and evil and suffering, than Annie Dillard, in her famous, rightly famous, Pulitzer Prize winning book, Pilgrim at Tinker Creek. Now, Annie Dillard's my age, and so I can understand something about her. And that is, she moved out into the woods of Virginia, and she wanted to, by a creek, of course, and she wanted to get close to nature. And like all, you know, secular, optimistic, liberal baby boomers, she saw nature as a good thing. She looked out at society, and she saw, you know, all injustice and terrible things out in society, and she said, we need to learn from nature. We need to look at the harmony of nature. You know, that was the way it was in the 60s when I was in college, and she just was working that out. So she moves near a creek, and she begins to observe nature, and that's what the reflections in the book are about. But she was astounded by the violence of nature. She became sickened by the violence, the relentless bloodiness of nature. She watched praying mantises eat one another. She watched a great big sort of water bug kill a frog and suck out its brain. She watched all this, and this is what she wrote. And really, nobody's, I don't think, ever put it more poignantly. She says, evolution loves death more than it loves you. by the side of the creek in order to shape my life to its free flow, but I seem to have reached a point where I must draw the line. I must part ways with the only world there is. Okay, that's the secular approach. I must part ways with the only world there is. Look, the robin dies the most gruesome of slow deaths, and nature is no less pleased. The sun comes up, the creek rolls on, the survivors still sing, but I cannot feel that way about your death. You cannot feel that way about my death. Neither of us can feel that way about the robin's death. Why? Because we value the individual supremely, and nature values him, not a wit. So it began to look as though I had to reject this creek life unless I wanted to be utterly brutalized, because either this world, my mother, is a monster, or I myself am a freak. Get this. Either this world, my mother is a monster, or I myself am a freak. Let's consider the former. This is great. The world's a monster. There's not a person in the world that behaves as badly as the praying mantises I watched. But wait, you say, there's no right and wrong in nature. Right and wrong is human concept. That's precisely what I'm saying. We are moral creatures in a universe that is running on chance and death, careening blindly from nowhere to nowhere, which somehow has produced wonderful us. This world runs on chance and death and power, but you and I cherish life and the rights of the weak versus the strong. So I crawled by chance out of a sea of amino acids, and now I whirl around and shake my fist at that sea and cry, shame? We little blobs of soft tissue crawling around on this one planet's skin are right, and the whole universe is wrong? Well, maybe it is. So let's say the world's a monster, or let's consider the alternative. Let's say nature is fine. What else could it be? And our feelings, therefore, are freakishly amiss. The frog that the giant water bug sucked out had a rush of feeling for about a second before its brain turned to broth. I, however, have been sapped by various strong feelings about that incident almost daily for years. All right, then. If there's nothing wrong with nature, how could there be anything wrong with nature? It's our emotions and our values that are amiss. We're the freaks. The world is fine. Let us all go have lobotomies to restore us to a normal state. Then we can leave the library, go back to the creek, lobotomize, and live on its banks as untroubled as any other muskrat or reed. You first. Pillitzer Prize. You see why. But don't you see what she's saying? It's very simple. Let's just say there's no God and all that there is is nature. Nature is red in tooth and claw. Nature runs on. Nature runs on a process of natural selection, survival of the fittest. It runs on violence. The strong eating the weak. The smarter oppressing and trampling the dumber. But as soon as you get into the human race, we say, oh, but the human beings can't do that. She says, why? She says, if this world is all there is, then our feelings are absolutely amiss because it's utterly natural for the strong and eat the weak. And the only alternative to saying my feelings of justice, my feelings of moral outrage are completely, you know, about the injustice, the indiscriminateness of suffering, see? That's what makes us say we can't believe in God. So there is no God because of the indiscriminateness and suffering. But what's wrong with the indiscriminateness and suffering if this world is all there is? You see, Sartre comes right out and says it, but I really believe that he himself couldn't live it out. Sartre comes right out. If you think you're pushing it, you're exaggerating it, no, I don't think so. Sartre says, if God does not exist, there is no longer any possibility of any a priori good existing. It's nowhere written that one must be honest or must not lie because we now are on the plane where there's only human beings. Dusky Esky once wrote, if God does not exist, everything is permitted. That is right. If God does not exist, we have neither behind us nor before us any luminous realm of values nor any means of justification of any behavior whatever. Was that John Paul Sartre on a bad day? No. It was in his seminal essay, Existentialism and Humanism, his definitive work. What's he saying? What's Annie Dillard saying? Either you absolutely have absolutely no right to be outraged by the injustice and indiscriminateness of violence out there in the world. Or you say, there's something wrong with nature. Nature is a monster. Nature is abnormal. Well, how could nature be abnormal? How could nature be unnatural? Unless there's a standard outside of nature that shows that it is not what it's supposed to be. It's not what it was designed to be. And that would have to be supernatural. Supernatural. God. So you see, in the end, having evil and suffering is difficult for me as a believer in God, but at least I have the right to be outraged. And what Annie Dillard is trying to say is, if nature is all there is, we really don't even have a right to be outraged unless we begin to posit something like God anyway. So ultimately, of course, there's no remedy for evil and suffering in the secular view at all. And there's even a certain disingenuousness about it, if I can say so with all due respects. Because the fact of the matter is, secular people are every bit as moral and as good and as concerned for justice, if not more so, than a lot of religious people. So in other words, on the one hand, they want to say, well, this world is all there is, and then they want to live as if there is something else. And that's just a certain amount of inconsistency at the least. And ultimately, why fight the injustice? Because this is all there is. So ultimately, the injustice and the violence and the evil and so on, there's no remedy for it. A secular approach is to say, death and evil have the victory. Suffering has the victory. Now let's move to the Buddhist. And the Buddhist approach, quite different than the secular. The Buddhist approach says that it is possible to have triumph. In fact, inevitably, over death and suffering, there will be a victory. And Buddhism comes at suffering in a very different way. And if you want to know the origin of Buddhism, it's all about suffering, you look into the scriptures of Buddhas. And let me just give you a quick summary of how Buddhism originated. Gautama, Siddhartha, the Buddha, originally was a prince, the scriptures tell us. But he lived in a castle or a palace where his father, the king, kept him completely ensconced and completely sealed off from the troubles of the world. So one night when he was either an adolescent or a young man, I can't remember which, he bribes one of the charioteers in the army to take him out of the city, I mean out of the palace into the city, four nights in a row, drive him around so he can see what the world's really like. And every one of the four nights, he sees one of the four distressing sights. The first night, he sees a sick man. The second night, he sees an old man. The third night, he sees a dead man. And of course, he's becoming incredibly troubled. And every time he sees one of these sights, he begins to try to read the riddle. Why is suffering? What does it mean? But he cannot read the riddle. He cannot figure it out. And on the last night, the fourth night, he sees a man begging, a man in rags, and he asks the charioteer, who is that? And the charioteer says, that is his sannyasin. And a sannyasin was a Hindu holy man who deprived himself of all, of good food, deprived himself, you know, inflicted pain on himself, put himself into a state of degradation in order to become wise. Well, why, Siddhartha says to his charioteer, does he want to become wise? To read the great mysteries, including the greatest of all mysteries, why do we suffer? So Siddhartha says, that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to be a sannyasin. But he goes and he becomes a sannyasin for a number of years. And he finds that hurting himself and not eating properly and living in abject squalor has not gotten him any closer to the truth. So one day, he says, I'm not going to do that anymore. And he rises up from his poverty. He eats his first decent meal. The other sannyasins are alienated except for five who stay with him and they become his followers. And he says, today I'm going to sit under the Bodhi tree and I'm not going to rise until I have read the riddle of suffering. So he sits under that tree. Who knows how long? I don't know. But when he rises, he says, I am the Buddha, the awakened one, the one who is awakened from the illusion. And he enunciates the four noble truths, which are at the heart and the basis of all Buddhism. And the first noble truth is all of life is suffering. Fess up. Admit it. We're born in suffering. It hurts. Ask your mother. You live in suffering and you die in suffering. So the first of the four noble truths is there's no avoiding it. There's no getting away from it. There's no denying it. Life is suffering. It's the very essence of life. The second noble truth was the cause of suffering is desire. Now I use the word there. The ancient word is tanha, which can be translated craving. It can also be translated selfishness. But what he's saying is that here is, here is the essence of suffering. The gap between desire and satisfaction is suffering. Suffering is the gap between what we desire and what we're getting. And the gap between suffering and, pardon me, between desire and satisfaction is suffering is suffering. And therefore, desire creates. all suffering. The third noble truth is that the way to solve suffering is to eliminate desire, is to go to the extinction of desire, which is the state of nirvana. And you see, at this point, what he's saying, this was radical. Here's why it was so radical. Because the world tells you the way to get rid of suffering, the way to get rid of the gap between desire and satisfaction, is to increase satisfaction. But the Buddha said the way to get rid of suffering and handle suffering is to decrease your desire. In fact, eventually go to extinction of desire. And that's why it was so incredibly radical. And the fourth noble truth was that the eightfold path, okay, I'm not going to go through that, don't worry, that the eightfold path is the way to nirvana to extinguish suffering in your life. And the eightfold path, you can summarize it into two basic things. On the one hand, it was mental and philosophical. It's a whole life, a whole life of changing your consciousness. Because what you have to come to see is that this material world is an illusion. And the greatest illusion of all is that you are an individual self. Because you are really just part of everything it is. And you're not separate, you're not distinct, you're not different from it. So one part of it is sort of philosophical and mental, and it involves a change of consciousness. The other part of it is volitional. Because the Buddha said that what you do, the other part of going to nirvana and extinction of desire is to live a life not of self-flagellation, see, and so forth, but a life of simplicity, of purity, of self-denial, of sacrifice, of compassion, and of service to others. So what do we see here? Now, what we see is, this is a whole lot better. First of all, it's so much more hopeful than secularism. And in many ways, Buddhism and Christianity share some very important points, and I'll just mention them right here so that you see that, I mean, my goodness, if two of the great world religions of the world agree on this, it's probably right. The first thing is, Buddhism, like Christianity, has always said that what the world tells you to do about suffering is nuts. What the world says is, if you want to have a happy life, increase satisfaction. Go get it. Increase satisfaction. Buddhism says, Christianity says, that's nuts because your desire will always stay out in front of your satisfaction. You never can eliminate the gap that way. Never. It's like trying to run to the horizon. You get there and you have a new horizon. See? So the first thing that Buddhism and Christianity certainly agree on is that the world is crazy when it tells you what to do about how to deal with life. Increase your satisfaction. You'll never, ever, by all the things you want, ever, ever decrease that gap. Secondly, Buddhism and Christianity also agree that you're never going to live in this world and deal with the suffering of this world and the troubles of this world without conversion. You need a whole life change. You need a complete transformation, volitionally, emotionally, psychologically, spiritually. You need a transformation of human nature. You need to be converted. You're not going to be able to handle it by going to this or that society or this or that program or this or that seminar or even this or that church or this or that temple and showing up and listening to some inspiration from some speaker and singing some music. You need to be converted. That's the only way. And the third thing is Buddhism and Christianity put suffering at the very heart of what it means to believe. You know what the Lord's Supper is, which is the central sacrament, the central part of, you know, of Christian worship? You know what it is? It's a depiction of suffering. Hey, Christianity and Buddhism both put suffering in the very center and say this is at the very essence. This is the ultimate mystery. This is the very essence of what we have to deal with if we're going to live in this world in a way that other religions don't. And it's wise about rejecting the world. It's wise about saying it's going to be a complete conversion. You're simply not going to be able to come to Manhattan and find out you can't handle life and just add a little something to get you through. No way. This is central. You need to be converted. But now what am I going to do? Am I going to critique Buddhism? No. I like it too much. I respect it too much. I would just like to show you the Christian approach because the Christian approach, when I positively show it to you, you'll see it goes beyond. It's actually more radical and it's also more nuanced and complex and therefore I think actually more balanced in its approach to suffering. It's more radical. Only Jesus was more radical in his teaching about suffering than Buddha himself. So let's see. What is Christianity? What is the Christian approach to suffering? And it can be organized around three... all, glory. One of the strange things about Christianity, especially about the Christian scriptures, is how often, in a way that's unique, certainly secularism doesn't do it, and absolutely Buddhism doesn't do it, how often suffering is linked to glory. How often, in the Christian scriptures, suffering is put together with glory. It's really quite remarkable. For example, here's from the New Testament. Therefore, we do not lose heart. Though outwardly we are wasting away, yet inwardly we are being renewed day by day. For our temporary suffering is achieving for us an eternal weight of glory, glory that outweighs them all. 2 Corinthians 4, St. Paul. Listen, this is Romans 8, St. Paul. For reason shows me that our present sufferings are not worthy to be even compared to the glory that is to be revealed in us. For creation itself will be liberated from its bondage to decay and brought into the glorious freedom of the children of God. And here's 1 Peter chapter 4. If you suffer, you are blessed, for the spirit of glory rests upon you. Now, right off the bat, we see a considerably more nuanced approach to suffering. Neither secularism nor Buddhism would ever speak so. How do I say it? Positively. Not positively. Hopefully. See, in secularism, Buddhism, Buddhism, and pretty much every other, I think, almost, you know, every other view I know. Suffering is something that is utterly negative that just has to be eliminated, has to be taken away. Christianity is different. And what it says is, no suffering, no glory. Now, what does glory mean? Both in Hebrew and in Greek, the word glory means weight, substance, depth. And the opposite of glory is to be ephemeral, to be wispy, to be easily moved, easily blown away, to be unreal. Glory is there-ness. You say, you know, to be unmovable, to be substantial, to be rooted, to be there, to be deep. How in the world, when Buddha says the only thing to do is you have to eliminate suffering, and of course, secularism says, well, we're never going to eliminate, but we got to do everything we possibly can to avoid it. Why would Christianity talk like this? Is that nuts? Well, let me give you another very, very wise book, and it's every bit as wise as all the other books I've been reading from. It's the Velveteen Rabbit. And in the Velveteen Rabbit, we have this extremely interesting interchange between the skin horse and the Velveteen Rabbit. Real isn't how you're made, says the skin horse. It's a thing that happens to you. When a child loves you for a long, long, long time, not just to play with you, but really loves you, then you become real. Does it hurt, asks the rabbit? Oh, yeah. That's why it doesn't happen to those who break easily, or have sharp edges, or who have to be very carefully kept. Generally, by the time you're real, most of your hair has been loved off, your eyes have dropped out, and you get loose in the joints, and you're very shabby. But these things don't matter at all, because once you're real, you can't be ugly except the people who don't understand. When you're real, you don't mind being hurt. Now, somebody says, well, that's, you know, sounds sweet, but what does it mean? What does it mean that to be loved and to love involves suffering and makes you real? What does that mean? It's not as hard. Listen, it's not as odd as you might think. Let's just use a little bit of common sense. What happens if you find somebody, and there's some people who get like this because their parents did everything they could, like Siddhartha's father, to shelter them. Or some people get like this because they're just lucky for a while. But you can get into your 20s and even into your 30s and have had a really incredibly good life. Nothing bad's happened to you at all. Things are going extremely well. Every door is opened, and you haven't had any major disappointments, and you haven't suffered. You haven't suffered. And when you meet somebody like that, I guess in their 20s and 30s and hasn't suffered, what are they? They can be courteous, they can be perky, they can be very nice, they can have a number of those kinds of virtues, but you know, you know the problem. I mean, how do I say it? I gotta say it. They're shallow. They're not very good friends. When something bad does happen to them, they're immediately blown away. Or when something really bad happens to you or to a friend, they say, I just can't deal with it. What is that? They don't have depth, you see. They're not rooted. They're not, as the skin horse would say, they're not all that real. They can't take reality. So they're not as real. Some years ago, oh gosh, 17, 18 years ago, I taught preaching at a school. I taught public speaking and preaching. And, you know, most of the people I was teaching were pretty young. And some of them were good, but most of them were really, really bad. I mean, most of the sermons and the preaching was really, really bad. And it was my job to try to help them, you know, figure out what was bad. And it was hard. You know, I say, okay, they're young, so they're inexperienced. But you know what? It was tough. Is there delivery? Well, no, their delivery's okay. You know, all right. Is it their outline? No. I mean, is it their content? No. Are they saying anything wrong? No. Try to figure it out. I remember one time my wife, Kathy, pointed out why a couple of these preachers weren't very, very good. And she says they haven't suffered. And that was it. Because it was so strange as they were saying everything just right, they were doing everything just right, and they weren't interesting. And they weren't wise. Because they weren't, uh-oh, they weren't real. Maybe the Velveteen Rabbits got on to something. And here's what's so astounding. Christianity does not simply bring this in as a free-floating truth. What is this free-floating truth? Suffering can kill you. It can destroy you. It can make you dehumanized. It can make you bitter. It can make you a bad person. It can hurt you badly. It can twist you badly. But no suffering. Without any suffering, you can't become real. You can't become deep. You can't become insightful. You can't become wise. You can't get glory. And even though, even though that is an insight, it's not a free-floating insight, because it's grounded in the very heart of Christian doctrine, which is that even God could not come into this world and be real without suffering. And that God could not love without suffering. You can't love without suffering. Even God would have no glory if he hadn't suffered, in a sense. I mean, or Jesus Christ. God comes into the world and he has to suffer. He has to. In fact, he suffered enormously. And we'll get back to what that means under some of the other points. But what does that mean? No suffering, no glory. I mean, one of the pivotal texts in my whole life is this place where C.S. Lewis puts it. And he puts it, as usual, rather perfectly. But some of you know how important this is to me. He says, love anything and your heart will certainly be wrung and probably broken. If you want to make sure of keeping it intact, in other words, if you want to make sure you don't suffer, give your heart to no one, not even an animal. Wrap it carefully round with hobbies and little luxuries. Avoid all entanglements. Lock it up safe in a casket of selfishness. But in that casket, safe, dark, and motionless, it will change. Your heart will not be broken. It will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The only alternative to suffering and tragedy, or at least to the risk of it, is damnation. You see what he's saying? See, listen, Buddhism says we got to do everything we can to get away from suffering. Secularism says we need to do everything we can do to get away from suffering. And if you ever find anybody who has done that to a certain degree, it can't be done, but to a certain degree, you see the lack of glory in them. Even God came into this world and he suffered because he was real. So Christianity says when the suffering comes, love through it. Don't stop loving God. Don't stop loving other people. Don't stop loving. That's what we do. We say, what good is it? Or generally speaking, very often, the suffering is a thwarting of love. You love your mother. You love your father. You love this person, that person. They're taken away from you. And so what are you going to do? You're going to pull it all in. No, no, no, no. Love. Love somebody else. Don't stop loving. And the suffering, ah, is hijacked by goodness and truth. And it becomes glory. That's the first thing. Do you see how much more nuanced this is? Do you see how much more complicated this is than the other views? So the first thing is, pardon me, is glory. The second word that helps us understand the Christian approach to suffering is presence. And here's what I mean by presence. This is not an intellectual question, suffering. How do we put... nice objective problem, blackboard, stuff like that. But suffering isn't just a problem to be solved. It's a mystery that we're in. We're involved in it, and we don't just need answers. We don't just need answers. A year ago, I guess it was a year ago, last summer, about 50 people from my old church, the only other church I've ever had down in Virginia that I had when I was just a young man, because I was passing through on my way somewhere else, this group of 50 people held a reception for me and my wife and my family. Just a reception, thanking us for our ministry and so on. It's one of the nicest things that have ever happened to me, and since I know that some of you are probably going to get this tape down there in Hopewell, Virginia, I want you to know that. And what they did at one point was very touching. As they went around, they said what everybody remembered most that I had said over the years that really helped them and touched them and stuck with them. And when they went around, every one of them went around and they said something, and it was an utter rebuke to my young self. When I got to Virginia, there was this older pastor in town, and he got me alongside and says, now, you know, just one thing, is don't just sit in your study and, you know, read your books and prepare your sermons. Get out there. Get into the nursing homes. Get into the prisons. Get into the hospitals. Get into their homes. Get out there. Every day. All day. Talk to people. Be with them. Well, now, here's what I thought. I didn't say this out loud, but I thought it. I said, why did I take Greek, Hebrew, and even Aramaic? Why did I get all these degrees? I am a scholar. I am going to write these incredible sermons, and people are going to come from miles around, and they're just going to be dying to get these erudite pearls of wisdom from my lips. And I've got to work on these things, and I, you know, you know who I, well, I didn't say any of that. What I just did was I looked at him like this, and he knew exactly what I was thinking. And I remember, his name was Kennedy, and I remember what Kennedy said. He looked at me. I never forget it. He says, the things you say to these people are not going to amount to a hill of beans if they don't know you love them, and you don't love them unless you're out there with them. Every other religion gives you answers. Lots of answers about suffering. Do this, do this, do this, do this. Christianity and only Christianity says that God has come here, that he's actually come here. There's all kinds of reasons, good reasons, why agnostics and atheists, why Jews and Muslims, why Buddhists, why Hindus, why everybody else says the transcendent creator God could not have become a unique human being in Jesus Christ. They all agree that this is wrong for various reasons. I'm not even going to be able to say anything about that because they have good reasons, really good reasons. It deserves a whole other lecture, honest to goodness. I'm not writing it off, but I want you to know they don't have the resources for suffering that we do if you accept it. And that's what this is. It wouldn't amount to a hill of beans to have God booming right out of heaven today. Answers if we weren't sure he loved us, and we wouldn't be sure he loved us if he hadn't come and experienced poverty, and experienced loneliness, and experienced rejection, and experienced political injustice, and experienced torture, and himself cried out, I mean, this is the Christian teaching, why? Why? You see, that's what the, here's what I learned, and what shocked me. Every single person in that room went around, and they shared something that I said, and not one of them shared something I'd ever said in this sermon. Not one. I remember what you said when you were sitting with me up at Medical College of Virginia when my mother had her heart attack. I remember what you said when my son was arrested, and we were in the waiting room at Petersburg Jail. I remember what you said. What an idiot I was when I was a kid. It wouldn't amount to a hill of beans if God gave us answers. We need him. We need him. And guess what? Only Christianity, only Christianity tells us that he came, and he got involved in our suffering, and how else would we be sure that there are good reasons that he hasn't stopped suffering? Every religion says, well, there's reasons. We can get God off the hook. Secularism says, there is no God. That gets him off the hook. Buddhism says, well, this world and suffering is actually an illusion. That gets him off the hook. And there's other reasons, but here's the point. Jesus Christ is God putting himself on the hook. And that's the answer. So first, the Christian approach is, we see around the word glory. Secondly, the Christian approach gives us another clue to how to deal with and understand suffering around the word presence, but his presence with us. But the last of all, the word resurrection. is death has the victory. That's it. That's life. That's death. Or Buddhism that says death will be replaced by victory. We'll get rid of death. Paul says, Oh, death, where is thy sting? Oh, grave, where is thy victory? Death is swallowed up. Death is swallowed up. What does that mean? You know what's so great about the doctrine of the resurrection? The doctrine of the resurrection is not the same as saying when you die or when the world ends, we'll take you away from all this. All this suffering, all this brokenness, we'll take you away from all this. No. The Bible does not offer us consolation. It offers us resurrection. It says we're going to go and we're going to have heaven. Heaven is going to come to earth. We're not going to take you away from earth into heaven. Heaven is going to come to earth and it's going to renew everything. Everything bad is going to come untrue. When you have a nightmare that your children have died or something like that, and you wake up, and there they are. That's what you want, isn't it? Here's what you want. You don't want new children. You don't want somebody to say, well, you know, the reason that you're really upset about their death is because that you have this illusion that you're an individual and they're an individual and all that sort of thing, so we got to get you out of the veil of illusion. Oh, no. What I want is I want my children back. And what's so wonderful is when I look at them, have you ever had a nightmare like that, that somebody you love died and you wake up and it's come untrue and you run and you look at them, they look better, don't they? You know what? Because your relationship to them has been increased by the nightmare. Your love for them is better for having lost it and gotten it back. Death is swallowed up in victory. It's the final and ultimate den and why. It's the final coup de grace. It's the final... French, huh? It's the final victory. The victory that Christianity says we're going to have in the end over suffering and death is not just consolation. We're going to be taken away from it into some other kind of realm where there's no suffering, but that the things that were broken, the things that were ruined are going to be resurrected. They're going to be renewed. They're going to be brought back and they're going to be even more glorious for having once been broken. Let me ask you a question. Do you think we're going to be able to look... Do you think history would have been better if there had never been a cross, never been bravery, never been nobility, never been courage, no suffering, no glory? And that we're going to find in the end that God is so great that every effort to rebel, every effort to sin, every effort to do evil in the end will make the final glory greater than it would have been otherwise. That's... That is victory. You see, death is swallowed up. It takes it up. It becomes in victory. The victory becomes even greater for it once having been true, that there was death. But when it's over, it's going to be even greater than if it never had existed. Now, how do you get that? How do you get the sense of God's presence with you? Really being there? Having to... I'll tell you what. I read you a little verse from 1 Peter chapter 4. There's a fascinating little place where 1 Peter chapter 4 says that do not be surprised by the fiery trials that have, you know, come upon you, but realize that it's refining your faith as in a furnace. And when you suffer faithfully, the spirit of glory rests on you. Now, Peter was almost certainly thinking about a very, very old story from Daniel, the book of Daniel chapter 3, where three guys, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, are thrown into a fiery furnace at the behest of the angry King Nebuchadnezzar. And they're thrown into this fiery furnace, and they're supposed to die there, but of course, to everyone's shock, especially the king, they see these three guys walking around. It's a miracle, of course, but here's the reason for the miracle. The king looks in, and he says, I see three men walking around. No, no, no. I see four men walking around, and the fourth looks like the Son of God. And here's what I want you to consider. It's not enough to be able to handle suffering and to feel his presence in your life just by believing in the resurrection as a doctrine, or believing in the incarnation as a doctrine, or believing in the future glory as a doctrine. Until you know that you personally, that for you personally, Jesus was thrown into the furnace, that he died for you, that he took the punishment for you, which is the classic Christian doctrine. Unless you know Jesus Christ was thrown for you into the furnace, you won't sense him walking with you in the furnace. See, because your sufferings are like little furnaces, and if you feel him with you, and you know he loves you, what's happened to you when you're thanks to yourself as a constructor. glorious. Well, how do you have that sense of presence? It doesn't come just by hoping for it. You have to realize that he was thrown into the furnace for you, and if you've seen that he was thrown into the furnace for you, the ultimate furnace of God's punishment for you, then you will sense him and feel him walking in your furnace with you, and that's how it's done. That's the Christian approach to suffering. Notice, not so much a solution to the problem, but several incredibly important clues to unfolding the mystery of it. Let me just close my talk here with a moment of prayer, okay? Father, I thank you that you have given us such important clues, but they really don't completely solve the mystery, and I certainly hope I didn't give anyone the impression tonight that I believe that I have all the answers. Nevertheless, Father, we pray that these last time, the rest of our time together here, that some answers, some clues, really will strike places in our hearts where we really are hurting or really confused, and we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
