TITLE: Suffering and the Steward-Leader
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Steward Leadership (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/suffering-and-the-steward-leader/

============================================================

Now here's what we're doing this month. We said to start the year that it's important biblically to look at leadership as stewardship. A steward is someone who receives resources and has the responsibility to multiply, grow, develop, cultivate those resources. And therefore leaders, Christian leaders, are basically stewards. That is to say, for the sake of their master, you're a servant of the master, the Lord, you're taking resources that the master gives you and cultivating them and developing them and growing them. Now tonight I want to give you a brief overview of how suffering, this is very counterintuitive, suffering is one of the resources that God brings into our lives that have to be cultivated. We live in one of the only cultures in history that doesn't see suffering as natural or normal or anything to be cultivated. It's just we have no place for it at all. When suffering comes in, as far as we know, life stops. All other cultures have expected suffering. All other cultures understand it as actually an opportunity. Our culture does not. And you're not going to be Christian leaders unless, A, you know how to process your own troubles, difficulties, afflictions with the gospel. And you certainly can't be leaders unless you know how to help other people do it, too. The people in your small group, the people around you in the church, the people in your ministry are going to have problems. They're going to have troubles, afflictions, difficulties unless you know how to help them with them. You're not a leader. Because part of being a leader, we said, is to be a steward. But another very important image of leader, Christian leadership in the Bible is shepherd. And you can't shepherd somebody unless you know how to be tender with a flock. Now what I want to do is I actually have in these two pages, which is a summary of a longer handout that's available on the website or will be at some point, what I hope is a quick overview of what you need to know to not only process your own but to help other people cultivate their suffering as a resource. There's a book, which isn't a very good book, past its title. I got it out the other day when I was preparing this and decided I didn't. The book itself isn't all that great, but the title is terrific. And the name of the book is Don't Waste Your Sorrows. And we all waste our sorrows. Now take a look at the handout. First of all, quickly, you have to understand how the gospel transforms the experience of suffering. I'm going rather briefly. 2 Corinthians 4, 16 and 18. Paul says, Though outwardly we're wasting away, inwardly we are being renewed day by day, for our light and momentary troubles are achieving for us an eternal glory that outweighs them all. So we fix our eyes not on what is seen, but on what is unseen, for what is seen is temporary, but what is unseen is eternal. This is astounding. Paul does not simply say, if you hang on long enough, your sufferings will give way to joy. Your sufferings will give way to glory. See, the word glory always has an aspect of joy, but glory means strength. Glory means magnificence. Glory means joy. Glory means delight. Glory means fullness of life. glory. Our sufferings are achieving glory. It doesn't just say, hold on long enough and God will come in and your sufferings will give way to glory. They achieve it. This is, this is, your sufferings are something that have to be cultivated. And where does this idea come from? It's pretty radical. Well, keep on going down. In the central event in history, which is the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, Jesus' suffering did not just give way to joy. He didn't just suffer and hold on until God could come in with joy. Jesus' suffering produces it. It's because of the way in which he suffered obediently, the way in which he suffered, that produces joy for the whole world and for himself. Isaiah 53 says, the suffering servant, the results of his suffering he will see and be satisfied. Now, because of that, if you are willing to apply the gospel to your suffering, the sufferings will produce glory in you. That means strength. It'll mean character. It means actually the ability to appreciate your life. But you have to, Elizabeth Elliot, just to be personal on this, when my wife and I, when Kathy and I were in seminary, Elizabeth Elliot lived in the region and in the neighborhood and also taught at the seminary. And Elizabeth Elliot was a woman who'd had missionary, and he was one of six men who were killed in Ecuador by the Indians that they were trying to reach. She lost another husband, her second husband, to cancer. And she had a lot to say about suffering. And she mentored us, and she taught us. And one of the things she used to say is, the same sun that softens wax hardens clay. Are you wax or are you clay? The same suffering that makes one person incredibly bitter and breaks them can turn another person into someone great. What's the difference? And the answer is whether or not you process it with the gospel. Elizabeth Elliott used to also quote Amy Carmichael, who used to say, Jesus suffered, not that we might not suffer, but that when we suffer, we would become like him. There's a life text for you. It's not in the Bible. But it's something that Kathy and I have held on to for years. He suffered, not that we might not suffer, but that when we suffer, it would make us like him. Now, how does that happen? Well, right here in the middle of this first page, it tells you a little bit about that. It says, Christians realize that our own suffering, while not substitutionary like Jesus' suffering, follows a similar pattern. If you are willing to plunge yourself into the reality of his suffering for you, if you're able to grasp that, if you're able to realize that, if you're able to, in a sense, rest in that and rejoice in that, then your sufferings, when they happen, will actually deepen you rather than embitter you. So, for example, I'll give you some examples. Look at these three bullet points under the second bullet point. I'm sorry. Look at the three sub-bullet points. If you keep in mind what Jesus did for you, his suffering for you, then you won't grieve in unresolved guilt. You'll say something along these lines. I know that though I'm suffering, this can't be God's abandoning me, because Jesus was abandoned for me on the cross. So, whatever this means, it's not God punishing me and throwing me out, because Jesus was thrown out in my place. He received that. So, this can't be God just giving up on me. Secondly, we won't grieve in deep self-pity and anger. We won't say, I can't believe God's doing this to me, because you're going to say, if you think of Jesus, you say, I know that he took far worse grief on himself than I will ever know, and it was totally undeserved. All for me, so I can bear this smaller amount of suffering for him. And look at the next part. I know his suffering and death did not make sense to his followers, and this suffering does not make sense to me, but I know that God was working in that to bring joy and redemption, and somehow I know he's working in this too. So, without the gospel, there's a feeling. I'll tell you what happens. If you don't believe the gospel, then what are you? Well, you're basically a person into either a secular or religious form of works righteousness. We talk about this all the time. You basically are trying to live the life that you think will achieve for you salvation, however you conceive of it. So, when suffering comes into your life, there's only two possibilities if that's your paradigm. You either feel like, I'm suffering because I'm failing somehow. I must be a bad person. I must be being punished. I must be doing something wrong. So, first of all, the one possibility is you hate yourself when you suffer. You get down in guilt. The other possibility is you hate God because you feel, I'm living a good life. I don't deserve a life like this. So, see, if you're into works righteousness, you will either get into I hate thee or I hate me. You'll either say, I hate thee, bang, bang, bang, or I hate me, bang, bang, bang, one or the other. Or, in many cases, you'll go back and forth on the same day, not being quite sure whether you should be mad at God or mad at yourself. Or maybe sometimes, you know, a lot of us are very, very resourceful and we know how to do both. The gospel removes that because, on the one hand, the gospel says, this can't be God punishing me for my sins because Jesus was punished for my sins. He can't be abandoning me. And, on the other hand, it gets rid of your anger at him because you say, look, I don't know why he's allowing this to happen, but one of the reasons, I don't know why, I don't know what the reasons are that he's allowing this suffering, but I know what the reasons aren't. I know what the reasons can't be. The reasons can't be that he doesn't love me because he came into this world and suffered himself, far worse suffering than I'm suffering. And even though everybody, listen, all the people who saw Jesus Christ suffering on the cross, you know what they said? I'll tell you what they said. They said, I don't see how God could bring anything good out of this. Here was a good man. Here was a man who was healing people. Here was a very good man. I don't see how God could bring any suffering, any good out of this. They were looking at the cross, which is the greatest act of... of the cross who knew what God was doing. And there might have been people who lost their faith that night, who went home and said, I can't believe God would allow such evil and suffering. I can't see what good he could bring out of that. And they lost their faith going home, even though they were looking smack at the greatest thing God ever did for the human race, but they couldn't fit it into the little thimble of their mind. Therefore, they walk away. And because you know that, because you know that gospel story, you're not going to hate God and you're not going to hate yourself. Instead, what you're going to do is you're going to say, I am going to handle this with as much courage, as much confidence, and which is with it. I'm just going to move on forward. I'm going to do what I ought to do. I'm going to love people. I'm going to pray. I'm going to do what I ought to do. And I'm going to keep in mind the gospel. And that'll keep me from either the bitterness of hating myself, that kind of bitterness, or the bitterness of hating God, and I'm going to move on. That's how I use the gospel. Now, if you want a little bit more detail, look at the next part, principles. There's basically six things I say to people who are processing suffering. Number one, don't be surprised. Don't be surprised. When people say, how could God have let this happen to me? Well, you say, you know, here's Jesus Christ, and look at all the horrible things that happened to him, and he was a very good person. And therefore, why are you shocked that bad things would happen to you? We're part of a messed up world. And Jesus actually says in John 9 and Luke 13 that the reason there's suffering in the world is because the world is fallen, and so we're part of the world. And even though we're not necessarily being punished for individual sins when suffering happens, we are being punished as a human race for being cut off from God. So don't be surprised. The second thing you can say is you have to recognize God's own suffering. We don't know what the reasons are that God allows suffering to keep on going, but we do know what the reasons aren't, and that is that he doesn't care. He's going to put an end to suffering in the end, but we do know that there's no way that he doesn't care because he hates our suffering so much, he came into the world to get involved with us so that someday he can end suffering without ending us. Someday he can judge evil without destroying us. Next, quick. Got to do this quickly. A third thing you can say to people who are suffering is you remember God has hidden purposes, and I've already referred to this. Romans 8, 28. God works all things together for good. We just aren't able to see it. We just can't see what's going on. That's why I put down here, many people looked at the cross and figured, I don't see what God could bring out of this that's any good. All right? So you look, another way to put it is, you know the Bible? There's a whole book, very long book, very detailed book, to show you how God is bringing good out of one horrible, tragic, unjust piece of trouble and suffering, which is the death of Jesus Christ. Now there's a book for you, and everything that you've gone through. There's a book, but we don't have the book. You just have to trust that there is a book. So God has hidden purposes for this suffering. We don't know what they are. Four. But God has revealed purposes, and these are all in the Bible. God says that if you keep from letting suffering make you hate yourself or hate him, if you move on through your suffering, these are the possibilities. You lose your self-sufficiency. It refines your commitment to God. During trials, God here says to you, oh, when things were all right between us, as long as I waited on you hand and foot, you served me. Now we'll see in the suffering whether you really are out to serve me or whether you only expected me to serve you. See, whenever suffering comes and everything seems to be going wrong, that's God looking at you and saying, now we'll find out whether you got into the Christian faith to get me to serve you or for you to serve me. Who's the God and who's the servant? Who's the master and who's the servant? So it refines our commitment to God. Number three, it makes us more useful to others because when we've suffered, we become more tender-hearted, we become more empathetic, we are able to help others. Also, suffering is a mode of witness because when you are actually seen by other people as handling your suffering fairly well, and they know you're a Christian, that's one of the greatest witnesses possible. So there's all those possible ways in which God's got hidden purposes for your suffering, but he's also got revealed purposes. Number five, examine your own heart. David Martin Lloyd-Jones tells a story about a, he heard a bunch of older Welsh ministers talking about a pastor who was a great preacher, and he was a young man, and everybody thought he was going to be a terrific preacher. And these older ministers were excited because the gospel was not doing very well in Wales at the time, and they were saying, oh, how excited it is that this young man seems to be at the time. there might be revival and many people might come to faith. But then one of the older ministers said to the others, oh, but there's one problem. I don't think he's been broken yet. And all the rest of the, Dr. Lloyd-Jones remembers, the other older minister said, oh, no. Yeah, well, until he's broken, he won't be of much use. Now, what are they talking about? And Dr. Lloyd-Jones went on to say, nobody who's not been really, really humbled into the dust by suffering has ever been of much use in the lives of other people. That's just true. That's just true. If you look at people who've had a charmed life, they're shallow. They don't understand how the human heart works. They don't understand what life is like. They can't empathize with you. They don't know. Yeah. But it's only during my hardest times in my life that I've ever really come to know anything illuminating about myself. So that's, you know, Samuel Rutherford actually puts it this way. His wise love feeds us with hunger. It fattens us with famine. Lord, spoil my fool's heaven here below that I might have thy true heaven forever. These inward trials I employ from self and pride to set thee free and break thy schemes of earthly joy that thou mayst find thine all in me. Now, look, last, and this is all I can have time for, pastoral approaches to suffering. Notice that there's three levels. Encouragement level, coaching level, insight level. In the early, if you don't know a person real well or a disaster has just happened to them, what you really need to do is just be with them and not give them a lot of content. It's very wrong to say, oh, your mother was killed in a car accident. Well, you know, Romans 8, 28, all things work together for good. We're going to take away your Christian leader's certificate if you do something like that. You know, make you sit in the corner for a long time. That's not the time to give content. But notice I put down here that you can share principles one and two when you have an opportunity, gently, carefully. What you mainly need to do is just be there to encourage them. You can talk about the fact that we all suffer because we're part of the human race, that Jesus suffered even though he was very, very good, and that Jesus came and suffered that we someday can end suffering and not end us. You can talk about the very general stuff because it's not very challenging. You just want to comfort people in the early stages. But at the next stage, if a person continues to move, you want to start to share three and four and eventually five and six. You eventually want to help people actually learn from it. Once they get over having the wind knocked out of them from the difficulty and the trouble that has hit them, after they started to kind of get back on their feet but they're really wrestling, then you can start to share three. God's got hidden purposes that you may never know. And you can give them examples. Four, God's got revealed purposes. Five, it's time to see what is God trying to show me about myself right now. What are the weaknesses in my character that need work upon? That takes a lot more maturity. Your relationship has to be stronger. The person has to have kind of moved along a little bit. But this is a pastoral process for helping somebody work through difficulties and sufferings in their lives. Now, okay, if you've got a question, if you're up here, well, just raise your hand, Justin, give you a mic. Thank you, Tim. How do you handle a Christian friend who's suffering from physical problems? And whenever you speak with the person, the person's clearly in a pity party, a lot of complaining. I know that listening might just dig the person deeper into the complaining pity party. Probably you get a sense the person doesn't want to hear some of these kinds of things. How do you handle that? Well, it depends on how long it's going, right? And I think I said a minute ago that when the onset of trouble, you need to really be very pretty understanding and low content and more support and sympathy. But, of course, it all depends. Let me give you a rule of thumb. For example, I know this isn't what you asked about. But most people know that if your spouse or a child or someone in your immediate family dies, that the bereaved person, the most bereaved person, the bereaved people, for a good year are not going to be over it. Because the first birthday, the first Christmas, in other words, things constantly come up that make you relive the fact that they're not there for like a year. And, therefore, for you to feel that it's time to start giving people more content and see them. actually probably pushing them too fast but at a certain point somewhere after that year if you see them still just not moving on with their life then you very gently increasingly uh let's just say you you see them in the very beginning you see them and you say five things and they're all just supportive and then maybe the next time when you turn that corner four of the five are supportive and one is challenging and as time goes on three are supportive and two is challenging and maybe that's about as far as you should ever go because after all it isn't people are suffering and you usually aren't suffering now by the way you may have more authenticity if the person knows that you that there's some commensurate thing you've been through or going through you might have actually more authenticity to say buck up so it depends on you and what they know of you and how long it's been but i would say you increase the challenging statements and you mix them in with the uh with the supportive statements but you do have to say um you do have to say you you have to challenge uh what you might have to say about uh physical illness there's a there's a there's a tension i don't know if i told you about this before there's there's a very important tension between acceptance and resistance like if a person's losing their sight if they just accept it and don't push and try to do as much as they possibly can then they're going to just resign and and kind of have no life but if they don't accept the fact that they've lost some of their sight if they're not willing for example to give up driving or something like that there'll be a disaster if you don't accept and there's a disaster if you don't resist and you you're looking for that dialectical tension between accepting and resisting uh so with with chronic physical illnesses there are there is some acceptance that you have to say look because of my illness there are some things i can't do anymore but there's also a need to resist and if you see a person in denial going too far into resistance or too far into acceptance you need to as a friend need to say here's where i think you need to be but you just couch it all with this with the still supportive statements and even if the person doesn't listen to you you know slowly you increase the number of challenging statements along with your supportive statements and if they're just not listening to you go to be a friend anyway you don't just say well i've had it with you i'm just tired but you're absolutely right the two if you're 100 supportive of a person who is clearly in self-pity you're actually making them more self-absorbed i even made a minor allusion to that in the sermon on sunday you might have heard that okay somebody else hi um i had a quick question about um as leaders how helpful do you think it is for us to share our sufferings because me as a leader so far my experience has been when i share suffering i either get condemnation or i get lots of advice from my from the people in my group or when i try not to share and i try to help them then they seem to think they don't really listen as much to what i say because they think oh well your life is fine yeah by the way i don't understand that honestly i understand the advice which is a problem we all have that is you fix it um well let me i'm going to ask you a question but first of all uh you you got to be a little careful about answering a feeling answer a feeling with a feeling like sometimes a person says here's the trouble i have and they're really looking for a responsive supportive gesture they're really they know what they should do about it already they're it's pretty obvious to them and they so if you just say well do blank blank blank you know no one two three they they may already if you if there's the people who already know they should be doing one two three and what they really want is somebody to say that is really really hard so if you answer a fact a feeling with a fact when they really just want you to say that's really really hard uh if you answer a feeling with a fact it'll be very uncaring which sounds like sometimes it's happened to you that you're talking about you know a suffering you're going through the persons just say well you should do this this and this which is a very typical in new york by the way because everybody's very fact oriented results oriented analytical um and uh you see one of the ways you judge whether or not the person wants a feeling or a fact is well what you just say you may think about maybe they they're pretty smart people and they already know that so be i mean it's the same thing with uh people who are sick my wife's often ill and there's a lot of well-meaning people saying here here do this you know medically when the best thing would be to say i know that's really hard on the other hand where's the condemnation come from i know he took the mic away can you tell me why condemnation you mean i'll repeat it for you go ahead yeah what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what do you think what And I'll see you later. Mic away. Can you tell me, why condemnation? You mean? I'll repeat it for you. Go ahead. Yeah. What he's saying is that there are many people who come from Christian, I don't know, I hate to say it's a tradition, but Christians should, well, I mean, I knew a guy, by the way, I knew a guy when I was in seminary who had a wife who was killed in a car accident, and what the people around him said, and they were part of this tradition, they said is, now, it's really important to just praise God for the fact that your wife is in heaven, and praise God for the fact that he's going to really work in your life, and you can't just break down and cry and scream at all, you know, that's un-Christian, you've got to show more faith, but, you know, that really, that's not the gospel. The gospel is you're simultaneously just and sinful, and it sort of sounds to me like a works righteousness approach, and that is you can never let God see you sweat. You can never show that you have any problem with him. You can never show that you're struggling in any way, or you can't show anybody else that, and I guess as a leader, what you would have to do in a case like that is, first of all, you need to forgive them so that you don't just start to feel like, gosh, what, you know, I got zinged there. You need to forgive them and realize that at some point over a period of time, you're going to have to lead them into a much, you know, a more full biblical understanding of how to deal with suffering. You know, here's a good passage to take him to, Job chapter 1. It actually says, when they got all the bad news, you know, he tore his clothes, he threw ashes on his head, he screamed, he fell on the ground, and the Bible says, in all these things, Job sinned not. That's not how modern American Christians, they would say, gosh, he lost the victory. You know, he's showing a lack of faith in God. Take a look at that. That you're just, you have no idea what that means. In all these things, Job sins not. In fact, at the very end of the book of Job, at the end of the book of Job, if you read his speeches, where he's trying to say, I cursed the day I was born, and he's saying, why did you allow this to happen, God, and all this sort of thing, at the end of the book of Job, God turns to Job's friends, and he says, Job has to pray to me for you, because I'm so mad at you, but if Job prays to me for you, I might turn for my wrath against you, because they were so cruel to him. So you read it, you get to the end of the book of Job, and God vindicates Job for the way in which he handled the suffering, and it doesn't look like, to us American Christians, he did a very good job. He's screaming, he's questioning, but the point is, he didn't stop praying. He took, he processed his troubles with God. He never stopped praying, never missed a quiet time. Had very, very, very long quiet times in iambic pentameter, you know, kind of, you know, five chapters at a time, but you've really got to, so you're going to have to help people understand that. So forgive them, but boy, you know, you know, one thing, though, is they probably became Christians somewhere else, I sure hope, because I can't imagine that somebody who became a Christian in New York at Redeemer and comes and listens to the messages and the communication would have that attitude, but if you became a Christian somewhere else, you could easily pick that up. Okay. Oh, there's a whole lot of places that say, Christians, you don't let God see you sweat. In other words, it's a Phariseeism, really. Okay, somebody else, over here. Sure, go ahead. Looking inward in dealing with suffering before looking outward, what practical advice can you give to guard against the inevitable tendency of your heart to take morbid joy in suffering, to almost make a fetish of it? Oh, that's the opposite, isn't it? The opposite of saying, when suffering happens, you shouldn't be unhappy and you shouldn't be impatient, you shouldn't question, you should just move, you should act like, you know, everything's okay because God's under control. All things work together for good. Those will have gotten called according to his purpose. The opposite is to actually be a little bit of a spiritual masochist, you mean? That you take a certain amount of maybe pride in the fact that I'm suffering for Jesus' sake? Oddly enough, I guess what I would do to myself is I would say, this is a different kind of works righteousness. And it's a way of saying, now, by the way, I do know, how do I say this? I certainly know people who I've had to deal with. They like having problems for a couple of reasons, but because they feel deep and kind of noble because of the suffering they're going through. And I'd say it's also a form of works righteousness. It keeps, it actually creates, usually in those folks, a spiritual superiority. And when you see other people are having an easier life, you feel superior to them. It's one of their ways of feeling. I'm deep. you see other people that have had a more charmed life and you feel superior to them and you need to come against that to use the pentecostal term you need to see that in your life and realize that that is really really really bad for you it's bad for your character it's a form of arrogance it's a kind of monastic arrogance you know i'm leading this sort of pinched and difficult life but i'm really trusting in christ and it'll lead to a smugness and a self-righteousness and you need to call it that that's what i would do let's take one more i thank you i have a close friend who's suffering from an inherited catastrophic illness and when i visited her yesterday how do you you know if i had that condition i'd want to be healed now not that i would say anything to her about this but when i pray for her do i pray for her to be healed what do i do how do i deal with that because it's a condition that they don't have any real treatment for yeah um yeah i think you have to when i pray i uh for people i always pray that god if it's your will you'd be healed but i said we always remember what jesus did and that is to say nevertheless not my will but thine be done in other words if jesus had actually if the cup that was in front of jesus at the cross had actually passed from him we'd all be up a creek wouldn't we so um jesus said let this cup pass from me nevertheless not my will but thine be done that's how we should always be praying and what you really are saying is lord um i would think with all due respect that would really glorify you if you healed me of this on the other hand if there if it will glorify you more for me to be uh to bear this thorn then i will you know i'll i'll accept that i know you're healing me of something inside and paul talks about that all through second corinthians you know paul paul um says he prayed for this thorn to be taken away we don't know what it is but basically this is what paul was saying imagine you're in a boat and you're going along in a boat and uh in in a kind of uh on a river and in front of you is a huge rock sticking up out of the water three feet and because it's a narrow channel your boat is about is going to be dashed upon the rocks there's three there's two things god can do what is it class class what are the two things how could there's two ways god could answer the question answer your question please don't let me be dashed upon the rock one is what class he could remove the rock what's the other possibility raise the level of the water four feet i hadn't thought of that i'm so glad somebody did all right one is he could take the sickness away the other is he could give you the kind of patience the kind of wisdom the kind of strength the kind of joy that can handle it and because of the the rock because of the thorn you get that joy it drives you to christ and you're able to become that kind of person and what you have to say is lord with all due respect i would just assume you didn't make me into this incredibly great person you just took the rock away but if you want to raise the level of grace in my life four feet instead that would be fine that would be fine i was actually one other illustration i always use i'll mention this it's very similar is when you're doing bicep curls in a gym uh does it feel like your biceps are getting stronger or weaker class it may it feels like they're becoming like spaghetti when actually they're getting stronger and bruce and i were trying to talk about we're not totally sure how that works but for in some way uh as the muscles breaking down it's strengthening isn't that right don't don't please don't explain it to me right now because it's my time's up the point is that when you are in suffering and you just try to pray it's like lifting it's like lifting a weight when you just when you reach out just to do the normal sorts of things god wants you to do pray read the bible worship uh don't repay evil for evil it's just harder it's just incredibly harder it's like right now i can raise my arm fine but it's not getting that much stronger but if i put a 25 pound weight in it it really hurts almost and it's getting weaker and weaker but that's the only way my arm is actually getting built up harder things coming into your life that you just bear as you go about living a normal christian life turn you into something great you feel like you're getting weaker you feel like you have more doubts and you feel like you have less patience and you feel like you're more angry and more irritable what's actually happening is your temper your faith all those things are getting stronger if you don't just give up and say i hate me or i hate thee and you move on and that's what you say to people and say maybe god will take the rock out maybe god will raise the level of the water maybe god will take the weight off maybe god's going to make you into somebody incredibly strong you
