TITLE: Tamar
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 38:11-19, 24-30
TOPICS: Mercy & Justice Redemption
SERIES: The Mothers of Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/tamar/

============================================================

Judah then said to his daughter-in-law, Tamar, Live as a widow in your father's house until my son Shelah grows up. For he thought, he may die too, just like his brothers. So Tamar went to live in her father's house. After a long time, Judah's wife, the son of Shur, died. When Judah had recovered from his grief, he went up to Temnah to the men who were shearing his sheep, and his friend here, the Adullamite, went with him. When Tamar was told, your father-in-law is on his way to Temnah to shear his sheep, she took off her widow's clothes, covered herself with a veil to disguise herself, and then sat down at the entrance to Enayim, which is on the road to Temnah. For she saw that though Shelah had now grown up, she had not been given to him as a wife. When Judah saw her, he thought she was a prostitute, for she had covered her face. Not realizing that she was his daughter-in-law, he went over to her by the roadside and said, Come now, let me sleep with you. And what will you give me to sleep with you, she asked. I'll send you a young goat for my flock, he said. Will you give me something as a pledge until you send it, she asked. He said, What pledge should I give you? Your seal and its cord and the staff in your hand, she answered. So he gave them to her and slept with her, and she became pregnant by him. After she left, she took off her veil and put on her widow's clothes again. About three months later, Judah was told, Your daughter-in-law, Tamar, is guilty of prostitution, and as a result, she is now pregnant. Judah said, Bring her out and have her burned to death. As she was being brought out, she sent a message to her father-in-law. I am pregnant by the man who owns these, she said. And she added, See if you recognize whose seal and cord and staff these are. Judah recognized them and said, She is more righteous than I, since I wouldn't give her to my son Shalah. And he did not sleep with her again. When the time came for her to give birth, there were twin boys in her womb. As she was giving birth, one of them put out his hand. So the midwife took a scarlet thread and tied it on his wrist and said, This one came out first. But when he drew back his hand and his brother came out, she said, So this is how you have broken out. And he was named Perez. Then his brother, who had the scarlet thread on his wrist, came out, and he was given the name Zira. This is the word of the Lord. Now what in the world does this have to do with Christmas or Advent? What in the world does this story have to do with anything? What in the world is the teacher in this service going to say of any interest about this strange, sordid, odd story? I'll tell you later about how it relates to Christmas. But for right now, the story you just heard read in Genesis 38. What's the message? Well, that's what we're here to talk about. But to start with, let's just remind ourselves of something that we've been looking at a lot this fall, especially if you've been here before this fall. And if there's one story that proves the thing that we've been pointing out over and over again, it's the one we see here tonight. And that is that you cannot read the stories of the Bible, like most people want to, as inspirational stories filled with moral examples for us to imitate. That's what most people think the Bible is. Oh, the Bible is a wonderful book. It's filled with ennobling, inspirational stories filled with moral examples for us to imitate. Where? Just take a look. Here's Judah. Judah is the son of Jacob, the great-grandson of Abraham. And Abraham is the one to which God came and said, Abraham, I'm going to save the world through your family. One of your descendants is going to be the savior of the world. So, I want you and your descendants to know me personally, walk before me in the ways of justice, peace, truth, and right, pass the faith down to the next generation. And Judah, in this story, fails in every single respect. Every one of those things. So, you're not going to find any moral examples with him. And what about Tamar? Now, obviously, we'll see that she's the protagonist in this narrative. And yet, is she your moral example? Is sexual entrapment and incest okay, in circumstances anyway? Is that what we're supposed to get out of it? No. Of course not. What's the theme of this story? In a way, it's the theme of all the Bible stories. At the end of the story, Tamar names one of her kids Perez, and the name Perez means breakthrough. We'll find out the details. On the right hand of another. Thank you. stories. At the end of the story, Tamar names one of her kids Perez, and the name Perez means breakthrough. That's translated break out, same thing, breakthrough. And here is the moral of all Bible stories. The moral of all Bible stories is morals will never save you. You'll never be related to God if it's through morals and moral performance. The theme of this story of all the Bible stories is not so much here's how you can live a good life and get God to bless you, but rather here's how the grace of God breaks out, breaks through into lives of people who otherwise would sink under their corruption and their brokenness. There's three great breakthroughs in this text. There's the breakthrough of Tamar, there's the breakthrough of Judah, and there's the breakthrough of the son of the promise. And we learn something from each one of them. What are they? Okay, first of all, first of all, let's look at the breakthrough of Tamar, and then we do that by looking at the text, and then how the story starts. Now, we didn't print in the bulletin your first 10 verses. Let me tell you what happens in the first 10 verses. Tamar marries the oldest son of Judah, and the oldest son of Judah is Ur. And we know almost nothing about the details. The narrator in Genesis 38 tells us nothing about the details. It only tells us that Ur was an extremely wicked, cruel person, and that he dies under the hand of God's judgment. We don't really know how he was wicked and cruel or what particularly he did. We don't really know how he died. All we're told is that he was a very wicked and a very cruel person, and he died as an expression of God's judgment. And then we're told that Tamar marries a second son of Judah, the second son of Judah, and for basically the same reasons, the same thing happens. Now, when you get to verse 11, the first part, we see Judah, it says, then Judah said to his daughter-in-law Tamar, live as a widow in your father's house until my son Shelah grows up. Now, why is he saying that? Here's why. Tamar, now let's see what Tamar's situation is. I think some of you find this interesting. First of all, Tamar, at least at verse 11, is probably about 15 years old. People married almost right out, right after puberty, you know, just right as soon as puberty hit. Generally, people got married 14, 15, 16, something like that. In verse 11, she's probably about 15. Probably by the time of the incident, years later, when Shelah has grown up and she realizes she's not getting him, probably about four or five years later. So, probably Tamar, all through this text, is a teenager. And the other thing we know, though, is that Tamar is a widow. In fact, she's twice a widow. And because she's twice a widow, she was the most socially and economically vulnerable member of that society. This is not a free market economy in which people can go out and get jobs. And certainly a woman couldn't go out and get a job. And a widow, which means a single adult already married woman, very, very, very unlikely to have some man choose her, was in an enormously economically vulnerable position. And therefore, there was an enormously important law to protect widows in those societies. And the law was called the law of the leveret marriage, the leveret marriage law. It comes from the Latin, from the Latin word lever, which is the Latin word for brother-in-law. And the leveret law was this, the father-in-law, the father of the dead husband. It was his job, it was his obligation to be the defender and provider for the widow, for the daughter-in-law. And if he had any other sons, to provide from his sons another husband for her. That was his job, that was his obligation. And verse 11a shows us that he says, at least to her, he says outwardly, I'll do it. My third son, Shalai, is probably 10, 12, something like that. He says, wait until he grows up. He couldn't be too far behind her for him to say, when he grows up, you can be wedded. He couldn't be too far behind her, probably saying four or five years. He says, go home to your father and don't call us, we'll call you. However, verse 11b tells us that Judah's being dishonest. Though Judah, in verse 11a, outwardly is claiming and saying, I will do my job. I will be the defender and provider of you. Verse 11b, look what he says inside. To himself, he thought, he, meaning Shalai, may die too, just like his brothers. Now, what does that mean? Judah's in denial. Judah is blaming her. sons. Judah does not want to admit what a mess they were. Judah does not want to admit their corruption and brokenness. He does not want to admit what a mess of a father he must have been. He doesn't want to admit it. Instead, what he wants to say is, this woman somehow is bad news. If she marries my third son, he'll probably die too. She's the problem. My sons are dead for some reason, somehow, for her. She's bad news. There's something wrong with her. And so he sends her away to her father, which evidently was pretty far away, with absolutely no intention of ever talking to her again or ever giving her a son. And that dawns on Tamar, as verse 12 and 14 tells us, she began to realize that Shelah had grown up and there was no way that Judah was going to be her protector and provider. So she goes into action. And it is an enormously and unbelievably bold and fascinating plan. When she hears that her father-in-law is on his way to her neck of the woods, what we're told here in verse 14, she goes into action. There's a bunch of, a series of Hebrew action verbs that come along, bang, bang, bang, to give the to convey just how decisive and how active and assertive and aggressive she is. It says, she took off her widow's clothes. She covered herself with a veil to disguise herself. She sat down at the entrance to Enayim, which is on the road to Timnah. Judah goes by, sees her, thinks she's a prostitute, goes in, has sex with her, not knowing it's his daughter-in-law. And leaves as a pledge against the fee that he promises, his seal, cord, and staff. Now, the seal was something only a wealthy man would have had. Shows he's a man of prominence. And it was basically a kind of signet on a kind of a little steely, which is a little cylinder. And it was what you use to make your, put your insignia on things. It was a way of making contracts. And it was tied to a cord, and very often perhaps tied to a staff, too. It might have all been one thing. Robert Alter, the famous expert on Hebrew narrative, says that leaving this with her was the equivalent of leaving your wallet, in a way, with somebody as a pledge against the fee. And once he leaves, she takes it and goes home. Now, let's stop the story right there and ask, what in the world is she doing? And the answer of the text, and the answer of the Bible, and the first thing we learn, is that she is absolutely going after justice. The word is even here in the text, if you know where to find it. Now, what I mean, she is after justice, but the Bible's take and comment on how she does it is absolutely unique and off the map, off the map of all human philosophies or political agendas or ideologies. Now, let me show you what I mean. First, first of all, Tamar brilliantly and ingeniously uses the double standard, the sexual double standard of Judah and that society against him. What's the sexual double standard? One standard sexually for men and one for women. You notice, Judah has sex when he wants. How would Tamar know that if he saw a prostitute on the road, he'd go to her? You have to realize her whole strategy is based on the fact that she can count on that. This was the way he was, therefore. This was his settled pattern in character. He had sex when he wanted it, with whom he wanted. But the minute he finds out that she has had sex outside of marriage, he wants her executed. There's the double standard. He clearly has been willing to say, when I want sex, I get sex. But he is insisting that she stay a childless, celibate widow. There's the double standard, which she uses against him. But there's much more going on than that. She's not just protesting a double standard. Oh, no. The Bible tells us, especially all through the Old Testament, the New Testament, too. The Bible is enormously concerned for the welfare of widows. Not, and what's really a little difficult for us is because our society is somewhat different, and we don't necessarily understand what the widow represents. But all through the Bible, there's an enormous number of statements that tell us that God is concerned for, and he wants us to be concerned for the welfare of widows. So, for example, Psalm 146. The Lord lifts up, by the way, we sang Psalm 146, but in tonight already, but in Psalm 146, we read this. The Lord lifts up those who are bowed down. He upholds the cause of the oppressed and gives food to the hungry. He watches over the alien, sustains the fatherless and the widow. Jeremiah 49. Sing to God. Sing praise to his name. A father to the fatherless and a defender of widows. I don't remember him because my friends are not skilled at all, he siglo X are. We speak EVs, that's why he's on Personal and Forgive LG. So, we understand this. So, you build the He watches over the aliens, sustains the fatherless, and the widow. Jeremiah 49, sing to God, sing praise to his name, a father to the fatherless and a defender of widows. Isaiah 117, seek justice. Hear that word? Seek justice. Encourage the oppressed. Defend the fatherless and plead the case of the widow. Your rulers are companions of thieves. They all love bribes. They chase after wealth. They do not defend the cause of the fatherless, and the widow's need they never hear. Therefore, I will turn my hand against you till Zion be redeemed with justice. Now, here's what we learn. In every single society, there are some requirements for you in that society to experience functionality, well-being, inclusion, and dignity. In every single society, there are certain requirements for you to experience in that society functionality, well-being, dignity, and inclusion. Back then, an education meant almost nothing. To be included in that society, to be functional, to be accepted, to have dignity, it wasn't education. You had to have a spouse and children, period. That was the way it was. It was an agrarian society. It was a family-oriented society. All right, let's not judge it at this point. That's what is necessary. Not an education. Today, what is it? It's not necessarily all that important, or certainly nowhere near as important, to have a spouse and kids. But you better have an education, because if you were raised in an inner-city neighborhood with family who cannot themselves know the difference, and cannot afford to do anything but send the kid to an incompetent inner-city school, so that by the time they get to, say, 8th grade, 9th grade, 10th grade, they are absolutely functionally illiterate, and there's almost no hope for them to ever overcome that, they lack the requirement. They lack a key requirement in our society for them to experience functionality, well-being, inclusion, and dignity. They're never going to. You've got to have that. They're going to be marginalized. They're going to be alienated. They are the widows, in a sense. I mean, every society has got people who don't have what's necessary for inclusion in that society. And we're told that when God sees the people who have the resources, not aiding the people who don't to get them, God does not call that stinginess. He calls that injustice. What Judah is doing is he is depriving this widow of her right. He has something that only he can give her. Only he can give it to her. And he is obligated to give it to her, so that she can be brought in. She realizes that out of his indifference, and out of his selfishness, out of his need to blame her for what happened to his family, he has relegated her to an absolutely dead-end life. She's not going to stand for it. And what is she after? She's after, not just a handout, she's after justice. And, you want to see where the text confirms that? At the very end, we're going to get to the end again, but let me just scroll ahead to the very end. When Judah sees the whole situation, he says, She is more righteous than I. Now, isn't that a strange word to be used? The reason it looks strange to you is because the translators weren't really quite sure how to get this across. He uses the word sadek, which is the word that means just. It was a word that was used by a judge, and clearly this is a kind of courtroom simulation. You know, she sends a set, well, we're going to get to this in a minute. She sends a set of evidence to him, and he renders a verdict. And what is his verdict? Sadek. When the judge was listening to the parties, listening in the trial, listening, and, you know, on whose side is justice? That's the job of the judge. Is this person telling the truth, or is this person telling the truth? Is this person innocent, or is this person guilty? And at the very end, the judge's job was to say to one side or the other, Sadek. Justice is on your side. And that is what Judah says. Judah looks at what he has done to her, and looks at what she is demanding, and he says she has justice on her side. She has justice on her side. She's after justice, and she's right. I have been guilty of injustice. I have been guilty of oppression, and she is right. Now, what some people are going to say, and here's what I mean, what I want to say, the Bible's take on what Tamar does is so off the map. It's off the map of any particular human ideology or political party I know. Some of you are going to say, well, does that mean that what she did was right? Incest? Sexual attraction? That was right? Look carefully at how not only Judah, but I'll show you in a minute how the Bible nuances this. It's remarkable. He does not say she is righteous. In other words, she does not say she is guiltless and I am guilty. is innocent and I am not innocent or anything like that. She is more righteous than me, which is a remarkable, a remarkable bound. What he's saying is this. She is not completely righteous. She is guilty, but I am more guilty. She has done wrong, but I have done the greater wrong. She has done sexual sin, but I have done social injustice, and my sin overshadows hers in this case. See, now, this is nuts. See, the liberal take is she is an oppressed woman and there should be nothing. She didn't do anything wrong. It's her body. She has to do what she wanted. She got him back. She stuck it to the man who was oppressing her, and therefore she didn't do anything wrong. That's the liberal take on it. Traditional values, the more conservative take is that sexual sins are a bad thing. Whenever you ask a person about traditional values, you're for traditional values? Yes. Is racism and social oppression on that list? No. You see, adultery is on that list and fornication is on that list and all sorts of other things. But here we have not the liberal take that says this isn't a sin or the conservative take that says that it's a sin and she needs to be punished. Instead, this unbelievable nuance. He says, because I oppressed her, though she is wrong, she is guilty. She did wrong, and there's no justifying of that. And yet, I'm the one with the power. I'm the one who is even more guilty. And that mitigates the situation. Now, if you think I'm just reading something in, see, this is remarkable. This is not a conservative or liberal position. This is not a Democrat or Republican position. This is saying that both, that it's not just, it's not just a sort of a conservative approach that looks at the personal private sins like sex and ignores racism and social oppression or the liberal sins that, you know, racism and social oppression and ignores the personal. But it doesn't even make them equal in this case. But it says, in some cases, a person who's been oppressed may do wrong things, and they're still wrong. And yet, we need to be understanding in the broader context of the oppression. This is wild. I mean, I never saw this until I've studied this in this last two weeks. And if you think that I am reading it in, there is another place in the Bible that refers to this very incident. It alludes to it. And it's a word from God to the people of Israel through the prophet Hosea many years later about the social decay of their society. And in it, this is what Hosea 4.14 says. This is God's word to the people. He says, hear the word of the Lord, says Hosea, and this is God's word. I will not punish, listen to this, I will not punish your daughters when they turn to prostitution. Nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery. That's a very clear allusion to what happened in the past. I will not punish your daughters when they turn to prostitution, nor your daughters-in-law when they commit adultery. You know what's weird? Here's God saying that what they're doing is adultery. He's not saying it's not. What they're doing is prostitution. He's not saying it's all right. But he says, I'm mitigating their punishment. Why? He says, because the men consort with the harlots and sacrifice with shrine prostitutes, and you have become a people without understanding, and you will come to ruin. It's the same thing. This is sin, O Tamar. And yet, in the broader context, you are guilty, but he's more guilty because of his position, because of what happened. That's what Judah says. That's what God says. And here's what this means. Social injustice is a big sin. That's all I'm saying. That's all this is telling us. When you have got what enables you to be included in society, when you've got the ability, when you've got the money, when you've got the education, when you've got the wherewithal, when you've got the connections, you've got the privilege, when you've got that, and you see other people without that, and you're not making an effort to help them get it, you could have been born in there, but you weren't. You could have been born in a mountain in Tibet in the 13th century, then you wouldn't be so cool right now. In other words, you must not overlook, you must not think, well, the reason that I'm okay is I completely pulled myself up by my bootstraps. You had all sorts of privileges, some more than others. Some worked harder for it than others. But the fact is, God holds you responsible, if you have, to share with the have-nots, where it's injustice. And it's such a serious sin. It can overshadow the sins of the people. It can overshadow the sins of the people that you might have a tendency to look down on. Look at all those people out there, cavorting and doing all these licentious things out there. Very interesting. Tamar goes after justice. And she should. She is right to do so. Do you have the same kind of passion for justice? Do you see oppression and social injustice as that serious of a sin or not? That's Tamar's breakthrough. another breakthrough. Now, if you're a liberal type person, if you're a liberal person politically, ideologically, temperamentally, you love that point. You may hate the next one because the gospel doesn't fit into any particular category. Because the next thing we look at is the breakthrough of Judah. And what is Judah's breakthrough? Here's what Judah's breakthrough is. Let's look at the last part of the story now. She goes home. She has his stuff. By the way, verses 20 to 23, which we didn't print for you to save space, just tells us that he tried to send a goat, which he promised to the prostitute, to the prostitute, couldn't find the prostitute, and just said, oh, well, and forgot it. But in verse 24, we see about three months later, Judah was told, your daughter-in-law Tamar is guilty of prostitution, and as a result, she is now pregnant. And Judah says, in Hebrew, there's only two words, take, burn. Take, burn. Take her out and burn her. Now, the thing that we miss as modern people, since so much of the Old Testament seems kind of brutal anyway. Ancient societies very often, you know, just seem a little more gritty than ours. We miss something that the readers back then would have not missed, and that is what Judah does here is enormously hateful, is disproportionately angry, because burning was something that virtually no one was ever executed, almost no one was ever executed through burning. Burning was, to be burned to death was reserved for the most heinous crimes, the most heinous crimes. And therefore, the average reader, the reader listening to this, would be amazed. Why in the world would Judah demand that? It's a torture as well as death. And here's the answer. This confirms, see, this is almost inexplicable, unless you remember verse 11b. What verse 11b tells us is the reason he decided to deprive her and oppress her and deprive her and just put her on the shelf and dump her. He needed to believe bad things about her in order to justify in his own mind what happened to his sons. She's the reason, somehow. She's the reason. She goaded them into it, or she brought it on somehow. And this proves that what he's been doing, he's needed to believe bad things about her. So over the years, he's been sticking little pins in her, in his head, you know. And thinking about this and that, he's got to do it to hide his own failure as a father, to justify himself, to sort of shield himself from the reality of his own sins and his own flaws and failures and his sons. And he's been doing it, and he's been doing it, he's been doing it, and now look. Look what happens. Murderous hatred spews out. Why? He's probably happy. He needs to believe something bad about her, and now he has it. This is confirmation. I knew it, he's saying. Burn her. She's a whore. I knew it all along. Now, what does this tell us? Was Judah a horrible, wicked person? Judah is about to do an enormous evil. He's about to take a woman, a girl, who is absolutely innocent, who's done absolutely nothing to him, or to his sons, or to anybody else, and he's about to torture her and kill her. Now, I want you to know, if he goes, if he does this, it's not just, it's not just Tamar that's on her way into the pit. It's not just Tamar who's on her way into the abyss. It is Judah as well. Because if he does this, there's only two possibilities for his future. The one thing is, if you do something that evil and that unjust, you either have to spend all of your life continuing to justify it in your heart and stay absolutely convinced that what you did was right, which means you've got to continually lie to yourself and lie to yourself and twist things and it just twists your heart, or you admit later on that what you did was wrong and it poisons you and you're never the same again. He's about to go into an incredible abyss. Why? Why is he able to do this evil thing? Is he a terrible person? He has got in his heart the same thing that you and I have in our heart. Every single human heart needs to justify itself. It needs to shift the blame. It needs to shield itself from the reality and the fact of just how selfish and stupid and bad and lazy and wrong we are. And so we say, well, I couldn't help it, or it was a bad day, or she made me do it, or he made me do it, or it wasn't so bad, or I'm not as bad as they are. You do everything you can to justify, but look what it can lead to. He's about to go into the abyss. 25 it says in verse 25 that as she was being brought out that means literally as she was being dragged to the fire she sent a message to her father now what that must mean is they had her they were dragging her and think of how dramatic is she pulls out a package she says wait i have a message from my father-in-law take him this and here's the message and in hebrew the message is haker nah it's a fascinating and critical word in this whole text and it links to a number of other texts in genesis and it's the word recognize do you recognize these now you see the word recognize doesn't just mean physically to see obviously the word means to see see this but it means not so much just to physically see but to discern to realize to recognize and when she sends him his stuff and says by the way the man who impregnated me who needs to go into the fire with me of course by rights these are his do you recognize them she is not just saying recognize your things she is calling him she is forcing him by god's grace to recognize himself she is not saying recognize these things she's saying do you recognize yourself do you see who you are do you see what you've become do you see the sexual hypocrisy do you see the hardness of heart do you see the delusion do you see do you see do you see the murderous hate in your heart do you see do you see where you're headed do you see what you are and by god's grace he does the word recognize comes up again it says and judah did recognize you see and says she is more righteous than i now what's going on here's the second point here's what we learned judah just had a breakthrough too he was on the verge of going all the way under but at this point he has a spiritual awakening that's what the word recognize means wake up open your eyes look and see who you really are and it's only because of that that he has a turnaround the second point see the first point is a great point if you're a liberal social justice is is overwhelmingly important and we need to be active in getting it and here's the second point you must be born again it's not like a very liberal point does it that even a very good person a very moral person a very privileged person has to have a spiritual awakening has to have god come in and break in or you or the natural self-justification the natural self-centeredness of the human heart can lead you into absolute hardness you cannot possibly make it without a spiritual awakening of some kind you cannot possibly make it without some grace intervening from the outside to waking you up to who you really are look look at the need for spiritual awakening here look at the nature of look at the need first of all judah think of who he is in the whole world at this time in history in the whole world this family the family of abraham isaac jacob and this family knows more about god and more about god's ways they've got more privileges and more knowledge of god's ways and will than any other family any other place in the world and yet look what he's capable of look where he's going look what he's about to do trying harder won't be enough just being a good person isn't enough let me put it this way right now the sin in your life the flaw in your life uh the the deficit in your life the problem in your life the character flaw in your life that is most hurting you and the people around you is the one you can't see by definition that's why it's hurting you the most don't you see the one that you can't see and you're not looking for it if you're looking for it it wouldn't be it wouldn't have the power it has your only hope is that god through the tamars of the world or through other awful painful things will wake you up we have we need grace we need we need initiating grace from god secondly notice in this text the nature of the spiritual waking what is the spiritual waking you say what are you talking about all right here's spiritual awakening what is it it's when you begin to see that the people you used to despise that you're really no better that they're no better you're no better than they are when you come to see that the people you used to despise that you're no better than they are in fact you're worse then you're on your way don't you see let me put it this way if since we've been doing this liberal conservative thing tonight if you're a liberal you are as bigoted and as narrow-minded in your own way as the people you have despised, the bigots. If, on the other hand, you're a traditional, very moral person, squeaky clean, you know, you follow all the rules, you are on your way to spiritual awakening when and only when. You begin to realize that your own self-righteousness and pride and self-centeredness in your own way means that you're just as bad as the people out frolicking and having sex in the streets. And only, only when that begins to happen, when the people you used to despise and look down on, you begin to start to look up at. Because you see your own flaws and your own fighting of God and your own spiritual weakness. Until that happens, you're not spiritually awake. And how does it come? And it comes through very, very, very painful situations and experiences. Very. This is what we happen... I mean, this is a public humiliation for Judah. He's never going to live this down. But it's the only way he could be brought back. He was on his way to really being lost. Remember last week? How do you save a lost sheep? Remember? Remember what the shepherd said? If you weren't here, here's what the shepherd said. Real shepherds say when you find a lost sheep, they don't jump up and down saying, way, hooray, I've been found. Oh, no. Lost sheeps are scared to death. And the only way to save a lost sheep is to grab it, throw it down, tie it up, and take it home struggling. In other words, when lost sheep are being found, they don't feel like they're being found. When lost sheep are being loved, they don't feel like they're being loved. When lost sheep are being made safe, they don't feel like they're being made safe. They feel like they're being clobbered. But that's how spiritual awakening often happens. But most of all, I want you to see the slow power of God's spiritual awakening. In Genesis 37, here's probably where Judah began to go bad. In Genesis 37, Judah and his brothers, the sons of Leah, who always hated the fact that Jacob loved Rachel and Rachel's son's best, and who always hated Joseph, Jacob's favorite son. They sold Jacob into slavery. And then what did they do? They took his coat, they put goat's blood on it, and they brought it to their father Jacob. And this was Judah's plan, by the way. And they said, Father, haker na? Do you recognize this? And Joseph said, Yes, it's Joseph's coat. He's dead. He's dead. And that's why, in the Middle Ages, there's a Hebrew rabbi, a rabbinical commentary on Genesis 38, that says this, The Holy One, praised be he, said to Judah, You deceived your father with a kid? Tamar will deceive you with a kid. You said to your father, haker na? By your life, Tamar will say to you, haker na. In other words, he started to go wrong in Genesis 37. He's starting to get pulled back in Genesis 38, but eventually, near the end of the book of Genesis, there was a moment, an amazing moment, when Judah and all of his brothers are standing before the prime minister of Egypt. Now, it's their brother Joseph who they sold into slavery, but they don't recognize him. They don't, haker, they don't recognize him. And Joseph's looking down at them and wondering if they're still the incredibly hard-hearted, becoming evil people that they were to start with. And so what he says is to them, I'm going to keep Benjamin, the only son of Rachel left. I'm going to keep Benjamin here. The rest of you can go back to your father in Canaan. And of course, they all know that their father, Jacob, will just die if they lose Benjamin. And what does Judah say? He looks up at Joseph and he says, take me instead. Let me be the slave. I'll give up my whole life. I'll give up my freedom. I'll give up my whole life for Benjamin's sake and for my father's sake. And that's when Joseph says, do you recognize me? I'm Joseph. Something's happened to you. God's been working in your life. Of course. Judah needed incredibly painful process of spiritual awakening so that eventually he could become the vehicle for Jesus Christ to come into the world. Because, you see, he is the father of Jesus. Jesus came into the world through his loins. And for him to be a vehicle of Jesus Christ, it took, for him to become like Jesus Christ, one who is willing to give up his life for another, it took a very painful series of spiritual awakenings. And, by the way, if you and I are going to be vehicles for Christ in the world, it's going to take the same thing for us. Now, last. At the very end, Tamar says to one of her children that comes out, you have broken through. She names him Perez. Do you know that Jesus in Matthew 1, in Matthew chapter 1, right before the Christmas narrative, Matthew gives a genealogy of Jesus and the genealogy is a way to show who Jesus is and why he came. And the genealogy it has, something that almost no genealogy has back then had, it has a woman's name. And the woman's name is Tamar. And Perez, the baby through whom Jesus came. And Judah, the man through whom Jesus came. And Tamar, the mother, the mother of Jesus, the woman through whom Jesus came. Why? Why and how does Tamar and Judah point to Jesus? Here's how. Tamar got her life back when Judah looked at her and said, in spite of your sin, you are righteous. Right? In spite of your sin, all this incest and this deception, he covered it, didn't he? He says, in spite of all your sin, you are righteous. And she got her life back. Her life was saved. But Judah is pointing to the ultimate Judah. He's pointing to his descendant. Because what you and I need, the thing that will make us able to work for justice, and the thing that will make us able to admit the depth of our sin, is we need to hear the ultimate Judah look at us, Jesus Christ, and say, truly, in spite of all your sin, you are righteous. And how can Jesus do that? How can he do that? The answer is, he's the opposite of his ancestor Judah. Because Judah, you know what Judah was doing to Tamar? He was punishing her for his sins. But the real Judah, the real Jesus, took the punishment for our sins. And that's the reason why he can look at us like Judah looked at Tamar with all the sin and say, righteous. You have to know that kind of acceptance. You have to know that. The story of Judah and Tamar and Perez points to the great Judah, the Judah that Judah should have been. And when, and only when, you know that kind of absolute freedom from conscience, absolute acceptance and love, then you'll be able to go after justice like Tamar, and you'll be able to accept what God is telling you about your heart and go through the journey of self-discovery like Judah and become someone great. You ready for it? Let's pray. Father, we ask that you would help us this last part of the service to consolidate and take in what we've just heard. And we pray that you would make us people who passionately love justice and yet people who humbly accept from your hand your verdict of our need so that we know that our only hope is this through Jesus Christ, the one who became sin, who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
