TITLE: Temptation
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 39:1-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel According to Joseph
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/temptation-4/

============================================================

The scripture reading is taken from Genesis chapter 39 verses 1 through 23 found on page 8 of your bulletin. Now Joseph had been taken down to Egypt. Potiphar, an Egyptian who was one of Pharaoh's officials, the captain of the guard, bought him from the Ishmaelites who had taken him there. The Lord was with Joseph and he prospered and he lived in the house of his Egyptian master. When his master saw that the Lord was with him and that the Lord gave him success in whatever he did, Joseph found favor in his eyes and became his attendant. Potiphar put him in charge of his household and he entrusted to his care everything he owned. From the time he put him in charge of his household and of all that he owned, the Lord blessed the household of the Egyptian because of Joseph. The blessing of the Lord was on everything Potiphar had, both in the house and in the field. So he left Joseph's care everything he had. With Joseph in charge, he did not concern himself with anything except the food he ate. Now Joseph was well built and handsome and after a while his master's wife took notice of Joseph and said, Come to bed with me. But he refused. With me in charge, he told her, my bastard does not concern himself with anything in the household. Everything he owns, he has entrusted to my care. No one is greater in this house than I am. My master has withheld nothing from me except you because you are his wife. How then could I do such a wicked thing and sin against God? And though she spoke to Joseph day after day, he refused to go to bed with her or even be with her. One day he went into the house to attend to his duties and none of the household servants was inside. She caught him by his cloak and said, Come to bed with me. But he left his cloak in her hand and ran out of the house. When she saw that he had left his cloak in her hand and had run out of the house, she called her household servants. Look, she said to them, this Hebrew has been brought to us to make sport of us. He came in here to sleep with me, but I screamed. When he heard me scream for help, he left his cloak beside me and ran out of the house. She kept his cloak beside her until his master came home. Then she told him this story. That Hebrew slave you brought us came to me to make sport of me. But as soon as I screamed for help, he left his cloak beside me and ran out of the house. When his master heard the story his wife told him, saying, This is how your slave treated me, he burned with anger. Joseph's master took him and put him in prison, the place where the king's prisoners were confined. But while Joseph was there in the prison, the Lord was with him. He showed him kindness and granted him favor in the eyes of the prison warden. So the warden put Joseph in charge of all those held in the prison, and he was made responsible for all that was done there. The warden paid no attention to anything under Joseph's care because the Lord was with Joseph and gave him success in whatever he did. This is the word of the Lord. We're looking at the story of Joseph at the end of the book of Genesis. In the first part of the book of Genesis, God is very visible and very audible. There's lots of, in the creation narrative, the Abraham, the Isaac, the Jacob stories, we see God constantly breaking in. There's miracles, there's visions, there's voices, there's appearances. But when you get to the last part of Genesis, when you get into the life of Joseph, all that is gone. There's no miracles, there's no visions, there's no voices, there's no appearances. But the point of the story is that with God, silence is not absence. Hiddenness is not impotence. When God seems the most hidden, often, he's working the most for us. That's what we've been looking at. Last time, we saw how this is true in Joseph's sufferings. And tonight, we see how it's true in Joseph's temptations. Because this particular narrative, in this particular account, is about temptation. And I want you to see that in the beginning, in the middle, and at the end, there are actually three temptations. There's a temptation in the beginning, a temptation in the middle, a kind of big one, in the middle. And then there's another temptation at the end. Second, there's the power temptation. Secondly, there's the sexual temptation. And thirdly, there's in some ways the hardest temptation of all. Okay? Let's look at that. The power temptation, the sexual temptation, and lastly, in some ways, the hardest temptation of all. First of all, let's notice something that probably is fairly easy to miss, is that there's a power temptation here. Now, where is Joseph? Joseph, he has been sold by his brothers, we looked at this last time, into the household of Potiphar, who... I know in English, the English rendering captain of the guard sounds pretty much like, you know, chief of security or something like that, but it was much more. This is the same title given to the Babylonian general that destroys Jerusalem in 2 Kings 25. In other words, Potiphar was probably the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, and that means that he was one of the most powerful men in one of the most powerful, if not the most powerful, kingdom on the face of the earth at the time. So, Joseph has come into a center of power, but how do you use power? And we have two examples of two very, very different ways of using power. First of all, you have Potiphar's wife, who's in this center of power, and we see how she uses it. Now, in verse 7 and verse 12, notice she says, come to bed with me. And I must tell you that in English, that just does not, the English translation there just does not convey the forcefulness of what she's saying. There's only two words in Hebrew, and they are imperative. They're a command. And I think the best way to render this is basically something like this, sex, now, something like that. Down, sex, now. That's really what it is. And we laugh because, of course, it's about sex, but it's really about power here. She's using her power like this. In other words, the habits of her heart have been corrupted by the power that she lives in. Of course, this is a betrayal of her husband, but she is used to using her power to get what she wants, to fill her needs. On the other hand, we have Joseph, who also has actually gotten a lot of power. Don't be fooled by this word in verse 4 that he became Potiphar's attendant. Don't be fooled by that. That's the same word, by the way, that's used to describe Joshua's relationship to Moses. In other words, Joseph was not just a personal assistant. He was the COO of a major business, of the whole estate. He had power, too. But look at verse 5. How does he use his power? To bless. Joseph used his power so that a society that did not acknowledge his God and a master who did not acknowledge his God were blessed by his use of power. Now, what do we learn here? We learn something that's actually so obvious that it's easy to miss when we read this passage. I have a tape that's been a very helpful tape to me. It's a tape of a sermon almost 30 years ago by Dick Lucas, who's a former pastor at St. Helen's Church of Bishop's Gate in London. And I have this tape of a sermon by him on this very story of Joseph. And here's what he says. I transcribed this from the tape. He says, if you were to go up to a book table and see a biography on the book table with the title, The Man God Uses, or The Woman God Uses, you would immediately think it was the story of a missionary or a minister or some specialist in some sort of spiritual work, like evangelizing or leading Bible studies or something like that. That's because the church has conditioned you to think this way. But in fact, what you have here in Joseph at this point is essentially a highly successful businessman. He's not a preacher. He's not a missionary. He's not leading a Bible study. And yet God is mightily using him. In short, in the short and long term, I think that being a preacher, a missionary, leading a Bible study group in many, many ways is easier. There's a certain spiritual glamour in doing it, but it is very much harder to get Christians to see that God is willing to greatly use men and women in every sphere of life, in medicine, in law, in business, in the arts. This is the great shortfall today. Now, he's absolutely right, and here's what he's saying. We have been conditioned to think like this. If you have musical skills and you really want God to use you, you have to use them in church. If you have administrative or business skills and you really want God to use them, you need to head up a ministry. If you've got communication skills and you really want God to use them, you need to be a speaker or a preacher or a like that. And yet, remember, do you remember, in Genesis 12, God says to Abraham, through your descendants, I'm going to bless all the nations of the earth. And the very first fulfillment of that prophecy, the very first one of Abraham's descendants that really God does use to bless the nations of the earth, he doesn't call to be a prophet or to be a preacher or to be a minister in any way. He calls Joseph to, first of all, be a very successful businessman. And later on, he will become a very successful government leader who uses his administrative skills to mount a massive hunger relief program and save his family and thousands of other lives. And that's how God's using him. But it's because he knows how to use power. and women, in every sphere of life to do amazing things if you can do what Joseph did, and that is this. Joseph used power, but was not used by power. He took up power, but he was not taken up with power. He took power, but he wasn't co-opted by power the way Potiphar's wife was. St. Augustine wrote a book, City of God. Most people have heard of it. But here's the thesis. He says, in every human city, there are two cities. There's a heavenly city and an earthly city in every city, the city of God and the city of man. And he says, what marks the citizens of these two cities off is this. The supreme motive of the citizens of heaven is love of God, and the supreme motive of the citizens of the earthly city is love of self. But Augustine says, the practical difference between these two citizenries is how they use power. And he says, the citizens of the city of God are the very best citizens of the earthly city, because in every area, whether it's medicine or law or government or business or the arts, in every area they go, they're using power to bless others, not to serve themselves. That's not easy. It is extremely difficult to take up power and yet not be co-opted by power. Let me give you two examples, a negative and a positive one, just to try to bring this down to earth. I know this is kind of esoteric. Somebody was telling me a very, quite a typical story. Listen, there's a Christian couple moved to a new city, and they went to a real estate agent. And they said to the real estate agent, you know, help us find a home. And the real estate agent said, oh, fine. What's your take home? What's your take home pay? And they said, well, here's the take home pay. Ah, she says, then you can afford this kind of house. This is how much you can spend on a house. This is the kind of neighborhood you can live in. This is how much house you can afford. They said, oh, fine. This is the way it's done. It's a real estate person. Fine. And after they bought the house and moved into that neighborhood, they realized they couldn't even come close to giving 10% or more of their income away to important causes and into people's lives. Your money is your power. A great deal of your power is your money. And the world just assumes that your money is for you, that your power is for you. And so the world just simply says, well, you have to live out to the margins. You have to spend on yourself and on your clothing and on your home and all that. You have to spend absolutely as much out to the margins. The idea of being able to give away 10, 20% of your income to others and all that sort of thing, that's ridiculous. But it can be done. It all depends on where you live. It all depends on how you live. You see how easy it is to be co-opted into the world's approach to power, which is your power is for you. Let me give you a more positive example. That's a scary one, isn't it? But just to see how easy it is and how difficult it is to take power and not be co-opted by power. If you want to be a man or woman God uses, you've got to know how to do that. Or secondly, though, a Redeemer some years ago, I remember talking to a woman who came a couple times. And I said, hi, how'd you find Redeemer? And she said, let me tell you. Quite a story. She said, I work for one of the networks here in the city, one of the TV networks. And I flubbed up. And I thought I was going to lose my job. But my superior, my immediate superior, took the blame for me. Now, he was kind of able to do that because he's well-liked and he's got a lot of, you know, professional credibility. And he took the hit. He was able to take it. He took the blame for me. But if he hadn't, I probably would have lost my job. She says, I went in and I sat down and she said, I've never seen anybody like you. She said, I've worked in this business for quite a number of years and I've seen superiors take credit for what the people under them did. But I never saw a superior take the blame for what the people under them did. Why did you do that? And he said, okay, sit down. Because you asked me, I'll tell you. Only because you asked me. She says, I'm a Christian and Jesus Christ took the blame for me. And that has shaped the way in which I do everything, including my work life. She says, where can I learn more about this? And he said, he suggested going to Redeemer, though he didn't go to the church himself. That is a citizen of the city of God working in the earthly city. That is an example of someone who's taken power but is not co-opted by power. You see the subtle temptation of power? Do you see how useful you can be in any sphere? At all? If you know how to resist it. So first you have the temptation, the power temptation. Secondly, we have the sexual temptation. Now the sexual temptation is the bigger one because at least it's the, it's not the biggest, it's actually, I want you to know that in the Bible, the Bible talks every bit as much, if not more about money and power than it does about sex. But in this particular passage, it's the middle one and it's fairly overt and graphic. And so let's... she says, I want to come to bed, come to bed with me, let's have sex. He says, no. And here's what he calls it. He calls it a wicked thing and sin. Having sex with you, he said, would be a wicked thing and a sin. Now, why? What would be so sinful about that? At first, you say, well, of course, she's married to somebody else. But biblically speaking, though, of course, that's terribly wrong and that's bad. Biblically speaking, it's not just wrong because she's married to somebody else, but because she's not married to Joseph. If you want to get a grasp on the biblical sex ethic, one of the best places to go is a place in 1 Corinthians 6 where St. Paul does a little bit of a riff on this story. He makes an allusion to this story, and he lays out the principle of the gospel approach to sex. Let me read it to you. This is 1 Corinthians 6 where he says this, do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute becomes one with her in body? For it is said the two will become one flesh. So flee sexual immorality. See, that's the reference to Joseph running right out. So flee sexual immorality. You are not your own. You were bought with a price. So honor God with your body. And here's the principle. Do you not know that he who unites himself with a prostitute becomes one with her in body? For it is said the two will become one flesh. Now, what's interesting here is he's not talking about adultery per se. He's talking about two people who are not married to one another or anybody else. And sex is still wrong. Why? He says because sex is designed to create one flesh. What does that mean? There's a wonderful comment on this text in a commentary on 1 Corinthians by Anthony Thistleton, and he nails it. In the commentary, commenting on this passage, this verse, he says this, quote, when Paul quotes Genesis 2.24, the two shall become one flesh, and he takes it to cover all sexual intercourse. Instead of devaluing sex, the very opposite comes about. Paul was far ahead of first century cultural assumptions in perceiving the sex act should be one of complete self-commitment that involves the whole person, not merely the manipulation of body parts. In the context, Paul is saying you must only give yourself to the one to whom you completely belong. Now, okay, this is me in Athens, so I better say this two or three ways to be very clear. The Bible says sex is God's way created to say to someone else, I belong completely and exclusively to you in every aspect of my being socially, economically, legally, emotionally, spiritually. Or put it this way. Paul is saying when physical vulnerability and oneness is an expression of whole life vulnerability and oneness. That is, if physical union is just an expression of what you've done with your whole life, then sex deepens trust. But if you have sex outside marriage, what you're actually saying is, I want physical oneness, but I don't want whole life oneness. Let's give ourselves to one another physically, but let's not give ourselves to one another completely. What you're actually saying is, I want you, but I don't want to entrust myself to you. Well, I want to be able to still make unilateral decisions. I want my possessions and my goods to belong to myself. I still want to belong to me. When the Bible talks about sexual integrity, here's what it's doing. It's saying integrate your body with the rest of your life. If you've given your whole life to someone, your whole life, every aspect, legally, economically, socially, if you've given your whole life, then you can give your body. If you haven't given your whole life, don't give your body. Don't split these things out. Sex is God's invention for complete life and trustment. If you use sex just for the satisfaction of the moment, you weaken your ability to do full, complete life and trustment. Paul is trying to say that physical oneness without complete personal and whole life oneness is a monstrosity. It's a dissonance. That's why Joseph recoiled from it. That's why Paul says recoil and flee from it. Now, before moving on and asking how does he resist this temptation, I ought to at least address at least a couple of thoughts that are going through a few of your heads. One thought is, you're making me feel pretty guilty. And I just want you to know, I'm not trying to make you feel guilty. I'm not trying to make you feel guilty. I'm trying to persuade you to think of sex in a different way. cuts against the normal way that people think about sex in Manhattan. I would like you to become more open-minded. I would like you to say, that's a very interesting way to think about sex. Of course. Of course it is. Integrity. Integrate your body with your life. Just think, I want to persuade you. If you're not persuaded, keep thinking. I'm not trying to make you feel guilty. I'm trying to persuade you. Here's the second thing somebody might be saying, and that is, this is ridiculous. This is absolutely ridiculous. I can't take something like this seriously. This is retrograde. Well, wait a minute. Let me just consider this. One thing I keep hearing in Manhattan all the time, New Yorkers are always saying this to me. Don't raise your religion above other religions. Let's celebrate what all religions have in common. Okay, here's one of them. Do you realize that there's very few things all the major religions of the world have in common, and this is one? That you should never have sex outside of whole life covenant and commitment. I mean, are you just going to dismiss that? Do you realize how hard it is to get consensus on all the major world religions of all the cultures of the world? And this, they have consensus on it. And you're going to say, how ridiculous. Give it some weight. Give it some weight. Now, how does he resist? How does he resist the temptation? And here's perhaps a big surprise. Most people today, in fact, the Greeks thought this way, Buddhists think this way, modern secular psychologists think this way, most people believe that self-control, resisting temptation of any sort, is mainly a matter of the will. Most people think that self-control works like this. You look into your heart, and you have all these desires, and you say, okay, self-control is, see these desires that are going to get me into trouble? I suppress them. Push them down. The will, in charge of the heart, self-control. That's not what happens here. Joseph is not looking inside to suppress his desire for her. He's looking outside to enhance his desire for God. Because he doesn't say, what does he say? What is his ultimate argument against doing this? He says, this is a sin against God. You say, what? It's a sin against Potiphar. How can it be a sin against God? Well, he mentions Potiphar, but that's not his ultimate argument. His ultimate argument, the ultimate way in which he's resisting temptation, the ultimate way he gets self-control, is not through willpower. It's actually through heart power. It's not by looking in and saying, see these desires that I've got? Wow. I suppress them. Oh, no. He looks outside. He doesn't look inside and suppresses his desire for her. He looks outside and enhances his desire for God. Saying, how can I trample on the God of my life? Now, here's how self-control works of any kind, but sexual too. In chapter 29, there's the story of Jacob and Rachel. You know, Jacob, this is Joseph's father, of course, fell in love with Rachel. But in order to get Rachel as his wife, he had to work for her father for seven years. Hard, hard labor. That's incredible. Seven years. That takes a lot of self-control. You want to give up. You want a break. You want some vacation. You want benefits. No. You know, work, work, work, work. But here's what it tells us in Genesis 20, 20. So Jacob served seven years to get Rachel, but they seemed like only a few days to him. Wow, there's self-control. Why? So Jacob served seven years to get Rachel, but they seemed like only a few days to him because of his love for her. Because of his love for her. You see, Jacob had the normal kinds of things his heart desired. He wanted leisure. He wanted a break. He was distracted. He felt self-pity. Everybody feels like that with all that kind of hard work. He wanted many things, but not like he wanted her. He desired many things, and not like he desired her. He had one over-mastering desire, one over-mastering love and passion that put all the other desires in his heart in their proper place. Self-control is not, basically, the will suppressing the desires of the heart, but it's all the desires of the heart being reordered, all the loves of the heart being reordered by an over-mastering, passionate, supreme love. And that's what Joseph was doing. Ultimately, if you look inside and try to suppress desires, you won't be able to keep it up. Real self-control does not come from suppressing desires of the heart by the will, but by reordering the loves of the heart through one over-arching, over-mastering supreme love that puts all the other loves in their power. that captures your imagination and captures your heart, a supreme love to put all the other loves in their place. Now, Joseph did that, but we actually have something that Joseph didn't have. We have something better. He said, how can we have something better? Oh, yeah, we have access to something better. Here's what it is. There's another Joseph I can talk to you about who was just as beautiful. See this Joseph? He was beautiful. But there's another Joseph who lived in heaven with his father. John 17 said he had the eternal glory of God. Philippians 2 said he was equal with God. Like this Joseph, he was beautiful. He had the palace. He had the power. He had the glory. But like this Joseph, he lost it. He lost it. And we're told in Isaiah 53, this is about Jesus, he had no beauty or majesty that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected. He had no beauty. He lost his beauty. He had no majesty. He lost his majesty. Now, we know why Joseph did it. We know that Joseph, out of principle, lost everything and was thrown out and was thrown into prison and was numbered with the transgressors. Joseph, though he wasn't a criminal, was thrown in with the criminals. Though he wasn't guilty, he was thrown in with the guilty. Though he wasn't a transgressor, he was thrown in with the transgressors. He was numbered with Jesus. Why? Isaiah 53, he had no beauty or majesty that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected. Though he had done no violence, nor was there any deceit in his mouth, he was numbered with the transgressors, for he poured out his life and bore the sin of many. Why did Jesus go to the cross? More importantly, he had many temptations to turn aside from the cross, right? Many temptations to turn aside from the cross. Why did he get to the cross? Why was he able to turn aside from all temptations? Why did he endure to the end? For us. We're his Rachel. We were the overmastering desire of his heart to put all other desires in their place. He loved us for his father's sake. He loved us. And when you see him doing that for you, see, when, and I think to the degree that you know that you're his Rachel, he'll become your Rachel. To the degree you see that we were the reason, we were the overmastering passion, supreme passion of his life. We're the reason why he endured temptation. When you see that we are his passion, he'll become your passion. When you begin to see that you are his beauty, he'll become yours. Don't you see how that would work? Let me tell you what you really want in sex. Freud says, sexual, Freud says, spiritual longings are just frustrated sexual desires. But the Bible says, sexual desires are just frustrated spiritual longings. Here's what you need in the deepest depths of your soul. You need an ultimately beautiful person to look at you and say, I find you beautiful, and I give myself completely to you. I give myself wholly to you. In the gospel, you have that. Jesus, the ultimate beauty, says to you, I've given myself for you. That is what you need. I know there's single people here saying, if I was only married, happily married, then I wouldn't have any problem with sexual temptation. That's not true. I happen to know this. I'm happily married, and I want you to know that the desire we have for an ultimate beauty, for ultimate love, is something that even good married love cannot possibly satisfy. Unless you have the spousal love of Jesus, an existential, present, regular reality, a reality to your heart, heart, this unfulfilled desire will spell out into sexual temptation, no matter how happily married you are. But if you have him, if he is the great thing you desire, all the other desires in your heart will be ordered, and they'll know their place. So there is the first temptation, the power temptation, and there is the second temptation, the sexual temptation. But I want you to know that there's a third temptation, which is in some ways is the hardest one of all, and here's what it is. Joseph has done everything right this time. Now, were you with us in Genesis 37? In Genesis 37, Joseph was a spoiled brat, and he lied, and he cheated, and he abused his brothers, and he kind of brought it on, and of course what they did was terrible, but he kind of brought it on, and they sold him into slavery. So he brought it on, and his life blew up. Now he comes down. and he's coming up and he resists every single temptation that comes along the temptation of power the temptation every temptation and his life blows up anyway here's what i mean by the hardest temptation the hardest temptation is the temptation to despair when you've resisted all of the temptations and your life still goes bad the hardest temptation is the temptation to despair it's very difficult to resist the temptation to despair when you're doing everything else right and god lets all this happen to me when i'm when i'm resisting temptation for sex i'm resisting the temptation if i'm doing everything right and god lets this happen to me and there's an awful lot of people who after resisting all of the temptations keeping their nose clean just saying no all the time to your your desires and all that and then god lets stuff like this everything goes wrong you feel like you're left with ashes what do you say to that well we have the story of joseph though and here's what's so intriguing you and i have a perspective on joseph's life that you can't possibly have on your life and that is we know this if joseph had not gone into this prison if potiphar's wife had not done this awful thing to him he never would have met the king's prisoners he goes into this this cell and yet all the prisoner he meets there are the king's prisoners and as you know as the story unfolds if if if these awful things hadn't happened to him he might have arisen to be high up in the potiphar's house but he never would have become the prince of egypt he never would have been able to actually save his family and thousands of others too god did not just save him and help him in spite of this tragedy he saved him through the tragedy he helped him through the tragedy notice what's interesting how the narrator gets this across in the very beginning it says god was with joseph and god gave him success and at the very end the last two verses it says all over again his life blows up and yet it says god's with joseph and he had success what does this mean come what may nothing can derail god's quiet care for you and his ultimate plan for your life don't forget the ultimate joseph he lived a great life he was absolutely perfect he resisted all temptation and his life blew up but there was a resurrection and there'll be a resurrection for you you say well that's joseph but what about my life well we don't have your book this is supposed to stand in for it this tells you how god works in everybody's life william cowper used to get depressed he was a great hymn writer and when he came out of his depression he would write some of the greatest hymns and here's one god moves in a mysterious way his wonders to perform he plants his footsteps in the sea and rides upon the storm judge not the lord by feeble sense but trust him for his grace behind a frowning providence there hides a smiling face he fearful saints fresh courage take the clouds you so much dread are big with mercy and shall break with blessings on your head let's pray father in the lord's supper you can make very real to us the spousal love of jesus that's what we need to resist temptation of power of sex but even more of despair we pray lord that you would help us all live our lives in the knowledge of what your son did for us we pray this in jesus name amen you
