TITLE: The Message of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Luke 5:4-26
TOPICS: Restoration Identity Salvation
SERIES: The Meaning of Jesus Part 1; Understanding Him
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-message-of-jesus/

============================================================

The scripture this morning is from Luke 5, verses 4 to 26. When Jesus had finished speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into deep water and let down the nets for a catch. Simon answered, Master, we've worked hard all night and haven't caught anything, but because you say so, I will let down the nets. When they had done so, they caught such a large number of fish that their nets began to break. So they signaled their partners in the other boat to come and help them. They came and filled both boats so full that they began to sink. When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at Jesus' knees and said, Go away from me, Lord, I am a sinful man. For he and all his companions were astonished at the catch of fish they had taken, and so were James and John, the sons of Zebedee, Simon's partners. Then Jesus said to Simon, Don't be afraid. From now on, you will catch men. So they pulled their boats up on shore, left everything, and followed him. While Jesus was in one of the towns, a man came along who was covered with leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell with his face to the ground and begged him, Lord, if you are willing, you can make me clean. Jesus reached out his hand and touched the man. I am willing, he said. Be clean. And immediately the leprosy left him. Then Jesus ordered him, Don't tell anyone, but go, show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices that Moses commanded for your cleansing as a testimony to them. Yet the news about him spread all the more so that the crowds of people came to hear him and to be healed of their sicknesses. But Jesus often withdrew to lonely places and prayed. One day as he was teaching, Pharisees and teachers of the law who had come from every village of Galilee and from Judea and Jerusalem were sitting there. And the power of the Lord was present for him to heal the sick. Some men came carrying a paralytic on a mat and tried to take him into the house to lay him before Jesus. When they could not find a way to do this because of the crowd, they went up on the roof and lowered him on his mat through the tiles into the middle of the crowd right in front of Jesus. When Jesus saw their faith, he said, Friend, your sins are forgiven. The Pharisees and the teachers of the law began thinking to themselves, Who is this fellow who speaks blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God alone? Jesus knew what they were thinking and asked, Why are you thinking these things in your hearts? Which is easier, to say, Your sins are forgiven? Or to say, Get up and walk. But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins. He said to the paralyzed man, I tell you, get up, take your mat, and go home. Immediately, he stood up in front of them, took what he had been lying on, and went home praising God. Everyone was amazed and gave praise to God. They were filled with awe and said, We have seen remarkable things today. This is the word of the Lord. We're looking at the life of Jesus through the gospel of Luke, one gospel writer, Luke. And the early chapters, which we have looked at for a few weeks, showed us that the people in Jesus' day did expect a Savior. They were looking for a Savior, but they were looking for a Savior who would restore their national sovereignty. They were looking for a Savior that would save them from their colonial status and restore them to power and prosperity. An angel comes to Mary. This is all through the early chapters of Luke, the first four chapters. But a perfect example of this is the angel comes to Mary and says, Yes, the Savior is coming, and his kingdom shall never end. And what you get all the way through the first four chapters of Luke is that there's a Savior coming, but he's going to bring a salvation infinitely wider and deeper and more magnificent and more... have here, starting in chapter 5 and the next chapters, we have Luke spelling out what that is. In other words, the salvation that Jesus brings, the message of Jesus' salvation is, I will save you, He says, but the dimensions of that salvation, the ramifications of that salvation have got to be sped up because they're beyond what anybody can imagine, certainly beyond anyone expects. And these first three incidents in this chapter that was just read to you, these are the first three incidents in Jesus' life. It's sort of typical to, if you're going to go through the book of Luke to take each one each week if you're teaching or preaching through it, but I came to realize that that would be to miss the point. The point of these three altogether is Jesus is showing us and Luke is showing us how all-comprehensive and how multidimensional and full the salvation of Jesus is. Because in the first incident, we see that Jesus' salvation transforms our relationship to ourselves. In the second incident, it shows us that Jesus' salvation transforms our relationships with others, completely transforms us sociologically, completely transforms us psychologically. And then lastly, the third incident shows that Jesus' salvation transforms our relationship with God. So it transforms us psychologically, sociologically, spiritually, in every way. So let's take a look at these three incidents to understand the fullness of this salvation. How shall we escape if we neglect so full of salvation? So the first, the first incident of Peter and the miraculous catch of fish tells us how our relationship with ourselves is transformed by the salvation of Christ. The incident's well known. Jesus is in the boat with Peter. He tells Peter to let down his nets. Peter says, I'm not sure a carpenter should be telling professional fishermen how to do this. He says, we've been fishing all night. There is nothing out there. But, okay, I'll do it. And so he lets down his fish, his net. And there is the greatest catch of fish that Peter certainly has ever seen in his whole life. It's miraculously big. And not only is it too much for his boat, but there's a second boat that comes along. And there's so much, so many fish that both boats are sinking. Peter's response is to say, to look at Jesus, to realize who he is, and to say, get away from me. And Jesus says, no, I want you to follow me. And they do. Now, what do we learn here? It is not insignificant that before this incident, this disciple is always called Simon. After this incident in the Gospels, this disciple is always called Peter. And in the middle of this incident, he's called Simon Peter, here and here only. There's a transformation of identity going on, what I'm going to call a self-quake. The salvation of Christ always creates a self-quake. It doesn't just forgive you your sins, get you a little closer to God. It completely reconstructs your psychology and your identity. It's what it's doing to Peter. And look, it happens in three ways. First part, get away from me, Lord. I am sinful. The first thing that happens to your self-image when the salvation of Christ really begins to work into your life is you get a worse view of yourself. You come to the realization and the admission of just how flawed and how bad you are. That's always the first step. You notice, if you go into a Hallmark reading card shop and you get to go to the religious section and you have any card that has on it near to God, and it'll always be pastels, and there'll be beams of light coming through stained glass windows and things like that. And everything about the card oozes the idea of warmth and toastiness. And of course, whoever designed those has no idea what they're talking about because every place in the Bible where anybody, whether it's Abraham or Moses or Job or Elijah or Peter, actually begin to get near the real God, it's traumatic. I was just briefly, when I was in college, I was just briefly, I was an aspiring musician. I remember thinking, maybe I should go into music. But you know, the trouble was, every so often, I'd get into the presence of somebody who was really, really good. And when I would listen to that person play, I had an ambivalent feeling. Because on the one hand, it was a track dance. And I said, wow, this is the sound I aspire to. of course, eventually I did. Because when you're in the presence of superlativeness, it attracts you and repels you because it forces you to see what's wrong with you. This isn't just true, of course, in something like music. When you're in people who are incredibly beautiful physically or incredibly brilliant intellectually or incredibly skilled in some way, how do you respond to them? They evoke deeply ambivalent feelings. Because not only are they attractive, they also make you feel awful. Because they show you who you really are. They show you your weaknesses. They show you your flaws. How much more true would this be if you actually got near the real God? I'm telling you something. If you think you're getting close to God and no sludge is being stirred up from the bottom of your heart and you don't feel like this, then you're not getting close to the real God. How can you get even into the presence of infinite power without finally having to discard the desperate illusion we all hold on to that we're somehow in control of our lives? How can you get into the presence of absolute love without having to discard the desperate illusion that we're not incredibly selfish and proud and self-centered? The first step in the self-quake that the salvation of Christ brings is the end of denial. All of your illusions, all of the denial, all the defensiveness, all the ways in which you're repressing what's wrong with you and refusing to see what's wrong with you, it's gone. The first step is he sees himself as worse than he's ever seen himself, more realistically, more honestly. But the second step is this. At the very moment that he says, I am a sinner, you shouldn't have anything to do with me, go away from me, is at that moment that the very person who is making him feel worse than he's ever felt affirms him more deeply than has ever been affirmed. Because, you see, what does Jesus say? Don't feel like this. He says, I want you to follow me. And, of course, when Jesus invites Peter to follow him, he's not just saying, I would like you to sign up for a few courses with me. He wants him to live with him. He wants him to be his family. Therefore, when the salvation of Jesus Christ comes into your life, you see yourself as more wicked and sinful than you ever dared believe, and yet you sense that you're more valued and loved and affirmed than you ever dared hope at the same time. That is a mark. Infinitely greater self-worth, infinitely greater realism about your flaws, at once, which is the self-quake, which is the unique self-image, which is the transformation of identity that happens to anyone into whose life this salvation comes. I say it every so often, but it's been a while, so I'll say it again. If you were saved by works, if you were saved, if you go to heaven through your performance, then you might be bold, but not humble, when you're living up, or you'll be humble, but not bold, and confident, when you're failing. But you can never be bold and humble at once. But if you are more wicked than you ever dared believe and more loved and affirmed than you ever dared hope at the same time because your relationship with God through Jesus Christ is based completely and sheerly on His grace, on His call, then it means that you can't be in the either superiority or inferiority at all because at the same moment you have infinite self-worth from His affirmation. You have infinite realism about your sin. You can't get an inferiority or superiority. There's a boldness and a humility about you at once. It is absolutely different. It's absolutely unique than you've ever experienced before. And that's not all. There's a third part to this transformation of personality and identity. Not only does He first say, I'm more sinful than I ever thought I was, and then secondly He gets an affirmation of more value than He's ever gotten. But then thirdly, it says, they left everything. See that? They left everything and followed. Now what was on the shore? The nets. No, not just the nets. They didn't just leave the nets. They left the catch. One of the things we've got to remember, and one thing I didn't realize until I was studying this week after all these years, is almost certainly that was the greatest catch that Peter had ever had. Almost certainly he'd never had a miraculous, such a huge number of fish that his boat was sinking under it, which means he was right on the cusp of absolute professional and economic success. There was more money, as it were, on that beach than he'd ever seen before in his life. And that's the day Jesus Christ says, I want you to walk away from it. What does that mean? What does that mean? Well, here's what it means. What it means is not that if you encounter Jesus Christ, you have to leave your particular vocation and go into full-time vocational Christian ministry, that's not only does that make no sense, that's against common sense, and it's against what the Bible says, of course. Well, what does it mean? Here's what it means. It means that Jesus Christ does not just, when he comes into your life, only affect your private life. He affects every part of your life, including your work. It means that Jesus becomes the priority, and your relationship with him becomes the most important thing in your life in every area. And that leads to freedom. Why? Freedom. How can he walk away from this kind of success? Have you ever noticed how many names, certainly at least British names, I'm sure there's others in other languages this is true to, how many names are names like Fisher, Baker, Smith? Have you ever noticed how many names are jobs? Do you know why? Because one of the major components in my identity and your identity is your work. One of the main ways that you deal with the question, is your life worth anything, is by looking at your work. What do you do? That's how you know you're worth something, and that's fine. But if it's the main thing, if it's your main identity, if it's the main way you get a sense of self is because of your work, because of your accomplishments, because of what you do, because of the money you make or whatever. However, if the main reason you work is to get a sense of self, or if your work is the main way you get a sense of self, you're a slave, and you can't ever put it down, and you can never walk away. You can't put it down at night. You can't put it down weekends. You can't put it down to rest. You can't put it down to have a family. You can't put it down when things aren't going so well, and it just bothers you because you just, you start to feel like, you know, crap inside, and you just, you can't put it down enough to look at other things in life and enjoy life nevertheless, and you certainly can never walk away from it if you have to walk away from it in order to keep your integrity. You're a slave to your work unless, what? How would you get the power to have this ability to not let your work run you, to not let your work control you? How can you get this power? Only if there's another kind of fishing beyond this fishing. Only if there's another kind of wealth beyond this wealth. See, Jesus says, I have a mission. I'm here to heal the whole world. The word catch, men, by the way, doesn't come across in English. It's a Greek word that means to rescue people for life. It means to liberate people into life. Jesus says, I'm on a mission. I'm going to heal the whole world of everything that's wrong with it. I'm going to liberate people psychologically, sociologically, spiritually, and every other way, and I want you to be part of that. How's that for meaning in life? And only when you have a fishing beyond this fishing, only when you have a wealth beyond this wealth, only when you have an art beyond this art, only when you have a work beyond this work, will you be able to do this work in a way that it doesn't consume you? Only then, only when you have this kind of meaning in life will you be able to do your work and really enjoy it because it'll be about the work, no more just about you, especially in a place like New York. You're not doing the work for your work's sake. You're doing the work for your sake. It's all about you. It's about getting a sense of self. You can be liberated from this. So, what do we see? The salvation of Jesus Christ comes into your life, and it utterly reconstructs your personality. It utterly transforms the priorities of every area of your life. It's total. But that's not all. See, somebody says, how in the world is it possible to be completely affirmed at the very moment you realize that you're completely unworthy? How can you feel worthy and unworthy at the same time? How's that possible? How can God show you that you're a sinner and at the same moment ask you in? How's that possible? Well, let's go on. The second thing we see is it doesn't only transform. The salvation of Christ doesn't only transform your relationship with yourself, but secondly, it transforms your relationship with others. It transforms you sociologically. The leper. The second incident has to do with the leper. Now, leprosy, by the way, in the Bible, those of you medical types out there, you must realize when you hear the word leprosy, you're thinking of Hansen's disease in the last 200 years. That's all the word leprosy in English means is that. The word leprosy in the Bible referred to a very large range of disfiguring and debilitating skin disorders and skin diseases, many of which were contagious. Some of them probably weren't contagious. understand this incident unless you understand the physical disease of leprosy is almost incidental. Lepers got the disease, but as a result, they became social outcasts, emotional outcasts. They were not allowed into cities. They were not allowed into towns. So they were economically impoverished. They were emotionally and socially completely cut off from others. No one could even touch them. They weren't allowed to touch or get near anyone. They were utterly isolated emotionally. They were utterly destroyed economically. And, by the way, in Israel, they were ceremonially unclean. They were not allowed into the temple. They were not allowed into the presence of God. They were not allowed into the worshiping community. They had to stay away. So they were social and economic and emotional and spiritual pariahs, outcasts. When you and I see the word leper, we almost immediately think of mainly the physical condition, but that's not the main point of this healing. The leper comes to Jesus. He shouldn't be in town. Notice, he's in the town. He must have made a mad dash to Jesus. And he falls at his feet, and he asks for healing, and Jesus heals him. But I want you to notice something. Jesus touches him. You see what it says there? It says, he reached out his hand and touched him. Why? Well, you say, because he was physically healing him. No. Jesus would not have been touching him to physically heal him because he doesn't have to touch him to physically heal him. Look at the healing of the paralytic. Jesus doesn't have to touch him. Jesus doesn't have to do anything. He doesn't even have to be there. You know, there's a place where he says to the centurion, go home. You know, your servant is, you know, well. And Jesus isn't even in the presence of the servant, and he heals him. Jesus doesn't have to touch him to heal him physically. What is Jesus doing? Of course, he is healing him physically, of course, because that's the cause for everything. What's he doing? What is Jesus' real concern? He's healing emotionally and socially. He's reaching out and touching him, a man who certainly, probably, has not felt human touch in a long time. And his whole concern is to bring the man into community who has been marginalized, to bring the man back into community who's been economically and socially and emotionally cut off. That's what Jesus is concerned. That's why he says, go to the priest. Prove that you're clean now. Now, what does this mean? Well, this is the beginning of something we're going to see over and over and over again, especially in the Gospel of Luke. When you go through the Gospels, you'll see something really strange. There is a disproportionate number of what the world would consider losers, what the world considers outcasts, what the world considers unimportant, what the world considers defiled, that Jesus is reaching out to and touching and pulling into community and very often making leaders. So, you'll see all the Gentiles that he's dealing with who are racial outsiders, and the women, especially what we used to call women of ill repute. You look at the gender outsiders. You look at the racial outsiders. You look at lepers. You look at the tax collectors who are political outsiders. Jesus takes the people that the world sees at the bottom and brings them in. Jesus looks at the people that the world sees on the outside and brings them in. Why? Because that's the pattern of Jesus' own salvation. Jesus was not the Messiah the world expected. He wasn't someone who took power and used it. He's someone who gave away power. He's someone who became weak. He's someone who served. He's someone who died on the cross. And look at how it comes into my life. How do I get Jesus' salvation? Not only was Jesus' salvation achieved through serving and losing power, not taking it, but I get the salvation that way. I don't get the salvation by being strong and accomplished, but by admitting I'm not. I don't get the salvation by negotiating with God, but by surrendering. And therefore, the pattern of Jesus' salvation, both in the way it's achieved and the way it's received, when it comes into your life will utterly change the way in which you look at people of other races, of other classes, of other social groupings, the way the world looks at power and recognition and status and achievement and accomplishment and beauty and privilege. Those distinctions don't matter to the person who's had the salvation of Jesus Christ. The salvation of Jesus Christ transformed them sociologically. Do you see that? It's astounding. And then there's one more thing that we see. When Jesus reaches out and touches the man and says, now you're clean. this is a transition to the last point, to the last incident, but let's take a look at this. Do you realize the momentousness of what Jesus does here? Again, you have to think about the history of religion. What is religion? Religion is, if I'm really good, if I really follow the rules, if I really do everything, I can get to heaven. And that means in the history of religion, the unclean, when it comes into contact with the clean, makes it unclean. Throughout all the history of religion, you'll see, go through all of the Old Testament, for example, and you'll see when the clean comes into contact with the unclean, it becomes unclean. So, the dead were unclean, and the lepers were unclean, and so on. And if you were clean, and you were fit for the presence of God in the Old Testament ceremonial law, and when you came into contact with the unclean, you became unclean, and you had to go through purification rites and rituals and that sort of thing to make yourself fit for the presence of God, and that's how religion works. But Jesus Christ comes and touches him and says the most astounding thing. Jesus shatters all the categories, because when Jesus touches him, by the Old Testament ceremonial law, by the way in which religion works, Jesus should have to now go and get purified and go, but he doesn't, does he? No way. Why? Jesus doesn't say, whoops, now I'm unclean. Jesus says, I am cleanliness. I am cleanness. I break all of the categories. Not only can't you make me unclean, but no matter how defiled you are, no matter how stained you are, no matter how tainted, no matter who you are or what you've done, no matter what your record is, the minute I touch you, you're fit for the presence of God. The minute I touch you, my cleanness becomes your cleanness. Why? How is that possible? Because Jesus says, I am not one more religious leader telling you how to make yourself fit for the presence of God. I am the fitness for the presence of God. The moment, if you just touch me, if you just come into contact with me, instantly, that minute, you're in. How could that be? That brings us to the last incident. I mean, how could you be sinful and accepted at the same moment? How could you be utterly unclean and yet just by a touch in? Well, the third incident is the incident of the paralytic, the immobilized man. And he's got some friends who want to see him healed. And they bring him to a house, and Jesus is in the center of the house, obviously, but he's so crowded they can't get in the door. So they go up to the roof. And by the way, there was always a staircase to the top of every single home in those days because the roof was part of the home. It's where people spend a lot of time. So they would have gone up there, but one of the things that they did was they tore up the roof. And they lowered him down. And Jesus looks at him and says, your sins are forgiven. And there's two very perplexed groups of people at this point. First of all, of course, is the friends. The friends lower him. And he says, your sins are forgiven. What are the friends going to say? That's not what we came for. That's not why we ripped this person's house up. And who knows whether we're going to get sued now. I mean, we've done a lot here, but for sins are forgiven, thank you very much. But let's have some real power. Say, walk, not sins are forgiven. Say, walk. That's what we're here for. And of course, Pharisees are not the only one who's upset. Of course, the Pharisees and the teachers of the law are upset because he says, how can he forgive sins? Only God can forgive sins. Now, here's what we learn from this incident. First of all, the Pharisees are right, by the way. So here's Tom, Dick, and Harry. And Dick punches Harry in the nose. And Tom goes up and says, Dick, I forgive you for punching Harry in the nose. Harry's going to say, wait a minute. Tom, you can't forgive Dick for punching me in the nose. Only I can do that. You can only forgive sins that are against you. That's right. And when Jesus Christ looks at a man and says, all your sins are forgiven, the Pharisees knew what he was saying. Do you? Jesus was hanging a shingle out saying, God is among you. Jesus, in the clearest possible way, was saying, all sins are against me. When you lie, it's my commands you're breaking. When you trample on some human being, that's my creation you're trampling on. Unbelievable claim. But something almost as important is this. The friends were very upset. Jesus says, your sins are forgiven. But what is he saying? He's saying, maybe you think the paralysis, the immobilized limbs are your real problem. They're not. people, especially today, don't want to hear, but here's what he's saying. He was saying this is not your most fundamental problem. Your most fundamental problem is that you're alienated from God and you need your sins forgiven. You need them removed. There's a barrier between you and God and it needs to be removed. Jesus is saying there's only one disease that can really destroy you. Suffering, physical suffering can't destroy you. Look, it brought you to me. It's not your most fundamental problem. Salvation transforms psychologically. Salvation transforms sociologically, but it's all based on whether you're transformed spiritually. Are you put right with God through Jesus Christ? That's the key to absolutely everything. It's only when you're spiritually put right. And we have all these other things we want from him. You know, why aren't you helping me this? Why don't you help me? I'm sick. I've got a problem. I've got financial problems. Jesus says, none of those things are like this. Until you get this right, nothing else can be put right. And so he says, with a stroke, you're forgiven. See now, at every one of these incidents, look at this. There is a strokeness about Jesus' salvation. He is not a religious teacher saying, now, if you pray and if you really work hard and you obey the Ten Commandments and you go through all these various states of consciousness, you can achieve salvation. No. At every single point, he affirms the man who knows he's a sinner. See? He touches a man who's unclean and says, you're clean. And now, in a word, he says, your sins are forgiven. And he sees the skepticism, and he asks the question about what is easier. You see, he's probably thinking about not just what the Pharisees are thinking, but also what the friends are thinking. This is too easy. Anybody can say, your sins are forgiven. And Jesus gives you a riddle. He says, oh, is it really? Which is easier? See that word? Which is easier? Which, of course, is another way of saying, which is harder? Which is harder, to say, walk, or to say, thy sins are forgiven? And what he's after is that you and I and his friends and almost everybody else reading that think it's much harder to say, walk. Now, that's power. That's hard. And Jesus says, no. You do not know how much harder it is for me to have put myself in a position where I can say to the unclean, in a stroke, you're clean. To the unforgiven, in a stroke, you're forgiven. You know how I can do that? It's hard. Jesus is saying it was hard, and here's why. Here's the answer to all the riddles. How can it all happen? When Jesus went to the cross, he bore what that he's removing from that man. When Jesus went to the cross, he was mobile, but he was nailed immobile. So, this man, who is immobile, in a moment will become mobile. The leper comes into town, and Jesus accepts him. Why? Because Jesus Christ was crucified out of town, outside the city gate. He became a pariah. He became a curse. So, Jesus is saying this is the answer to all of them. Psychological transformation, sociological transformation, like that. Why? Only because I died. Because I was paralyzed so that you can get up and walk. I was cast out so that you could be brought in. I became unclean. I was forsaken by my father so that you could be brought in. Now, do you see? Only if you take a look at the dimensions, all three dimensions, how absolutely full and how absolutely comprehensive they are, do you realize what you have in the message of Jesus' salvation? Now, let me give you three applications that are actually pretty important and pretty practical, three things before we go to the Lord's Supper and the Lord's Table. Here's the first thing. The first thing I learned personally from studying this passage for you this week was you have to trust Jesus long term. Do you see how often this happens? Not just here, all through. You know, Mr. Beaver in the Chronicles of Narnia says to the children, of course he's not safe, but he's good. Of course he's not safe, but he's good. And boy, do you see that here. I mean, he says to Peter, do something stupid. Peter says, this is stupid. Do it. Peter does it. It comes out all right. They bring Jesus, this man, and they know what his urgent need is to walk. And Jesus says, no, that's not his most urgent need. I want to talk about something else. Jesus, you can't, Jesus, if you begin to relate to Jesus, you're going to find that there's going to be things that he's going to do, things he's going to say, things he's going to not do for you. And it just isn't going to make sense. Your agenda is never his agenda. never his list. There's things that start to happen in your life that you feel like, he's not really protecting me. You know the place where a man comes and says, my little girl's dying, and Jesus says, I'll come with you. And on the way, he stops and talks to a woman with a much less urgent problem. And he just delays and delays and delays, and next thing you know, she's dead. The little girl's dead. I mean, this is the way it is with Jesus. He's not tame. He's not safe. He doesn't act the way you expect. He brings grace into your life, but never the way you think. But he's good. You want to see how good he is? Does it ever occur to you, when reading this passage, that Jesus forgives a man who doesn't appear to have repented? Everywhere in the Bible, everywhere it says, God would never forgive you unless you repent to him. And here's a man that Jesus says, you're forgiven. And you know what that must mean? It must mean that in his heart was an inarticulate yearning for mercy, an inarticulate yearning for grace. Even though he hadn't even said it out loud, Jesus is so tender, so emotionally sensitive, so eager to bless, so eager to forgive, that he responds to the inarticulate. You know, do you feel like, boy, if I'm going to get right with God, I got to do it just right. I got to say the right thing. What are the steps? People write me. They email me. They talk to me. What do I have to say? You just have to take him. You just have to go to him. He is that good, and yet he doesn't work the way you expect. I mean, you can't hurry him, but why would you want to hurry somebody like this? Trust him for the long term. That's the first thing. Here's the second practical. It takes a long time to get the gospel of grace down to your instinct level. Anyone who reads Luke 5 immediately has to go and read John 21. That happens to be a couple years later. In Luke chapter 5, Jesus says, put down your net. Peter says, that's silly. We've fished all night, and there's nothing there. Jesus says, do it anyway. Peter does it. Incredible, miraculous pile of fish, boat sinking. What does Peter do the first time? Get away from me. What does he do the second time? In John chapter 21, everything's the same, you know. Jesus says, put down your net. Peter says, no, we've fished all night. Jesus says, do it anyway. He puts down his net. Incredible amount of fish, boat sinking. What does Peter do the second time? Everything else is the same. What does he do the second time? He runs to Jesus like a madman, you know, through the water. What's going on? Well, he's started to figure it out. It takes a long time to get grace down to the instinct level. You see, his first instinct, the first time is get away from me. His instinct, the second time, he's not thinking about it. He's an impulsive man. But grace has come way down deep. Now, it takes a long time to get the gospel of grace. The things I've told you today, if it was down deep enough, you wouldn't get despondent. You know, somebody cuts you off in line, you turn around and say, I'll show you. You can't treat me like that. Well, you believe the gospel, but what happened? Well, it's not down at instinct level, is it? You're still defensive, see? Your ego is still sensitive. There's still a superiority and an inferiority working. It takes a long time for the gospel of grace to get down to the instinct level. And it's not going to happen just by waiting around. You say, well, I believe 20 years ago. I wonder whether it's gotten down there. It takes time, but it also takes work. What is Bible study? What is community? Spiritual friendship, accountability, you know, the means of grace, the sacrament, the word preached, the word taught, the word studied. It's not going to happen just by saying, well, I believe it. It takes a long time to work itself down. And lastly, one of the things you learn here, and it amazes me about the salvation of Jesus is so multidimensional that any church that tries to follow Jesus' concerns as a whole will be misunderstood. You see, on the one hand, what do we see? To work against the social marginalization of people, to take people who've been oppressed, to take people who've been excluded, to take people who are the victims of bigotry, to work against poverty, to work against bigotry, to work against these kinds of things, to work against disease and hunger, is a sign of the kingdom. It's a sign of the way, the pattern of Jesus' salvation. And yet, on the other hand, Jesus says, you've got to get converted. You have to be converted. You must have your sins forgiven through me. And therefore, any church that really tries to take... say, oh, that's too liberal a church for me. Some people say, that's too conservative a church for me, and it's right. We're not going to fit into the category. We're going to be continually misunderstood. But that's the message of Jesus' salvation. Let's pray. Father, we ask that during the time of the Supper, you would help us to get the grace of the gospel down deep into our lives until it's at instinct level. Make us in the image of your Son. It's in Jesus' name that we pray. Amen.
