TITLE: The Mission of God
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel and the World Conference
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-mission-of-god/

============================================================

What we're trying to do in these three conferences is distill what, after about, well, obviously 15 years, essentially, of ministry in the city, what we at Redeemer have come to recognize as the basic topics, the basic subjects, the basic truths that need to be mastered for effective living in the city, effective Christian living in the city. Those of you who are old timers, been around a long time, will find, I think, that if you come to these three conferences this year, it takes themes you've heard many times in sermons, but it gives us the theological underpinnings. We're trying to do that. It goes into more detail, more application than you can do in a sermon. Those of you who are newer to the faith, newer to Redeemer, newer to New York, you'll not only hear some things that you may never have heard before at all, but you'll get them in a whole year. In other words, the idea is we realize that all the stuff we're putting into these three conferences are things that, if you stick around Redeemer enough, you're going to hear it all. But we actually know that there's an awful lot of people that are in here for a few years and out. We want to cover the waterfront in a year, and so here we are. Now, the first conference, if you were here, was trying to get you to look inward. This conference is trying to get you to look outward. The last conference is trying to get you to look sideward, because the first has to do with the gospel in the heart, how the gospel changes you. The second has to do with the gospel in the world, how we are to relate to the world around us. And the third is gospel in community, and that is how we're supposed to live together as Christians, as the body of Christ, amongst the people of God. Now, in some ways, though I'm going to continue to refer to it, if you weren't at the first conference, you've got to realize that this builds on that one. Oh, it doesn't mean that nothing will be comprehensive or puzzling, I don't think, if you weren't at the first conference. And I know some of you weren't, and that's fine. But to get the deeper underpinnings, you're going to have to either get to that conference or get the tapes from that conference, I think, to see all of how what we talked about last time lays the groundwork for what we're talking about tonight and tomorrow. Now, if you look at your handout, it's on page 10. Look on page 10. I'm going to go through this, not every line, not even every paragraph or even every page, but I'm going to stick with the handouts. And the first thing I'd like to tell you, here's where I promise a little theology. Let me ask the question, what's the Bible all about? What is the Bible all about? There are basically two ways to go about answering that question. And in theological circles over the last few centuries, there have been these two approaches. The one approach I'm going to call for the moment a topical approach. That is, when people say, well, what's the Bible all about? The answer is that the Bible is actually a way to live. And the topical approach looks at the Bible by asking topical questions. What does the Bible teach about sin? What does the Bible teach about God, about the Holy Spirit, about family living, about repentance, about sin, about how we are to live in society, about what is our relationship to government? In other words, you ask the Bible a question and you look at the whole Bible to find out everything the Bible says on the subject. And therefore, the Bible is sort of looked at as a medicine chest, a series of various answers to questions about how we should live. You'll see in the text, or in the handout, I said, I called this the systematic theological approach. Systematic theology tries to understand the Bible by asking questions. What's the Bible teach about God, Christ, man, Holy Spirit, family, church, and so on? And it tries to put everything the Bible says about one topic underneath that heading, distill it, you know, synthesize it and say, this is the teaching of the Bible on this topic, this topic, this topic. Now, because we believe the Bible is coherent, because we don't think the Bible is contradictory, you can always ask the Bible a question about, you know, how should a husband and wife relate to one another? And you will, if you go through the whole Bible, learn an awful lot. And that can be distilled. I'm not saying that can't be done. There's a danger to looking at the Bible like that. It's a danger to look at the Bible as a kind of medicine chest or an answer book or a reference book on how to live right. Because obviously, it tends to center on... second way to read the Bible. And the second way is to understand it as a single story, a true story with a plot line. Now hopefully you can see why that's not the way most people originally start reading the Bible. Because when you first start reading the Bible it doesn't seem like a unified whole. It seems like tons and tons of stories and poems and laws and rules and epistles and surely you look at this and you say this is fascinating. It's sort of like a compendium of things. It's like a reference book. And it's sort of natural to go about saying well what does a teach about God, about me, about Christ, about the family. And you don't tend to think of it as a plot line, a single story, unified true story. If you assume the Bible is a single true story we have to ask the question what's it about? What is the plot line? And when you ask that question you come to see this. That the Bible is a story, a true story, about how God is saving the world. Or put it this way, if you ask with a topical mindset, I told you I was going to be theological about this to start with, okay? If you ask the Bible with a topical mindset, what's the gospel? The topical mindset is, well there's a God but we've sinned but Jesus has died on the cross and so we have to believe. And if we believe in him we'll be saved and go to heaven. But if you ask the question about what the Bible is, thinking about the Bible as a single unified true story with a single plot line, then you'll find that the Bible is actually, this is the gospel, the gospel is creation, fall, redemption, consummation. Or this plot line of the Bible is, God created us because he loves us. But he lost us, but he's coming back for us. He loves us, but he lost us, but he's coming back for us. And if you read what the Bible's like that, or to use a nice big word just so you can feel like I learned a big word or two tonight, if you read the Bible diachronically instead of synchronically, if that is instead of looking across trying to synthesize the topics, and so you read it along the plot line as a true history of what God is doing, you'll see the Bible's about God, not about us. It's not so much about how we're supposed to live, it's about how God is breaking into the world to redeem it. How he created us for a love relationship, he lost us and everything broke, but now he's coming back into the world and he's going to restore eventually everything. Through Jesus Christ, he has begun his redemption, and in the end, he's going to completely restore it, heal the entire world, and then we will be his. Now, when you realize that, go to the bottom of page 10, near the bottom, where it says, in other words, you see, sort of the paragraph before the bullet points. In other words, the gospel is, God has entered the world in Jesus Christ to achieve a salvation that we could not achieve for ourselves, and thereby renew the whole world. That's the gospel. And if you understand the gospel like that, I'm going to show you that that's a little different than the way the gospel is understood when you're thinking about the Bible pretty much as a book on how to live. This understanding of the gospel is grace-centered and kingdom-centered. See, first of all, it's grace-centered. If you think of the Bible basically as a book on how to live right and how to push the right buttons, you know, to be in a right relationship with God, if you see it as mainly about me and about you and me and what we're supposed to do, you lose, I think, the sense of the radical grace of the gospel. If, on the other hand, the Bible is not primarily just about how to live right, it's about what God is doing, then it's all about grace and rescue. Jesus has come to live the life we should live but won't, and he's come to pay the penalty for the life we do live but shouldn't. So we're not reconciled to God through our own efforts. You know, it's God coming in. So it's radically grace-centered when you understand the Bible like that. But secondly, it's kingdom-centered. The Bible is not primarily then, is it? In other words, if you're reading the Bible, you know, listen, you want to be challenged a little bit to think in a slightly different way, so come along, okay? If you read the Bible diachronically, if you think of the Bible mainly as this true story of what God is doing in the world, you'll see that the Bible is not primarily about how an individual can escape this material world. Jesus is not ultimately only saving individual souls by removing them from the world, right? But rather, kingdom of God, back down into the material world to eventually renew and restore it completely. Then the kingdom of God, see, the kingdom of God has broken in. When you think of, when you see that, it means your understanding of salvation is not so individualistic. It's not really a matter of what do I have to do in order to go to heaven. It's God is on a program to renew the entire world. And that means this. You know what the Bible is about? It's about God's mission. It's about the mission of God. That's what the Bible is about. The Bible is not about, well, God did this and now we have to do this and this. The Bible is about mission. It's all about mission. It's all about mission because the word mission means sent. God has sent Jesus into the world. God is coming into the world to renew it. And if that's the case then, being a Christian is also all about mission. Turn over. Let me tell you what the implications of this are. Now, I just gave you some theology. Let's get practical. Quick. You never know what you want to say. You don't want to get practical as fast as you can. First, it means mission is primary. I don't know what you think of mission. Probably, if you've been a Christian for very long, you have thought of mission, the word mission, as foreign missions. Which is to say, some people go into foreign missions. They go to other cultures and countries to witness for Christ. Or maybe you think of mission just as sort of evangelism, something that I need to do. I need to share my faith with other people. Both those things are true. But you see, in that way of thinking, have you noticed evangelism and mission is a department of your life, isn't it? It's just one thing. It's a topic. You know, we have a topic, God, and there's the Holy Spirit, and there's sanctification, there's family, and there's mission. It's just a topic. But not if you read the Bible the way I think I'm trying to get you to read the Bible. What is the Bible all about? It's about God's mission. And to be a Christian is to join his mission. It's to be saved by his mission and then to join up. So everything in your life is about mission. If you are in business, if you are a dancer, if you're a reporter, or if you're a preacher, it's all about mission. Everything you're doing is to be part of God's mission to redeem the world, to redeem all of creation. So the first thing is, if what I'm saying is true and right, I hope it is. And you probably would like, you probably have a bias to believe me or you wouldn't be here tonight. Think, if the Bible is mainly about the mission of God, then missions can't be a department of ministry or one topic under the heading of Christian living. Mission is what your life's about. It's what God's about. It's what the whole Bible's about. In fact, it's what history is about. When Adam and Eve sinned, God could have just carried, could have just, that could have been it, right? They sinned. That's the end of the world. That's the end. He could have just brought the curtain down, but he didn't. Why not? Mission. The only reason there's history is for God's mission. The only reason he didn't bring the curtain down at that point was because he had a plan for getting us back and renewing the world and repairing what was broken and making it better than it was before. See, if that's true, then, mission is even what history is about. Secondly, here's another implication, it means that mission includes not only evangelism, does it, but seeking peace and justice in the city. Now, see, this is the next implication. If you tend to think of the Bible kind of like a book of medicine chest, a book of interesting topics on how we should live the Christian life, then you tend to think of salvation as here's what I have to do in order to be saved and get to heaven. And that is actually thinking very individualistically. If you understand the gospel as God coming back into the world to redeem it and restore it, bring his kingdom power, his royal power, his presence back into the world to renew everything, then suddenly you might have a kind of corporate and holistic understanding of salvation, which is God's plan in salvation is not just to get an individual soul out of the material world into heaven, God's plan is to renew the entire world. Therefore, to be part of God's mission is not only to do evangelism, where you're asking somebody to believe in Christ and be born again. That is clearly a huge, enormous, central part of mission, but that's not all there is to it. Mission has to include also the re-weaving of the material world because that's part of God's mission. It's part of God's salvation. You know, this is a rhetorical ploy I know, but I do it in the sermons all the time, and that is at the end of history. You don't see. into the city of God, but you see the city of God coming down out of heaven to renew the world. That's, you know, that's what the Bible's all about. When you get to the end of the book, when you get to the conclusion, you get to the last page, that's where you see what the book is all about, what the story's all about. What is it all about? It's about salvation coming down and renewing the world. That means that rehabbing a house for a poor family in Christ's name and feeding the hungry and evangelizing are all part of God's mission in the world. Very important. And if you don't see it that way, you really are probably not reading the Bible. Well, you know what? Next time somebody says, well, you mean you're supposed to, you know, the church is supposed to feed the hungry? Isn't that just a social gospel? Say, you're just not reading the Bible diachronically, and then walk away. And the reason you need to walk away is because when they say, what do you mean? You probably just still don't know, do you? You just spent, you know, 15 minutes with me and you still don't know. You know, synchronically means reading across all the things the Bible says in order to sort of synthesize answers to questions, how should I be like this? And there's nothing wrong with that. There's nothing wrong with that. When you ask the Bible a question, what is the church? You should find everything you can in the Bible, you know, about what the church is. But if that's all, if that's the only way you're reading the Bible, you are reading the Bible as basically about you and basically an individualistic way. And basically you're missing, it's what you're really doing is you're looking at the trees and not the forest, you're missing the forest for the trees. The Bible is about mission and your life's about mission and history's about mission. And everybody who becomes a Christian is someone rescued by God's mission and now you have become a man or a woman in mission. You are all missionaries. Missio, Latin for sent. In fact, let's keep on going actually. Third, if you understand the Bible like this, you understand the gospel as this, the true story of God saving, the Bible about mission. Thirdly, it means that, this is on page 11 in the middle, it means mission is through countercultural communities of Christians. Now, I'm not going to read you this sentence by sentence. What I'm saying in this paragraph is simply this. If you think of a salvation sort of individualistically without understanding salvation as the kingdom of God coming back into the world to renew it, if you think of it as individualistically how I'm going to get eternal life, then you tend to think of the church as simply kind of a support group, you know, a place of inspiration and fellowship for people who are individually saved. But if salvation is the kingdom of God coming down to renew the world and make the world the way it's supposed to be, now the church actually is a counterculture of the future. It's supposed to be a society, obviously it's always partial, always imperfect, but it's supposed to be a society to some degree embodying God's future, showing what the world would be like if sex, money, and power were used in gospel cleansed ways. And so we actually are not just simply an aggregation of individuals who come together for inspiration to try to help each other, you know, along in our journey toward heaven. We're supposed to be a counterculture, a mini version of the future. And that, wow, you see, we're supposed to embody that new humanity that's coming. That actually gives you, that's a whole other dimension to what it means to build a church and to be in the church, doesn't it? It really doesn't mean just showing up on Sunday. It doesn't really mean just coming to a small group, you know, to, you know, get some inspiration. It means to say, how do we create business relationships, family life? How do we create racial relationships here inside the church that are showing the world what God is going to do eventually in the future that we are capable of to some degree because of the way the gospel has changed our hearts because we're born again? That's a whole different thing. And to ask that question, and I'm afraid most churches don't ask that question. Why not? Because they're not reading the Bible diachronically. How shocking. Okay. Fourth, it means that, I still don't quite know what that means either, but I... Fourth, it means that, it means now that mission includes our secular vocations, not just church ministry. In other words, in the more individualistic understanding of salvation, of, you know, what buttons do I push in order to get to heaven? Basically, Christianity is something you do on the weekends. During the week, you know, you make your money and you, you know, and then, of course, you, you know, give your money, a portion of your money. And whenever you think about discipleship in that mindset, discipleship is... fellowship with Christians and so forth. But it never asks the question, okay, well, now, since God's renewing the whole world, what will banking look like in that renewed world? You see, what will arts look like in that world? See, I put down here, most American Christians seal off their faith beliefs from the way they work in their vocation. Discipleship is not seen as thinking out how does Christianity and the gospel radically change the way in which I actually do my work. Most people think if you really, really, really want to witness to the kingdom, you go into church ministry. Well, I mean, that really can help, and I mean, I did. But you notice when you think of that, what you really think of strictly is evangelism, not being a sign of the future kingdom. So we're going to be talking about this somewhat. Obviously, the third will be my third talk, and we're going to be talking about it in the breakouts as well. But look here at the bottom of page 11. Without a grace orientation, a legalistic Christianity is much more likely to see the secular world as a polluted place to flee from. In other words, when you think of the Bible as mainly how to live right so I can go to heaven, there's a tendency to just sort of see the world as a polluted place. And therefore, when you don't grasp the gospel of absolute grace, you tend toward a pharisaical obsession with ritual purity or cleanness. Since we're saved by the purity and rightness of our lives, and therefore, we tend to encourage people to stay very much within the church where we don't have to deal with unbelievers. And a lot of people, I think, actually do go in sometimes to full-time ministry just because they don't know how to handle that. They feel polluted. But without a kingdom orientation, the gospel is seen as a means of finding individual peace and not as a worldview, a comprehensive interpretation of all of reality that affects everything we do. The gospel has a deep and vital impact on how we do art and business and government. We will be talking about that later. One last thing and a little summary, then we need to talk a little bit about the city, being in the city. The last thing was so wonderful about recognizing that the Bible has a single plot line, and the Bible is not just a medicine chest of how we can make ourselves better and be happy, but is the story of God's mission, saving mission. That means when you understand the gospel as creation, fall, redemption, consummation, we're still in the story. You know, I mean, for many years, I read the Bible saying, how do I... As a preacher, I tended to think that the Bible was, here's how to live, and now I have to apply it to you. It's sort of like the Bible was written in the past about things that happened in the past, and now I have to figure out how do I apply it to myself in the present day, how do I apply it to my people in this present day. This approach, what's interesting about this approach, you're in the story. You know, and that's the reason why sometimes we're a little bit confused when we see places like where Paul says, having been saved by his death, how much more saved will we be by his life, you know, and it talks about salvation sometimes in the future tense and sometimes in the past tense. And we say, wait, I thought once you become a Christian, you're saved. You really read the Bible carefully, you'll see we have been saved from the penalty of sin. We are being saved from the power of sin, and eventually the world will be saved from the very presence of sin. So salvation is a story that's not over, and we are smack in the middle of it. We are between the first and second coming of Christ. We are in the overlap of the ages. We are in the period of redemptive history in which the kingdom is here partially, but not fully. And we are smack in the middle of it. We are absolutely in the story. But when you read the Bible, it's not about something that happened a long time ago, and how do we make it relevant to ourselves. God comes to Abraham, right, and says, I want to come into a covenant with you. I want to bless you. I want to be in a relationship with you. And immediately he says, right after that, what does he say? Let me quote. Get out. Get out of your familiar place. Get out of your country. Get out. Where to, Lord? I'll tell you later. You know, that's Abraham. God comes to Moses, meets him at the burning bush. Finally, Moses has a personal relationship with God. Immediately, what does he say? Go to Pharaoh and tell the most powerful human ruler in the world that he has to completely give up his entire free labor force or else. And, you know, Abraham says, well, and Moses says, ah, here comes Isaiah. Isaiah, God shows up in the temple. He meets Isaiah. There's a coal from the altar. An angel brings it and puts it on his lips. He's, he's, he's, he's forgiven. He experiences salvation. Immediately, God says. He's right. He's been here. Thank you. Isaiah, there's a coal from the altar, an angel brings it and puts on his lips, he's forgiven, he experiences salvation, immediately God says, who will I send to a group of people who, and preach to them, who will never, ever listen to you, and who will try to kill you? And Isaiah immediately jumps up and says, send me. In other words, here's the point, God never calls you in without sending you out. But God never calls you into himself without sending you out. He says, he never blesses you except to make you a blessing to the world. And if you aren't willing to be a man or woman in mission, you can't be like God because God is in mission. Because look at, who's Jesus? What did he do? Where did he come from? What did he give up? He got out. He got out of his comfort zone. And you can't be a blessing unless you're willing to sacrifice, get out of your comfort zone. And the gospel erodes your pride, erodes your anxiety and fear, and erodes your discouragement and selfishness enough to make you a person in mission. Because, you know, it's fear and security and anxiety and those things that just make you self, you know, kind of self-absorbed. And then you're not a person in mission. But the gospel can make you a person in mission. That's what the whole Bible is about. Now, there's three topics. One of them, which I'm just, I'm going to do in the next 14, 15 minutes, is in some ways important, but it's maybe the least, least practical. You should be on page 13. The second one, tomorrow morning, is what it means to be part of a missional church. Redeemer is a church utterly committed to mission. It's not a place to come, I hope, if you just really want to find a way for God to give you a comfortable, safe little life. What does it mean to be in a missional church? And then finally, we're going to be talking about what it means to bring Christ, the gospel, into your work life, into your vocation. Tonight, I want to talk to you a little bit about how the mission of God affects your understanding of life in the city. And let me give you an orientation to this. There's a theology of the city in here that I want to talk to you about, that I want you to master and know. Let me just go on through this to the degree we can. And we'll be discussing it afterwards in the breakout sessions. Page 13 is trying to say this. In the ancient times, when the church began, the key to early Christianity's success, the key to the first mission of the church was the city. Rodney Stark, you sometimes hear me quote him. He looks at how Christianity really, really developed and really succeeded in the early Roman Empire. And it comes down to this, this quote in the middle of the page. He says, To cities filled with the homeless and impoverished, Christianity offered charity as well as real hope. To cities filled with newcomers and strangers, Christianity offered an immediate basis for attachment. To cities filled with widows and orphans, Christianity offered a new and expanded sense of family. To cities torn by ethnic strife, Christianity offered a new basis for social solidarity. I'm not saying, this is Rodney Stark who's a historian and a sociologist, I'm not saying the misery of the ancient world caused the advent of Christianity. People had been enduring for centuries without the aid of Christian theology or social structures. I am arguing that once Christianity did appear in the cities, its superior capacity for meeting human problems soon became evident and played a major role in its ultimate triumph. For what Christianity brought was not simply an urban movement but a new culture. In other words, in the very beginning, Christianity was absolutely, its success was completely tied to its ability to flourish in the cities. Let's keep on going. You've heard me say this before. Cities in the Book of Acts. Cities in the Roman world became urbanized and globalized because for the first time really in history, that part of the world, there was peace. It was called the Pax Romana. Nations that had been warring against each other for centuries all were at peace with each other. You know why? Because they were all conquered by Rome. Because they were all conquered by Rome, suddenly borders that you could never pass through before, they were all open. And they built roads. And one of the things that immediately happened was in all of Europe, essentially, and all around the Mediterranean, suddenly there was this freedom of movement that actually that part of the world had never seen before. Next thing you know, cities became like our cities today, which were multi-ethnic, filled with mobile people, centers of commerce. And when the Christians went into the cities, and as we're going to see here in a second, that's where they went first when they did their missions, great things happened. Now, today, because not so much of peace, though that's some part of it, partly because of technology, partly because of our mobility, cities today compare to, say, 50 years ago. at actually all the cities of the world, because of technology, mobility, and a number of other things, this world is becoming just as urbanized and just as globalized as that Roman world was. In other words, the world in which we live now is more like the world of the Greco-Roman world of early Christianity than we have seen since those times. In 2,000 years, we've really not been as much like the Book of Acts as we are now. Do you understand what I'm saying? And the two things that are happening are urbanization and globalization. Now, for example, now you can be on page 14. What do I mean by urbanization? Look at the first bullet point. You know, in 1950, New York was the only world city with a population of over 10 million people. Today, there are over 20 such cities, 12 of which have grown to that size in the last 20 years. Many more are rapidly approaching this size than they're passing, you know, New York, of course. Why? In the 18th century, a combination of population growth and technology brought rural Europe to its carrying capacity. Now, that meant... It meant... You got to the place where everyone on the farm, only one or two people could stay on the farm and take the farm over because there was no more land. They had to go into the cities to find jobs. So, I mean, actually, my first church in Hopewell, Virginia was filled with people from North Carolina because eastern North Carolina had actually reached its carrying capacity. So every farm had... You know, every farmer family had eight children. Six or seven of them had to go north into the more urbanized parts of Virginia to find places to work. That's why they said in eastern North Carolina in the 60s and 70s, they used to teach the three R's, reading, writing, and the road to Richmond. And that's where they went. And it's the same thing. Same thing. What happened in Europe, and what's happened actually in America to a certain degree, is now happening in what's called the Third World to an amazing extent. Many experts believe this is now happening in Africa, Asia, and to a lesser extent in Latin America, where the cities are literally exploding with immigrants from the villages and rural areas. If rural urban population in the southern hemisphere stabilizes at 75% to 25% as it did in Europe and North America, in other words, 75% in the cities, 25% in the rural areas as it has in Europe and North America, over the next few decades, we're going to see half a billion people move into the cities of Africa and Asia alone. That's one new Bangkok every two months. Eight million people be moving into the cities every two months. This explosion is one of the main reasons why, as you have heard, Christianity is growing like crazy in the Third World. It's very simple. Think about it. People who have always lived in the mountains and in the hills and all the rural areas of Africa, Latin America, Asia, they're conservative. You know, this is the way we've always been. We're not Christians. We're this or we're that. They move into the cities and they're uprooted. And two things happen. One is they go through changes, so they're more open to new ideas. And the second thing is they've got problems in the cities. They've got to go into the cities. There's no place they can't be supported now. The rural areas have reached their carrying capacity. They come into the cities, they've got problems. And vital Christian communities in those cities are exploding. And as a result, Christianity is exploding in Latin America, in Asia, in Africa. It's astounding. Why? Cities. Cities have always been the key to Christianity, to Christian mission. Always have been. They always will be. Look at the bottom of page 14. The other aspect that we see today, like in the Book of Acts, is not only urbanization, the growth of cities, but globalization. Those cities are more linked to the rest of the world than they are to their own nations in two ways. One is cities are the places where the elites go. This is where the artists go. This is where the writers go. This is where the filmmakers go. This is where the business types go. And as a result, they control the world more than nations do now. Understand that? Cities are more influential than nations. Let me give you a quick example. Turn over to page 15. Quick example. Under communism, the Romanian government tried like crazy to eradicate the cultural identity of the Hungarian minority in Romania. There's always been a Hungarian minority in Romania. The Romanians tried like crazy to eradicate it. Wipe it out. What they did was they refused to let any, there was, certainly they didn't allow any bilingual education, but they wouldn't let you take civil service exams in Hungarian. They just did everything they could to try to Romanianize the Hungarians. It didn't work. The Hungarians loved their culture, and they did everything they could to sort of build a hedge and guard their culture and guard their identity, the way they spoke, the way they dressed, the way they ate, the way they ran their families and that sort of thing. However, there's a lot of people that think that they were put in jail, didn't change them, but now they think perhaps the cultural identity of the Hungarians will be gone in about 15 years. You know why? MTV. MTV. It's absolutely captivated the Hungarian youth. They don't want to be anything particular. They want to be like what they see on there. They want to dress like what they see on there. And what's interesting is, you know where Viacom is, right? It's right over here, 6th Avenue. That's where MT, that's the headquarters. It's 6th Avenue between 42nd and 43rd. Walk by there. That is having more of an impact on what's happening to Hungarian youths than, you know, the communism ever could. Where's MTV? It's cities. Cities now control the culture of the world, more than nation states do. But also, cities are connected to the whole world because of our immigration patterns. You know the New Life Church out in Queens? Are you a Pete Scazzaro's pastor? I think I got this right. You know, they plant churches. And they're in Queens. So they planted a church in Brooklyn. And they planted a church in the Bronx. They planted a church in far Queens. You know, they're thinking about planting churches. And they planted a church in Manila. Manila. Now, you know, wouldn't you think, well, okay, you would do the Bronx, and you would do Queens, and you would do Brooklyn, and then Manila? You know, what about Long Island? What about Westchester? What about New Jersey? Well, I'm sorry. Manila is closer to New York City than New Jersey. Because the cities of our world are much more connected to the rest of the world than they are to their own locality. I mean, the fact of the matter is, culturally, there's a much bigger difference between, you know, New York City and Pennsylvania than there is between New York City and London, or New York City and Nairobi, or New York City and Manila. You know that. I know that. I'm from Pennsylvania. I don't know that. Look at the middle of page 15. Harvey Kahn concludes that we're witnessing against the rise of the city-state. He quotes a guy who says, great metropolitan regions, not states, not even the nation-states, are now starting to emerge as the world's most influential players. And therefore, living as Christians and ministering as Christians in cities has always been the key. And it is again. Now, the Bible tells us about this, bottom page 15. In the Old Testament, let me give you, actually, I'll tell you what, I'm going to, we'll turn the pages, but I'm not going to be reading this. I'm going to, I'm going to be, for the sake of time, I'm going to be kind of summarizing. Go back to the Old Testament, and God says to Ab and Eve, he puts them in the garden, and he says, be fruitful and multiply and have dominion. What does that mean, class? And the answer is, you know, we still aren't really sure. I mean, I mean, Old Testament scholars are always debating, theologians are always debating, what does it mean to be fruitful and multiply and have dominion? But here's what we do know. When Adam and Eve were given that mandate, which seems to mean build a civilization that honors God, you know, something like that, they failed, right? They fell into sin, they failed. But Jesus Christ is the second Adam. He's the true Adam. He's the true representative of the new humanity. And he will fulfill the mandate that God gave to the first Adam. But when we get, yeah, turn over to page 16, when you get to the end of the book of the Bible, and you see the ultimate fruit of the work of the second Adam, it's a city. When you see the world that Jesus Christ built, and by the way, you know, Hebrews 11 says, you know, that Abraham was looking for the city whose builder and maker is God. The future of the universe, the future of the world is urban. And what that must mean then is when God told Adam and Eve to be fruitful and multiply and have dominion, he must have been saying build a city, because that's what Jesus did. Now, some people would say, well, that's kind of weird, you know, isn't that just a symbol? Well, yeah, the city is a symbol. And of course, it's very hard to define a city, because, you know, is a city something that's this dense or this dense or this dense? But here's the point. Look at the bottom of page 16. Because God told Adam and Eve to build cities, there's something special about cities in the plan of God. Cities are the place where culture is formed. Cities are the place where human culture is formed, more than anywhere else. And I'll show you why that happens. First of all, when you come into the city, and this is very important to know, first of all, the city puts you together with you. when you come to a big city. There's tons of people that aren't like me. Now, the reason for that is because cities are merciful places for minorities. Do you know that? In God's providence, cities are the best place for minorities in a culture. That's why they gather together in cities. They can have their own papers. There's enough of them together, they can have a little bit of clout. They don't want to be dispersed through the rest of the culture. So they come on in, and that's the reason why cities attract minorities, and they develop minorities. Turn over to page 17. However, it's because you and I and everybody in New York City is constantly thrown in with people unlike us that it makes us so creative. We're uniquely challenged. Because I'm put together by its density in the city with unique numbers of diverse people, my thinking and my viewpoints are radically challenged. I am confronted with creative new ways to think about everything, and I must abandon my traditional ways or become far more knowledgeable and committed to my traditional ways than I was before. Do you see what I mean? When you come to the city, you are either going to give up the things that you always took for granted and realized, gee, they were stupid, or you're going to hold on to them with vastly more intelligence than you ever did before, one or the other. Therefore, what happens is being in a city makes you vastly more creative, committed, and skillful in everything you do. But on the other hand, the city does not only put you together with unique numbers of people unlike you, it puts you together, unfortunately, within unique numbers of people like you. What that means is if you were the best singer in Albuquerque, New Mexico, and that's a pretty big city, so you must have been pretty hot stuff to have won the soprano contest in high school or college, and you're the best soprano in Albuquerque. You come here, and the scariest thing about New York, you're in the subway, and there's somebody playing on the platform, begging for money, and they're good. In fact, I think they might be better than me. I mean, you know, you come from Albuquerque with your bags packed, you know, you're going to make it in New York, and you get into the subway, and you hear that person singing on the street, and you say, I better practice. And it's true. The city makes you dig down deep. Listen, ask the preachers what it's like to preach in New York. It's the hardest, scariest possible place. Everybody works twice as long on their sermons. Automatically, you just sense it. Okay? It's exhausting. It's exhausting. And you're exhausted, too, living in the city. Why? Because people are so different. That's exhausting. And people are, there's so many more people like you who are better than you, and that's exhausting. But you put it all together. Cities create culture. Cities bring out the best and the worst. Cities make you dig down deep and pull out stuff that you never thought you could do. That's the reason why cities always will be, because they were created by God for that, the culture-forming wombs of the world. Therefore, now this is the last thing I'm going to say, and then we're going to have to, yeah, we're done for now. Page 17. When God sent Paul, this is middle of page 17, out into the world to preach the gospel, right? Paul, in every town, in every region he went to, in every nation he went to, he always went to the biggest city of the nation, planted churches there, and then left, and ignored the countryside. Now, you may have heard me say this before in sermons, but I'm going to, hopefully, there'll be something even clearer now in light of everything else I've said tonight, is that Paul ignored the small towns, he ignored the village, he went, took Christianity into the urban center. Why? Number one, urban people, because they go through all these changes, are always more open to new ideas than people who live in homogeneous places and places where no one ever changes and things don't change as much. People are just not as open to new ideas. In the city, Paul knew people are more open to new ideas, number one. Number two, in the city he knew that, you know, in the village he might win the lawyer or two, because there's only two lawyers in the village, but if you want to win the legal profession, you've got to go to the city. So the city was more culturally strategic, it was more filled with people who are personally open, and lastly, it was more globally connected. If you wanted to get the gospel to Morocco, and then the gospel, you know, five years in Morocco, and then the gospel in Mauritania, five years in Mauritania, and the gospel in Algeria, five years in Algeria, or you go to Antioch, or you have Mauritanians and Algerians and Moroccans all living in the same basic area, you have your Bible study, and you have a multi-ethnic Bible study, they've come to Christ, and the gospel goes to those countries. So Paul went to the cities and ignored every place else. As a result, 300 AD, we know this, that 50% of the cities of the Greco-Roman world were Christian, whereas the countryside was pagan, utterly pagan. to say, as far as he could understand, the Greek and Latin word for pagan, paganus, is the word for farmer. And almost certainly means that the pagans were the people who lived in the villages, and the Christians were the people who lived in the cities. Why was that important? We all know this. If the cities are Christian and the countryside is pagan, where's the culture going? It's going Christian. If, as is true in America today, the cities are pagan and the countryside is Christian, where is the culture going? It's going pagan. Because, you see, the cities are the culture forming wombs. Does every Christian have to live in cities? Absolutely not. Absolutely not. Because you have to have Christians every single place. Everywhere there are people. But I believe, if you read the Bible the way I'm saying tonight, you have to say that God is calling the church as the church to major on cities. Not every individual Christian, but the church as the church should be majoring on cities. Is it? No. But we're going to try to change that. And you've come to a church in which we are trying to change that. It's extremely important to realize. And what it means to live in the city, as with this mission mindset, we're going to be especially looking at tomorrow in detail. But I want you to keep one thing in mind. I just, I was, I had to preach on this just, what is tonight, Friday, two nights ago somewhere. The book of Jonah is very interesting. In Jonah chapter 1, verse 1, God says, Go to the city of Nineveh and preach. And Jonah doesn't. And then in chapter 3, verse 1, God again says to Jonah, Now that you've been through this whale incident, Go to the city and preach. And he does. But when they repent, he's mad. Because he never liked the city. He doesn't like the city. He's like a lot of people. He doesn't like the city. He knows that they're a bunch of pagans. And he knows they're a bunch of wicked people. And he wants God to smite them. And when they repent in response to his preaching, he's mad about it. And he says so to God. And God ends the book of Jonah saying, You see that plant that you're so upset about? How could you be upset about your plant? And not care about Nineveh, that great city, 120,000 people who don't know the right hand from their left. Shouldn't we be? Shouldn't I be concerned? Shouldn't I care? Shouldn't I love that great city? Now here's what he's saying. It's what my friend Bill Crispin said to me years ago. He says the countryside is where, And this is what God is saying to Jonah. The countryside is the place where there's more people, Where there's more plants than people. And the city is the place where there's more people than plants. And since God absolutely loves people more than plants, He has to love the city more than the country. And when I laughed when Bill Crispin said this, He didn't laugh and he said, I want you to think about the theological logic of this. He says, you know, Was it Virginia Woolf who said, I think, no, Gertrude Stein. Who said, I think I shall never see a thing as lovely as a tree? Who was that? Joyce Kilmer. Oh, was it? Joyce Kilmer? I think that I shall never see a thing as lovely as a tree. Wrong. Because God says in the book of Jonah, He says, Listen, If there was a big boulder coming down the side of a mountain, And it was a human being and a tree, What would you do? Save the tree? Of course not. You save the person. If the tree gets knocked down, You say, what a pity. But there's no comparison. Because God is saying, The most beautiful thing I've ever made on the face of the earth is a human being. Infinitely more beautiful and complex. Now, go out into New York City. What do you see? Crammed into every subway car. The most beautiful thing. There's more beauty in New York City. As far as God's eyes are concerned, What about your eyes? Do you think like God thinks? Do you see like God sees? My calendars don't. You know, I have all these calendars, right? No people on them. Just mountains and trees and lakes and rivers. That's beauty. That's not the way God sees it. There's nothing more beautiful than a city filled with people. And so what God is saying to Jonah, Jonah, you went to the city, but you didn't love the city. You still haven't heard my call to the city. You went, you preached, but you don't love the city. And until you love the city, You're not walking the footsteps of the ultimate Jonah, Who didn't go outside the city to watch it be judged. He went outside the city to take the judgment of the city on Calvary. Jesus Christ was judged to save the city. And if you know that, then you'll be... City for that. Now, we're going to flesh that out tomorrow, but now I'm going to close you in prayer. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us enough to think about tonight. And we are going to spend the weekend digesting it and processing it. Father, some of us, I mean, I have been talking about this for 15 years, and yet the material convicts me as I talk to my brothers and sisters here. I don't think I love the city. I find so often it's a pain. I look at the diversity, and I sometimes think, why can't those people be like me? I do get exhausted because I don't let the gospel help me relax and let the city move me to excellence. But instead, without the gospel really gripping my heart, I let the city just make me work incredibly hard for approval. And I pray, Father, that you would help us to see just what you see when you see the city. Make us men and women in mission who love the city and who know that there is no better place on the face of the earth to live as your people than in the midst of one of the great cities of the world. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
