TITLE: The Journey of Love (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Art and Beauty
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-journey-of-love-an-open-forum/

============================================================

I said to Tom, this might be one open forum where the music comes in first. I may have to work very hard even for a tie. What's a lecture? What are we doing here? I'd like to help you understand, appreciate the meaning of this particular artwork, Porgy and Best. Now, when you ask a question, what does a particular artwork, what is it saying to us? What does it mean? Of course, in all great art, there's multiple levels of meaning. I think it would actually be a service to us all if I mentioned three of them, even though I want to spend most of our time on the third one, at least briefly the first two. There's at least three levels of meaning. Let's apply it here to this particular artwork, Porgy and Best. The first level goes like this. Richard Crawford is a very prominent musicologist. He's taught at University of Michigan. He's written a lot about Gershwin, by the way. I read a really helpful interview with him recently in which somebody was asking him questions about Porgy and Best and what it means. Of course, there's a lot of technical and ideological issues surrounding this piece of music. Technical issues is, you know, this is not a musical. This is an opera, right? It's a sung dialogue. There's recitative and so on. It's an opera. And there's been a lot of debate about whether jazz is appropriate for an opera and so on. And, of course, as we'll see in a minute, there's been a lot of debate about what does this say about African-American experience. But what's interesting is Crawford says this in the interview. At one point, he stops the interview and he says, what I don't like is somebody judging a work strictly on technical or ideological grounds without actually experiencing it. Maybe one of the most beautiful things ever said about Porgy and Best was said by Gershwin himself to Ruben Mamoulian the night after the first rehearsal. He called Mamoulian, who was the opera's stage director, in the middle of the night. It was about two in the morning and Gershwin called him up and said, you know, I can't sleep. I just found the music tonight so beautiful. I can hardly believe I wrote it. And what Crawford goes on and says, it was as if he, at that point, was able to stand outside the thing. It wasn't a matter of ownership. It wasn't even a matter of pride. It was a matter of wonder. He was saying, holy smoke, where did this come from? To me, there is so much music that is exactly like this. Great music takes you to another region of your being. It's the experience. It's that transcendent experience. Now, what is Crawford saying? Before you should ask, in great art, before you ask the question, what does it mean? And try to get an answer. First, ask the question of any great work of art, is there any meaning in life at all? And you don't even have to wait for an answer, because it doesn't matter how discouraged you are. It doesn't matter how nihilistic you are. It doesn't matter how much in despair you are about the meaning of life. In the presence of any great art, there is a sense sometimes of joy, sometimes of wonder. But there's a sense that always comes through like this. There is something worth standing for. There is something that means something. There is something worth hoping in. There is something worth fighting for. I mean, it doesn't matter what the art is. Even if it's very strident protest art, it's saying there's something worth fighting for. Or even if it's incredibly beautiful art, there's what comes upon you at the first level of meaning. The first thing that any great artwork shows us is life is not a pile of spit. The world is not an accident. There's meaning. There's design. You know, of course, Bernstein had that famous place where he actually says in, when he listens to Beethoven, he realizes there is something that checks out in the universe. Something that follows its own laws. Something that will never let us down. There's something. It doesn't matter what I believe in my head. So, at the very first level, didn't you notice that? I mean, at the first level, way beneath your cognition, way beneath your intellect, great art always tells you, this world didn't happen by accident. There is a meaning. There is a hope. There is something worth fighting for, maybe even dying for. So, at the first level, it tells us about that. It tells us that there is meaning. There is right, wrong truth. There is hope. Now, the second level, Porgy and Bess, of course, is about African-American experience. But here's what I'm going to take. I think it's my job as a lecturer to take about two minutes to tell you what the issues are and then abdicate. And here's why. Of course, Porgy and Bess would be about African-American experience. But if you actually, and I did, I spent quite a bit of time, go and listen to African-American thinkers and what they think about Porgy and Bess, you will see that there's not a consensus out there. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. debate is about and then not try to be an arbiter. You don't need a white male up here telling you who's right about this. But I think it's my job to enhance your understanding of the artwork by just telling you what the issues are. On the one hand, you have a number of African-American theorists and thinkers and artists who have not liked Porgy and Bess. Duke Ellington wrote against it. And the basic idea was this. It was produced by white men. And it was produced by George and Ira Gershwin. It was Dubose Hayward who wrote the book. And the one knock against it is simply, there's two. The one knock is, here are white men coming and telling the world about African-American experience. What do they know? And the second knock against it is the concern that there's stereotypes. And for example, certainly this especially happened in the 50s and 60s, when you have a black man saying, I'm poor, I got plenty of nothing, and that's all right. I'm happy anyway. Is that really something you want to sing to the rest of the country and say, I'm poor, I'm a poor black person, but that's all right. I'm happy. I'm happy in my poverty. And it was things like that that got some people very unhappy and have criticized Porgy and Bess. On the other hand, there's every bit as much, there's every bit as many leading black thinkers and scholars who also love and adore and are tremendously supportive of Porgy and Bess. For example, Maya Angelou, of course, obviously a well-regarded African-American poet. She actually was in the cast, I didn't know this, she was in the cast in 1954 when Porgy and Bess first played the La Scala in Milan. And she says that there was, it was a, it was a, you know, it was a transcendent event. Here were all these Europeans that had never, ever heard black people singing and certainly had never heard jazz brought into the very center of high European cultural, you know, the La Scala in Milan. She says that night, she says all of the performers were in tears almost the entire time. She says every five minutes, the entire audience jumped to its feet, shouted and applauded. And she, and basically this is what Maya Angelou said, she says, all right, it took a couple of white people to show the world the genius of African-American art. All right, I wish it didn't have to be that way. But the point was that the world through this finally saw the absolute range and depth of the genius of jazz and of African-American art and music and culture. Produced out of poverty, of course. So do you need me to tell you who's right? I needed, you needed me only to tell you there it is. That's an issue. Of course, it says something about African-American experience, but there are some, what, disparate voices. But here's the last thing. Here's something I think we can talk about and I want to talk to you about. The third thing we know about Porgy and Bess is that it's a love story. Third thing that it tells us about is love. And most of the places that give you a little synopsis of what's Porgy and Bess about, it usually says star-crossed lovers. It's a story, it's a love story of star-crossed lovers, a tragic love story. But I want you to consider this. It is a counterpoint. I mean, there are other love stories, West Side Story, places like that. There are other musicals and movies that have been produced in America in the last 75 years that also seem to have star-crossed lovers. Titanic, you know, the movie Titanic. But this is what Richard Crawford, Richard Crawford in the same interview talks about the fact that Porgy and Bess is extremely different. He says that there is an American myth, the American myth of true love, the American myth that true romantic love, true individual romantic love is a universal solvent. This will solve all of your problems. This will overcome all social barriers. This will overcome all injustice. This will overcome everything. True love. This is what you need. And he says the myth of true love, the myth that there is such a thing, the myth that it's impervious, it's infallible, it has to overcome everything, all barriers, all problems. He says that is the very essence of all American popular culture practically. That any musical, any movie, any story that is presented to a mass audience in America in the last 75 years that deviates from that doesn't do well. Americans believe it. Americans want to believe it. He says, for example, very interesting, he says, the fantasy of boy gets girl is present in virtually every musical and virtually every blockbuster movie you can think of for the last 75 years. And he says, in fact, if you study every music, you'll see there's basically one theme. There's a hero and there's a heroine. And there's some barrier between them that seems to be insurmountable. It could be class, but… so… and death peril, whatever. But in the end, somehow, they get through it. They break through it, and they get perfect love. And here's what he says. What's interesting is, it doesn't mean the movie or the story has to end happily in order to perpetrate the myth. He says, for example, and this is a quote from the interview. He says, in West Side Story, even Maria and Tony have their perfect love. It doesn't last, but they get it. For almost two centuries in America now, he goes that back and that far, audience demand that romantic fantasy of perfect love, or they turn away from the story. And he goes on to point out. See, for example, you know, in West Side Story, it's awfully famous. I'm going to assume most of you know about it. Of course, it seems to end tragically, right? Are they star-crossed lovers? Well, yes and no. Because you remember that moment in the back of the dress shop where they sing that song where they say, you know, we are one. Even death won't part us now. Our love has overcome racial barriers. Our love has overcome racism. Our love has overcome, you know, class barriers, and now even death won't overcome it. And actually, Crawford points out that even in West Side Story or a place like that, they get it. It perpetrates the myth. And he actually goes on and says, since the late 1960s, artists in New York especially, artists who produce musicals have refused to go that way. So you have Stephen Sondheim, you have Sweeney Todd, things like that. Or you have Chicago. They refuse to go that way. And as a result, they will never, ever, ever, ever get the same amount of success that the older musicals and movies get. Because he says, Americans believe in the myth of true love. And it's a universal solvent. That individual romantic love is something that if you really get it, it will overcome everything. It doesn't matter injustice. It doesn't matter race, class barriers. It doesn't matter what's…it will overcome everything. It's true happiness. Now, what you have…this is what's interesting. What you have in Porgy and Bess is an American anti-myth. Now, I didn't say an anti-American myth. I didn't say that. Please don't go away thinking I said that. What you have is a counterpoint or an anti-myth myth to the American myth. What you have here is that natural evil, social injustice and evil, and personal character flaws make perfect love essentially impossible. See, it's not West Side Story. It's not Titanic, you know. Sure, at the end he dies, you know, he goes off and he saves their life by not getting on the raft and so on. But they've had it. They've had true love, and they've overcome all class barriers. That's not what you have in Porgy and Bess. Natural evil, social evil, and personal character evil, flaws, make perfect love essentially an impossibility. Let me show you what three…those three things. First of all, that I told you there's an enormous irony to that…and Laurie sang it so incredibly well. Summertime, the lullaby, one of my favorite songs, and it was the best I'd ever heard it rendered tonight. But the irony, of course, is that the mother is singing over the child and says, your daddy's rich and your mom is good looking, and since we're both standing by you, you're going to have a great life. Now, during the movie, pardon me, during the play, during the opera, the husband, the father of that baby, Jake, his fishing boat is caught in a hurricane, and Clara, the mother, runs to try to save him, and they're both drowned. And actually, there's a place near the very end of the…near the end of the opera where Bess now is taking care of the little orphan, and she sings the lullaby, of course, because this is the lullaby that she heard her mother sing. But she's singing to this orphan saying, your daddy and your mama are standing by you, so someday you're going to be able to fly. And of course, we now have an orphan. We have incredible obstacles between this little child and any kind of fulfilling life. And what it was, it was just a hurricane. It was a natural disaster. All that's gone. The lullaby, it wasn't true. Natural evil. Secondly, social alienation. Now, listen, I'll say this first, and I'll get back and explain what I mean. White people in particular want to believe that individual romantic love can overcome all race, all class barriers, all social injustice. If you just love one another enough, then we can do it. You know, Titanic's all about how here's a poor boy and here's a rich girl. We've overcome it through true love. It can be done. You know, we can get rid of all that prejudice. A Knight's Tale, which wasn't anywhere near as well received as Titanic. But it's probably about the same level of artistry, I think. in a video, and it's all about a peasant boy who can't be a knight, but his father says, if you try hard enough, if you believe enough, you can change your stars. Yeah, see, you are fated to be a peasant, but you can change your stars. And of course, he poses as a knight, and he wins the heart of the Prince of Wales who knights him, and then he wins the beautiful and noble woman who becomes his bride and so forth. That's the American myth. That's what we want to believe. White people want to believe that corporate injustice isn't that bad, that racial barriers aren't all that bad, that if you really try hard, if you really believe, if you really are determined, if you really love enough and work hard enough, you can overcome all these things. White people want to believe that because, see, we don't want to admit what a head start we have just walking into a store, being white, and not having an accent. We don't want to admit the kind of head start we have in looking for jobs. We don't want to admit that. We don't want to admit how structural problems keep us out. And this play tells us that the structural problems, the structural injustice really do. I mean, Porgy is not able to get Bess because he's poor and he's crippled. You see, he's not beautiful and he's not rich. And he gets her when she's desperate because, you see, nobody will take her in when Crown leaves. The women won't take her in because she's disrespectful. The men won't take her in because she's tainted. She's not, you know, she belonged to somebody else. So finally she comes into him. But you see, the whole, all through, eventually, of course, she's seduced away by the idea of the high life, the idea of money. You know, the way the culture works, the structural injustices and inequities of the culture are not something that you can just say, well, they're really not that bad if you just really work hard. One of the great ironies of that lullaby, your daddy's rich and your ma's good looking. Isn't that interesting? Isn't it great that we don't live in that horrible place where all that matters about men is that they're well off and all that matters about women is they look good? Isn't it great that we don't live in a, you know, a terrible ghetto like that? Isn't it wonderful, for example, that we've overcome those prejudices? We've overcome those kinds of exploitive relationships. We're not seduced by them. We're not controlled by them. We're not manipulated by them. Of course we are. It's astounding. It's Manhattan. Your daddy's rich and your ma's good looking. This New York magazine, February 11th, was doing some survey about how do singles treat each other in Manhattan. Here's what one woman said, I won't settle for a guy who's unemployed right now, period. I don't care if he's nice and treats me well. It doesn't matter. The first thing I do, if a guy starts to talk to me, I check out his shoes and his watch. Only then will I let him buy me a drink. And of course, on the other side, I'm checking out her dress size. Looks like a six? All right. Now, if you start a relationship, if you start a relationship at the very beginning, if you look past everybody else except the people who are going to meet your status needs, if you automatically eliminate anybody from possible, as a possible mate or possible love relationship, unless the person automatically up front is going to meet your status needs. There is no possibility for a non-exploited relationship, or at least it's not a very good one. And you are being controlled, you are being controlled by stereotypes. Gender stereotypes, class stereotypes, absolutely. And you know, what Porgy and Best tells us, what reality should tell us, at the American fairy tale myth, is that basically, social evil, structural evil, structural injustice, has a devastating effect on your possibilities of true love. It is not something that you can just win through, because basically, you know, class barriers and injustice and corporate injustice is really basically not all that bad anymore. It used to be bad back then, but it's not anymore. Yeah, we sing the same lullabies. So there's natural evil, there's social evil and injustice, but most of all, obviously, what dooms this relationship is the sin in the human heart. Now, here's one of the places where people who get upset about what they consider stereotypes, I just, with all due respect, don't think they're there. Here's where people who get upset with stereotypes get upset. First of all, Bess. Here is Bess. all, he's a cripple, he has no money, you know, and she continually is attracted. You know, she can't help herself, she says. You saw it in one of the songs, I Loves You, Porgy. She can't help herself. She's attracted to the power of her old boyfriend, even though he's a violent man. She can't stop herself. And of course, the stereotype is, yeah, there we go, women, you know. A woman is now considered emotional, and she doesn't, and they don't like that stereotype. They also don't like the stereotype of Porgy saying, I got plenty of nothing, and nothing's plenty for me, but here's what, here's what I want you to see. What dooms the relationship, first of all, yes, is Bess Weakness. It is amazing. The Gershwin, you cannot understand sport in life, and you can't understand the song, it ain't necessarily so, unless you study Genesis 3. In fact, what he does, you go out and he tempts Bess in the garden. They go out to this beautiful island where they're having a picnic, and he tempts her in the garden. And the three things that the tempter, the serpent, says to the woman in Genesis 3 is, first of all, questions God's Word. He says, has God really said? You're going to die if you eat that tree? It ain't necessarily so, says the serpent. You will not surely die. So, that's the first thing. But secondly, the serpent doesn't just contradict God's Word in Genesis 3, but twists it. And one of the things that's so intriguing about the, it ain't necessarily so, is that the serpent, sport in life, has one place here where he describes the gospel, but it's not true. He says, to get into heaven, don't snap for a seven. That's shooting craps, by the way. To get into heaven, don't shoot craps. Live clean. Don't have no fault. Oh, I believe that gospel whenever possible, but basically I take it with a grain of salt. What's the gospel? If you want to get into heaven, be good. And so, what you have is, you have a tempter, and the tempter comes to the woman, and she eats. Well, you say, see, the problem is the woman. No. Porgy looks like the hero, but here's the problem with Porgy. Porgy says, I got plenty of nothing and got plenty of nothing's plenty for me. Why? Because I've got my woman. I've got my gal. Before he had his gal, he wasn't happy with God. Why did you make me a cripple? He wasn't happy with children, by the way. He sort of, he grouched at them. And one of the things that comes out in the book, by the way, the book Porgy, is that when Bess comes into his life, suddenly now he's happy with everything. He's nice to children. He's praying to God. Everything is fine because I finally got the one thing. In other words, Porgy believed the American myth. Porgy says, my life is crap. I am nothing, but if I would get her, if I would get this beautiful woman, if she would be mine, then finally my life would mean something. And what does that mean is, he has made her his savior. He has made her the integrating point of his life. And if you do that to a fallible human being, you're doomed to disaster. And ultimately, because she has become his savior, she's become the one non-negotiable, the one thing he's got to have to be happy in life. He kills for her. He kills for her, which is the reason why he loses her. And therefore, in the most, and I cannot believe that DuBose Hayward or Gershwin's understood the profundity of the story. In fact, you don't. Great art, as Gershwin says, I can't believe I wrote it. How did it happen? Great art basically comes. But what you have is, you have the ultimate refutation of the American myth that somehow the thing that's going to make you happy, if you can get it, is get that one true love. Get that one person. A, you probably won't find that person because of natural evil, because of personal evil, because of social evil. But if you do, and you believe that that one true love is a thing that will make your life right, you'll destroy her. You'll destroy the relationship. You'll destroy him. You'll destroy it. It has the seeds of its own destruction in it. So, where does this bring us? We saw there's an American myth that if you get that one true love, then your life has made it. And Americans over the years have rejected any story that does not give them the myth they want. But secondly, Porgy and Bess is beautiful. It's poignant. It's realistic. It's powerful. In all sorts of remarkable ways, it actually, I'm sure it's unconscious, it works off of the biblical understanding of sin and of temptation and of human corruption and of the brokenness of reality and being. we say, okay, there's that stupid, sentimental American myth, and then there's the realism of Porky and Bess? No. Here's the last thing I'd like to say. The way it ends. Now, we didn't sing any of the songs tonight about the way it ends, but the way it ends is very intriguing. I mean, obviously, it's poignant. He comes back. It's very sad. He's only been in jail for a week for contempt of court. Bess thinks, and Sporting Life gets her to think, that he's been taken away forever for the murder of Crown, but they don't know he did it. And they just locked him up for contempt of court because he wouldn't go in and identify the body. So after she leaves, he comes back, and because he's been fairly, he's had a couple of successful games of craps, he has bought her a new dress, and he comes back with the new dress, and he shows to everybody, I'm going to give this to Bess. Everybody sort of walks away from him, and he finds out that she's gone. Where has she gone to? New York. And here's how it ends. He says, how far is New York? Where is it? It's up north. Well, how far is it? They said, way past the custom house. Now, by the way, if you know anything about Charleston, the custom house was just blocks north, and for him, that was a long way because he was crippled. And the only way he used to get around was in a goat cart. He had a little tiny cart that he would sort of kneel in and sit in, and a little goat that would move him around. And therefore, he never went any more than blocks from where he was. So he said, how far is it? He said, how far is it? How far away is it? And they said, oh, a thousand miles, way past the custom house. So this is how it ends. He gets the goat cart, and he gets in it, and he says, I'm off to get her. I'm going to take her out of that heroin slavery. I'm going to get her away from the man who's going to make her life miserable. I'm going to redeem her. I'm going to take her. I'm going to find her. We're going to be happy again. And he goes off singing a song, but it's like a spiritual, of course. It's a wonderful song. He says, Lord, I'm coming. He says, I'm on my way to do this. And it's very rousing. And so there's a weirdness. There's an affirmation at the end, a joy at the end. And yet you know he's never going to do it, never going to do it. And so it's not cynical. It's not Chicago. Porcupine is not Chicago. It's not Sweeney Todd. It doesn't deconstruct the idea of romantic love. In the end, it still says, but there's got to be. But there's got to be a romantic love that there's got to be, because look what it's done to Porgy. It's made him in a man who's willing to do anything to get her back. So there's both a deconstruction of the myth and yet some kind of affirmation. And here's how I think I understand it. Let me just tell you how I do it personally, and then we'll close up. I read Porgy and Bess like the Old Testament. In fact, even though the Gershwins probably weren't doing this consciously, Porgy and Bess is a parable of the Old Testament. Because if you go to the book of Ezekiel, and if you go to the book of Hosea, and you go to the book of Isaiah, you will see that God in the Bible, the biblical God, creates us not just to be subjects of a king, and not just to be sheep under a shepherd, but He creates us to be His spouse. He continually calls us that we are His bride, and that He is our husband. He wants to have an incredible love relationship with us. He wants to have a relationship of intimacy, and that comes all the way through. Like, for example, in Isaiah 54, sing, burst into joy, burst into song, O my people, says God, for your maker is your husband. No longer will they call you deserted, for as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so will your God rejoice over you. And the book, if you go through the prophets, and you go through the whole Old Testament, here's what you see. God creates human beings to enter, not just to have serve Him, but to enter into a love relationship with Him. But the tempter comes and questions God's Word, and seduces us away. That's what the text says. And yet, God continually comes back and says, I will not give you up. One of the most astounding Porgy and Best stories in all of the Old Testament is the book of Hosea, in which God tells the prophet Hosea, I want you to take in that woman, Gomer. She's a prostitute. She's an adulterous woman. She's filled with all sorts of emotional and social and sexual weaknesses. I want you to take her in and make her your wife, even though she's going to continually let you down. And every time she lets you down, I want you to go back, and I want you to love her, and I want you to forgive her, and I want you to bring her back. And Hosea says to God, why? He says, so that at least you will know how I feel about my relationship with the human race. And so over and over and over and over again, God. we run away. I'm not going to let you go, and then we go somewhere else, and then we rebel. That's what the story of the whole Old Testament, all the Hebrew Scriptures. And then the Old Testament ends, because near the end, God says, and this is the end of one of these passages in Ezekiel 16, where he says, I saw you thrown into the field, but I took you in. Isn't that like Porgy and Vess talking about us, his people? And he says, and when you grew up, I adorned you, and I made you my bride. He says, but you trusted in your beauty, and you used your fame to become a prostitute, and you went to others. But here's at the very, very end, he says, this is what the sovereign Lord says at the end of Ezekiel 16. I will remember you. I will not deal with you as you deserve. I will remember the covenant I made with you in the days of your youth. I will make atonement for you, and then you will remember me. But that's how the book ends, very much like the way the opera ends. Here's a man who says, in spite of what she's done to me, I'm going to find her. I'm going to redeem her. I don't care what it's going to take. I might die in the attempt, but I don't want her to live a life of slavery. I don't want her to be enslaved to someone who doesn't really love her. I'm the only husband for her, and I'm going to go do it. And so he goes off, willing to sacrifice everything. You and I know that he's going to fail. That's how the Old Testament ends. Yes. But what's the answer? The great thing about the Bible is it doesn't end there. And what the Bible tells us is that God came to earth. This is the Christian gospel. God came to earth as a poor man. And we're told in Ephesians 5, husbands love your wife as Christ loved the church and gave himself for it. And so he came as a poor man, and he came, and he also was willing to suffer for us. He's willing to do anything for us to redeem us. And that's the Christian message. Now, I'm not here to expound all that, explain all that, or defend all that. I mean, this is this, but what I'm here to show you is that I believe that the Gershwins, who would have been very, very, very, very immersed in the Hebrew scriptures, unconsciously were working off that canvas, from what I can tell. At least they were working on that canvas. And so what you have is, on the one hand, no. Sentimental idea that true love is really the thing that's going to save you, nah. But not a cynicism that says, oh, we don't need romantic love, who cares about it? The great thing is, he says, there must be a love, there must be an answer to the deepest need of the heart that says, I need a romantic love that will fulfill me. Well, the answer of the Christian whole Bible, both Old and New Testament, is there is a romantic love that will satisfy you utterly, but your true lover cannot be any one individual human being. It's got to be the one who came as a poor man and gave himself for you. Once you taste that, though, then oddly enough, you can get into human relationships without making them into idols and get into more deep, satisfying love relationships than you ever thought would be possible otherwise if you were living out the American myth. So that's it. And that's, to me, the only way I can get the affirmation of Porgy and Bess and yet the realism of Porgy and Bess and hold it together in my own heart. I'm saying that as a Christian. I'm saying that as a pastor. You may have another way to do it, but this is one take on the meaning of Porgy and Bess. It tells us about the reality that we are not here by accident, that there is someone who's made us. It talks about the reality of social injustice, but it also talks about, it points to a romantic love that is going to eventually be the thing that fulfills us. Though in the movie, in the, in the opera, we can't quite get our finger on it, yet we know somehow it exists.
