TITLE: The Resurrection
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 28:1-20
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Savior and Teacher – A Study of Matthew
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-resurrection/

============================================================

Scripture reading is found on page 7 of your bulletin from the book of Matthew chapter 28 verses 1 through 20. After the Sabbath at dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. There was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and, going to the tomb, rolled back the stone and sat on it. His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were white as snow. The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men. The angel said to the women, Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. He is not here. He has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay. Then go quickly and tell his disciples, He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him. Now I have told you. So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid, yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. Suddenly Jesus met them. Greetings, he said. They came to him, clasped his feet, and worshipped him. Then Jesus said to them, Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers to go to Galilee. There they will see me. While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened. When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money, telling them, You are to say, His disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep. If this report gets to the governor, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble. So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed. And this story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day. Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had told them to go. When they saw him, they worshipped him. But some doubted. Then Jesus came to them and said, All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I am with you always, to the very end of the age. This is the word of the Lord. So, Matthew is one of the four direct descriptions we have of the resurrection of Jesus Christ. And when people today, in our time and place, read or confront an account like this, I think there's two questions we have to process. Two questions we have to ask. Did it really happen? And what does it mean? Did the resurrection of Christ really happen? We have to ask that question because our culture is so dubious of miracles and resurrection. It's so skeptical of it. And even if you aren't, you need to, yourself, come to grips with that question. Because it's not responsible not to. If you don't wrestle with it, how could this be? If you don't wrestle with it, your relatives and friends do. And you have to be able to speak to it. It's not good enough to say, well, my mother told me Jesus was raised from the dead. That's good enough for me. That doesn't help your friends. And maybe it won't help you throughout your entire life. So you have to ask the question, could it really have happened? Did it really happen? But then after that, we have to ask, what does it mean? Because the resurrection is not a naked historical fact that you just believe with your mind and it doesn't change your life. Like, for example, human beings have walked on the moon. Did you know that? Human beings have walked on the moon. Absolute historical fact, right? Do you believe that? Does it change your life? Not really. From what I can tell, it doesn't have any effect on my life at all, that human beings walked on the moon. And it's possible to believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ as a kind of naked fact. In fact, the majority of Americans, I think, do, but it doesn't change their life. What does it mean to believe in that? How should it affect you? How should it change and transform you? So those two questions, let's get right into it. First of all, did it really happen? The average New Yorker I talk to says something like this. Well, Jesus was a good man, a fine teacher of love and wisdom. But as the years went by, the decades went by, his believers in Christ started to develop more and more high views of him. And they started to say he was divine and he's the son of God. And the resurrection stories developed. And after a couple of centuries of these legends growing up, they were written down into the New Testament. And that's how we have Christianity. That's where it comes from. you remember from Religion 101, Philosophy 101, and the Da Vinci Code, all sort of wrapped up in one ball and saying, isn't that how? And the only problem with that account is that absolutely every single part of it is wrong. That's the only problem with it. Let's start with this. First of all, the New Testament documents written by Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, did not get written centuries later after years and years of accretions developed on the accounts of Christ, and legendary material was incorporated, and on it goes, sort of like Whisper Down the Valley, you know, as time goes on, it grows and grows. Because first of all, notice, for example, verse 15. It says, so the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed, and this story has been widely circulated to this day. See, Matthew is writing so soon after the events, he can still talk about the fact that this particular story was still being in circulation. Matthew was probably written 30 years maybe after the events, within the lifetime of all the people that had seen Jesus, and Paul was writing within 15 years. If you really, if you really wrestle with this whole question of can you trust these documents as really being historical accounts, you really got to read a book by Richard Baucom, who is a very respected historian, biblical scholar, University of St. Andrews. He wrote a book called Jesus and the Eyewitnesses, and in it, he points out so many things. For example, you got time, right? You know, in Luke chapter 7, we're told Jesus raises a boy from the dead, the widow of Nain. Her son has died. There's a public funeral in the center of the village, and he raises him from the dead, all right? So not only would most all the village have actually seen it, but even those who weren't there would have heard about it. Now, what if that never happened, and you just want to write a document and say, Jesus Christ raised a boy from the dead in the village of Nain, you know, that sort of thing. Maybe 130 years later, you could write that. When everybody who ever lived there was dead, and you could write it and maybe get away with it, you couldn't write that 30 years later. Remember, when most, you can't say Jesus Christ raised a boy from the dead in the public square of Village X 30 years later when most of Village X is still around. And they would say, that never happened, never heard of that. You know, that kind of faith doesn't get off the ground. These stories, these accounts are written within the lifetime of the eyewitnesses. Paul, in 1 Corinthians 15, says that not only did Jesus Christ raise from the dead, actually visit numerous people. He appeared to numerous people over a period of weeks. But at one point, he actually appeared to 500 people at once. And Paul says, most of those people are still alive. You can go talk to them if you want. So, these accounts were not written years later. Legendary accounts. These are accounts of something that happened, written within the lifetime of the people who were there. And therefore, these are historical documents. They're not legends. You say, okay, so they're historical documents. But the resurrection? You can't believe in the resurrection. Well, here's three good reasons to believe it from this, from this text. Three, and the three are the existence of the women eyewitnesses. Secondly, the non-gullibility of the eyewitnesses. And thirdly, the changed lives, the transformed lives of the eyewitnesses. Okay? Follow along these three stages in the argument. Number one, the existence of the eyewitnesses. We've said this before. If you come to Redeemer, you've heard me say it before. If you haven't, I think it's still important to say. Verse eight. The women hurried away from the tomb, afraid yet, filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. The first witnesses of the resurrected Christ in Matthew, in Mark, in Luke, in John, are women, and only women. And this was at a day in which female testimony was not even admissible evidence. It was a paternalistic society. It showed women were not full citizens in any sense of the word. Now, what does that mean? Again, the only reason why you would write an account of the resurrection of Christ and say women were the first eyewitnesses, the only possible motivation you would have for writing that down is if it actually happened. Are you following me? If you were making these things up, if you were writing these things up, you would never put women in there. Because that doesn't help the credibility. The average person would have said, what, only women? You know, that's the way it was back then. So, the only reason why you would write that down is if you were writing that down is if you were writing that down is if you were writing that down is if you were writing it down. writing these things that you would never put women in there because it doesn't help the credibility. The average person would have said, what, only women? You know, that's the way it was back then. So the only reason that women are the eyewitnesses of Jesus Christ's resurrection in this account, the only possible reason would be that they were. In fact, you know what, even if they were, N.T. Wright in his great book on the resurrection says, even though women were the first eyewitnesses, there would have been tremendous incentive on the part of the Christian authors of the Gospels not to have mentioned it. Why not just jump to Peter and Paul? You know, because, of course, because women had such low status. I mean, this may be, I'm saying may offend you, but I'm not, I'm not suggesting they should have low status. I'm saying that's the way it was. And yet, why did the Gospel writers write it this way? They had the incentive to hide it. Why did they write it? Because the women were there. And the fact that women were almost certainly still alive. Mary Magdalene, the other Mary. Luke mentions other women by name. The women lived a long time. Richard Baucom in his book says that many of the women who saw Jesus Christ were well regarded. They were respected members of various churches around the Mediterranean over the years. Many of them lived a very long time and told their stories. These, listen, there really was an empty tomb. And there were many, many, many hundreds of people who said they saw Jesus Christ. You say, oh, well, back then people were gullible. Point two. Oh, really? Look at verse 17. Then the 11 disciples went to Galilee to the mountain where Jesus told them to go. When they saw him, they worshiped him, but some doubted. Isn't that interesting? Jesus appears to them. They can see him. They can hear him. They can touch him and some doubt. Now, isn't it interesting that's mentioned there? First of all, if you're making that up, would you say, would you mention that some of the apostles, the founders of the church doubted? You probably would leave that out, right? And you know, it, it's also not the way legends and fairy tales operate. It's, but this is how real life would be. If you, if Jesus Christ appeared to you and you could see him touching, what would you right away say? My Lord, you probably wouldn't be saying, what's going on? What have I eaten? Wouldn't, wouldn't a normal person doubt? Yes. They're normal people. Don't you dare say all those people back then, they were gullible. They're not like us. Oh dear. They're not like us. I mean, that's called chronological snobbery by C.S. Lewis. You know, we're newer people. They're older people. We of course are smarter. Listen, their IQ, people's IQs have not gotten higher as the centuries have gone on. There is absolutely no empirical evidence that we are any smarter than those people. And not only that, let me press you a little bit. Why were they doubting? It's not just that they're normal. No, no. You and I say, well, we don't believe in miracles nowadays. We're, we're, we're skeptical people, scientific people, see. And back then people believed in miracles and so forth. Well, it's true that ancient people were more likely to believe in miracles in the supernatural than we, but these were Jews, first century Jews. And I want you to consider this. The Jews did believe in a resurrection at the end of time. And a resurrected body, you know, is not just a revived body that then dies again. Lazarus was revived miraculously. The widow, uh, widow's son was revived in Luke seven. Uh, Jairus's daughter was revived. That is, in other words, it was miraculous. They were dead and they were brought back to life, but then they died later. Why? They didn't have new bodies. They didn't have resurrection bodies, but Jesus has a resurrection body. Luke, uh, the book of Luke says Jesus passed through his body, passed through locked doors and get, he could still eat a fish and they could still touch him. It wasn't a ghost. It wasn't a spirit. This was a resurrected body. Jews did believe that a resurrection was possible at the end of time, but nobody believed. None of the Jews believed that a resurrection could happen by one person in the middle of history. Jews were the last people possible to believe that someone could be the son of God that they would worship. Jewish worldview was virulently against the idea that a human being could be divine, could be raised from the dead, could have a resurrection body completely. And therefore, here's my, my, my contention. You might have different reasons than first century Jews to say about the resurrection, impossible. And even if you saw Jesus in front of you, you can say, no, no, what's going on? What have I eaten? They were just as sure that it couldn't be true. They were just as ready to say impossible as you and me, different reasons, but just as skeptical. So let me ask you a question. This is a thought experiment. Ready? Do you have any doubts that Jesus was raised from the dead? Are you skeptical? Some of you surely are some of you more than others. What kind of evidence would you need? How strong would the evidence have to be to blow away all your doubts completely? doubts were as strong as your doubts, and therefore they must have received that kind of evidence. They must have. They were not gullible people. They were no more gullible, no more susceptible to believe in the resurrection than you. For different reasons, but no more susceptible. So not only do the eyewitnesses exist, but they were not gullible, and lastly, their lives were changed by what they saw. See down here? All authority in heaven and earth is given to me. Go and make disciples of all nations. You know, you've heard this probably. It's a very famous passage. But have you ever realized what he's saying? You, 11, uneducated fishermen from a backwater place, Judea, now go out there and change the world, convert the world. And what do they say? Okay. Why? Because they knew it was Jesus. He had been raised from the dead. If that's possible, anything's possible. Their lives were changed by it. Now let's put it all together. You say, well, I don't even know if there was an empty tomb. We don't even know if there was an empty tomb. But it would be impossible to have all these eyewitness accounts. It would be impossible for Paul to say, 15 years later, 500 people saw Jesus raised from the dead. They're still alive. Go talk to them. If the tomb wasn't empty, the Christian faith could never have gotten off the ground. You say, all right, so maybe the tomb was empty. But it could have been a hoax. His followers could have taken his body away. Right. His followers could have taken his body away. And then hundreds and hundreds of those liars lived lives of compassion, courage, and sacrificial love that changed the world. And then they died for the fraud. No, I don't think so. And you say, all right, so there probably was an empty tomb and probably it wasn't a hoax. But maybe it was a sincere delusion that they really wanted so badly to have Jesus. And they really thought it was going to be true. And they thought themselves right into believing it. But we just said, that shows you don't know much about first century history. Because there's nobody here. And by the way, a number of Jewish people were in a morning service that I was talking to afterwards. Many of whom were skeptical about Christianity. But they agree with something. The Jews are the last people on the face of the earth to be willing to worship a human being as God. And yet these Jewish people got such evidence that he really was alive that they did. And their lives were changed by it. So, are there good reasons for believing it really happened? Yeah. There are really good reasons for believing it happened. But even if it did happen, and it did happen, It's not enough for you to believe it just as a naked fact. So, secondly, let's just ask the question, what does it mean? If Jesus was raised from the dead, what should that really mean to you? And how can you believe in it in such a way that it would change your life? And the answer is this, though I'm going to break it into four parts. The answer is, what does it mean that Jesus is raised from the dead? And the answer is, at the very end, that means that surely he is with you always. He is with you. You know, you can say, oh, I love Abraham Lincoln. I love, I've read his biographies. And I just admire him so much. And I've read his works. And I feel he's always with me. And when I read the Gettysburg Address, I feel like Abraham Lincoln's right there. And you know what? That's perfectly okay to say. Just don't think that this is what Jesus is talking about. You know, when you read my writings, even though I'm dead and gone, that, you know, I'll be with you. No, he is risen. He is raised from the dead. And when he says, I'll be with you, he's talking about what? All right. First of all, if you believe in the resurrected Christ, four things. He's with you in history. He's with you in the gospel. He's with you in Christian community. And he's with you at the end. Number one, he's with you in history. Because he says, all authority is given to me. See? Verse 18. All authority in heaven and earth has been given to me. Now, many of you know there's other places in the Bible that says when Jesus was raised from the dead, he ascended into heaven and he sits at the right hand of God, the Father Almighty. What does that mean? That's not just rhetoric. To sit at the right hand doesn't mean he just went to heaven. It does mean that. But it means to sit at the right hand is the place of the prime minister. It's the person who sits at the right hand of the king and who actually runs the country and rules and executes the will of the king. And when Jesus says, I'm raised from the dead, I'm with you always. What he means is, I'm in charge of history now. I'm running things. And I now have sovereign control of everything that happens in history and in your lives. And I'm ruling everything on the basis of the cross-resurrection principle. What is the cross-resurrection principle? Do you see all the evil things? there? Do you see the injustice that Jesus experienced, the betrayal, the rejection? Do you see how awful that suffering was? And yet, in the end, what came of it? What happened to it? It just led to greater salvation. All the things the world did, all the things the devil did, all the suffering, all the evil, just ended up to accomplishing salvation and the resurrection. The evil of the cross is swallowed up. Listen, there were people who knew that Jesus was a great man who had been raising people from the dead and healing the sick and giving sight to the blind, and they stood there in front of the cross, watching him die, and you know what they said? I can't see any good God could bring out of this. That's because they didn't understand the cross-resurrection principle. Now, are you looking at anything in your life and saying, I don't see how God can bring anything good out of this? That's because you're forgetting that all authority is given to Jesus. He is with you. He is going to overrule that. He is going to control that. It doesn't mean that by next year, things will work out for good. Romans 8, 28, all things work together for good to those who love God. It doesn't mean the end of five years, the end of ten years, maybe not even within the span of your life. But in the span of all of life and all of history, God is working everything out. All the evil and suffering is going to be swallowed up to only make the eventual glory even better. Do you believe that? That he's with you like that? That he's with us in history? Now we can relax. What confidence, what peace that would bring. Do you really believe? Because he's risen, he is with you in history. Secondly, he's with you, I said, in the word and in the gospel. Notice, he says, all authority in heaven and earth is given to me. I'm with you always. Go, make disciples, teach them to obey everything. Jesus is actually connecting his presence, especially to the ministry of the word and the ministry of the gospel. When we go to people and say, Jesus died for your sins, you can be saved by grace. How do I unpack this quickly? It's actually, it's been hard all day. Ephesians 2, 17. Paul says to the Ephesian churches, Christ came and preached peace to you, who were far away and peace to you who were near. Now far away is the Gentiles, near is the Jews. But he was saying to you in the Ephesus churches, Christ came and preached peace to you, and that's how you were born again and saved and changed. Now the real question is, when did Christ do that? Did Christ ever go to Asia Minor? All the churches are in Asia Minor that Paul's writing. Did Paul, did Christ go to Asia Minor? No. Then what is he talking about? He's saying that when anyone preaches the word to you, the gospel to you, when you read the word and the gospel in the scripture, Christ is preaching to you. The risen Christ is really there, and not the way Abraham Lincoln is with you when you read the Gettysburg Address. He's really there. There, Luke 24, road to Emmaus. Jesus appears to these two disciples, the risen Christ. They don't recognize him at first. Later they do. And they say, weren't our hearts on fire when he opened the scriptures to us? Now this is what I'm trying to tell you. You can really have him. You can really have him. The word of God, especially the parts of the word of God that you understand, and not just the word of God in general, memorizing the judges and the kings and all the details, but understanding the message of the word of God, which is Christ died for your sins according to the scriptures, that the gospel is a way for you to really have him in your life, to really know him, to really sense his presence, to really have his love in your life, to really, he says, he can be as real to you as anybody. He can be, he must be, because he's risen. So he's with you in history. He's with you in the word oath. Thirdly, he's with you in Christian community. He says, surely I'm with you always. Now is that a first person or a second person? So what's the problem with the English language? Those of you who know other languages, you realize, isn't it strange that unless you're from the South, in English, you say you individual and you plural, it's the same word. Now, if you're from the South, you say y'all, which is, as most Southerners will say, an improvement on the English language. And it actually does, it makes it clear whether or not the person is saying you individually or you collectively. The fact is that the Greek word that Jesus is using here is, surely I'm with y'all. That's what he's saying. And that's significant. He's saying, I... in particular in christian community i'm there in community now you know some of you know when i'm one of a life-changing passage for me was the place in c.s lewis's book the four loves chapter on friendship where lewis talks about he had two dear friends and one died and he realized after the first friend who died was gone that he no longer could see certain things in his second surviving friend that only the first friend brought out that when he lost his first friend he lost part of his second friend he didn't really have more of him he had less of him and he then said well you know it takes a whole community to draw the full person out for you to know another person you have to see that person in a full community and see them relate to a lot of people not just you well how much more true would that be of jesus and you're never going to know jesus unless you are deeply involved in community not just coming to church on easter that you are that you're walking with brothers and sisters and you're seeing them relate to christ and you're going to see things about christ through them that you otherwise wouldn't see and not only that you're going to hear things from christ through them that you otherwise would never hear so uh dietrich bonhoeffer in his great book life together talks about how do you deal with your guilt how does christ give you relief forgiveness from your past and how do you help how does it help you get rid of your regrets this is what he says it is possible that a person may by god's grace break through to certainty new life fellowship and forgiveness without the benefit of confession to a brother or a sister it's possible that a person may never know what it is to doubt his own forgiveness but most of us cannot make this assertion when the confession of sin is made in the presence of a christian brother or sister the last stronghold of my self-justification is abandoned and as the open confession of my sins to a brother ensures against self-deception so too the assurance of forgiveness becomes fully certain to be only when it's spoken by a brother or sister in the name of god you see what he's saying what he's actually saying is when a christian brother or sister says you are forgiven christ does forgive you you can sometimes hear christ speaking to you in a way you couldn't if you were just sitting all alone with you in your bible in your closet because he says i'm with you all always and finally he says to the end at the end of your life do you believe in the resurrection of jesus do you believe that he died for you have you put your faith in him the crucified and resurrected lord then at the end of your personal story he'll be there which means the end of your story whatever it is will be a happy ending and it also means at the end of history he will be there because he's risen from the dead and that means in the end everything is going to be made right and here's what i want you to consider there's a place in j.r.r tolkien where tolkien says that great fairy tales and then he says this he says it is the mark of a good tale that however wildest events however fantastic or terrible the adventures it can give when the turn comes you know when suddenly there's a rescue no matter how bad it looks suddenly there's a rescue and everything turns out okay when the turn comes there's a catch of the breath of beating and lifting of the heart near to or accompanied by tears as keen as that given by any form of art in the turn we get a piercing glimpse of joy and a heart's desire that for a moment passes outside the frame rends indeed the very web of the story and lets a gleam come through joy beyond the walls of the world as poignant as grief the gospels this is still talking talking the gospels contain a story which embraces the essence of all fairy tales but this story has entered history this is the gospel story and the primary real world the gospel therefore has not abrogated legends it has hallowed them especially the happy endings now you know what he's saying if you believe this world is all there is and when you die you're rot and that's that and nobody's ever going to make everything right and nobody's ever going to redress all the wrongs that have ever been done it's just not going to happen when you die you're right and eventually the whole world's going to burn up in this death of the sun now you open up you go to a movie or you open a book and it's one of these tales there's dark and it's wild and you think oh my goodness how are they going to get out of this and then there's resurrection or there's you know there's there's rescue or there's and you you know and you you love it don't we love it that's why we spend all the money to watch those movies that's why we spend the money that's why we spend the money rot and you have this wonderful experience that talking talks about when you do a happy ending it helps you for a minute but then you realize life's not like that the world's not like that you can't really enter into the happy ending very far in fact if you're in new york if you're a new york art critic you hate happy endings and you say over and over again because life is not like that but if you're a christian and you believe in the resurrection and you're trusting in the resurrection then you know and every time a great happy ending comes life is like that and this is the reason why i'm speaking personally here kathy and i find that if you believe in the resurrection of jesus christ jesus christ comes to me and her comes to us again in every great story when you get to the happy ending because you can enter into happy endings you can receive them with a wonder and joy because you know that life is like that why because jesus was raised from the dead and he's he'll be with you at the end don't you want to believe in that see the reason why i have to look at both why it really did happen and what it means is if you just look at the second half if i just gave you the second half the sermon any thoughtful person will want it to be true any thoughtful person will want it to be true but you just because you want to be true doesn't make it true but when you look at the evidence oh my goodness it is true that's a life change it did happen and that's what it means believe it let us pray our father it is easter and we have just looked at the greatest gift you ever gave us and that is not just your son as a human being but but the resurrection because if that's the case if this is really if this really happened then we can we can face anything and we can know that there will be all the art the evil and suffering in our lives will be swallowed up in joy and victory eventually father we want jesus christ risen jesus christ to be real to us give us the uh the peace that should come from knowing he's in charge of history give us the intimacy that can come to us through prayer and the word give us the uh the richness of life that comes through being deeply involved in christian community and let us always be able to in a sense relive the gospel every time we hear a story with a happy ending because we know that's how our story will end too we thank you for this thank you for easter thank you for jesus we pray in his name amen amen
