TITLE: The Accuser
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 6:10-13
TOPICS: Spiritual Warfare Repentance
SERIES: Spiritual Warfare – The War
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-accuser/

============================================================

Turn with me to the passage we've been studying, and that's Ephesians 6, verses 10 through 13. We're looking at the subject of spiritual warfare and demonic power. We're going to look tonight at one of the strategies of demonic power, which is accusation. That's part of what was behind my semi-successful joke about somebody keeping the microphone. Because actually what accusation is, is you walking along doing your life, and yet the devil has a microphone somewhere, and you can't really see where it is, in which he's contradicting you. Now what we're going to do, what I'm going to do is I'm going to, as the offering, don't worry, as the offering is being passed, listen to me as I read from Ephesians 6, verses 10 through 13. Finally, be strong in the Lord and in his mighty power. Put on the full armor of God, so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes. For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, and against the powers of this dark world, against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms. Therefore, put on the full armor of God, so that when the day of evil comes, you may be able to stand your ground, and after you have done everything, to stand. What I want to talk about tonight is this term that at the end of the last sermon in the series, I began to look at, and actually I want to do a small series expounding what this term means. It says, put on the full armor of God, so that you can take your stand against the devil's schemes. The little Greek word that's there, that's translated as schemes, is the word from which we get our English word method. The methods. The word means a strategy. It means a device. It means a very specific, carefully laid out plan. It means a scheme is a good word, except I'm afraid in some ways, a scheme seems like something that you suddenly concoct quickly. We're talking about the schemes of a very wicked dictator. We're talking about the well-laid plans. And we're told that the whole idea of putting on the armor of God, and we're going to look at what the armor is as the weeks go by, but right now we're going to see what we're fighting against. The purpose of putting on the armor is to deal with the devil's schemes. To deal with the devil's methods or his devices. Now, some of you might remember, and I'm surprised nobody gave me any kind of headache about this. Last time, I said there were three basic schemes, three basic sets of strategies that Satan uses. And then I never mentioned what they were. I'm surprised nobody bothered me about that or called me up in the middle of the night. What are they? Now, what we've done in the series up to now is we've established, A, that the Bible, unavoidably, the Bible teaches that there's such a thing as personal supernatural evil. We've said that the Bible teaches that. Paul teaches that. Jesus saw the Satan as a personal enemy, not as a principle. We've said it's one thing for you to reject Christ's authority when it comes to these matters. It's one thing for you to say, I don't believe we can trust Jesus' authority when it comes to the supernatural or the spiritual realm or the moral realm. But if you accept his authority in what he says about supernatural good, but you can't accept the idea of a personal devil, though he teaches that too, what possible basis have you got other than pure prejudice? It's a completely arbitrary and totally unreasonable position to have. It's one thing to reject what Jesus says. It's another thing to like certain things, accept certain things, and not accept what he says about personal supernatural evil. The Bible teaches it. Then we also said last week that the main strategy, not last week, two weeks ago, the main strategy, now we're going to talk about sub-strategies from here on, but the basic thing that he does is he's a liar. Remember? And we said that the word devil, the word diabolos, from which our English word devil comes, from which we get our word diabolical, basically the word devil means deceiver. And therefore, the main way in which Satan works is through lies. There's an awful lot of books. you read them, they have a tendency to go into things like Satan worshippers and the strange and bizarre rituals and practices that Satan worshippers have and how it's on the rise. And then the books talk about the occult and about astrology and about how that's on the rise. And then the books might talk about demon possession and the more spectacular manifestations of that. And I think that in some ways, all that's a red herring. Now, I'm not saying that there isn't such a thing as a Satanic religion. There always has been. It's a minuscule thing, and maybe it's becoming, instead of one grain of sand, it's two grains of sand. Essentially, it's not. But the real problem, it's not the main way in which you need to be, you, sitting here, need to be worried about Satanic influence in your life. In some ways, the Hollywood approach to demonic possession, you know, the vomit and the heads turning and the green faces and so on, to some degree, when Christians think about that and they worry about that and are concerned about that, I almost wonder if, in a sense, it isn't a faint, a ruse. See, a good general will do anything he can if he's against you. A good general might do anything he can to make you think that the main battle is going to be over here when actually the main battle is over here. And if you look at the old books, now let me just tell you three books from the 17th century or just the great classics during the Reformation, post-Reformation time on the devil. When you read those books, they talk very little about the extraordinary, the 1% and the 1 half of 1% and the 1 tenth of 1% of demonic influences. They don't talk about all that the way the modern books tend to do. But instead, they talk about what we're going to talk about tonight. And that is the variations on the kinds of lies that Satan will actually take and install at the root or the base of your personality to distort you. For example, those three, I'll just give you three books, one of which has never been reprinted. The only reason I've read about it and I found a copy of it in a rare book room in a library at one point. It's a book by John Downame called The Christian Warfare. I think that was it. The Christian Warfare, D-O-W-N-A-M-E, Downame. Then there's another one that is still in print today. And it's by Thomas Brooks called Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. And there's a third book, William Gurnall, called The Christian Incomplete Armor. One of the more interesting things about Gurnall's book, and I see these books are hard to read. They're extremely thick. William Gurnall's book is something like seven or eight hundred pages, tiny print. And all it is is an exposition of Ephesians 6, verse 10 to 20, you know, going through verse by verse. And people read this, but let me tell you something. There is nothing like these books because what they'll do is they'll say, all right, one of the things Satan does is tempt. Here are 17 or 18 ways in which he does that and ways for you to deal with them and recognize them and remedies for those devices. And here are 32 ways in which Satan tends to try to discourage us and depress us. And very detailed, extremely practical. One of the things you might find interesting is that David Wilkerson, who also is a pastor in town, some years ago somebody gave him that William Gurnall book, The Christian Incomplete Armor. And for a long time he didn't even look at it and said, oh gosh, one of these things, old Puritan books, hard to read, old English. He said one day for some reason he read the first 24 pages and he said he was down on his knees and his life has never been the same again. And he's actually, evidently, he put up the money to have that thing abridged and put into modern English so you can buy it in a more modern English form, which, by the way, I don't like. And it doesn't matter. The point is that the old timers, when they thought about what does the devil do, they thought about lies. They thought about the way in which the devil distorts your way of believing. It distorts your belief system. The normal field of demonic endeavor is to take your belief system so that it's distorted, so that you can't understand what's going on. There's a lot of talk about how the fact that counselors are not supposed to change people's beliefs. They're not supposed to attack their values. I think, listen, a good counselor will do just that because all of our problems are because of our belief systems. I think I shared a couple weeks ago in the morning service, I think, that there was a point at which when I was going to a counselor, the counselor said, it's wrong for you to be so perfectionistic. It's wrong for you to feel that you have to be perfect. And, of course, now you might say, well, of course, that's a fine thing for a counselor to say. It's right. That's a good thing to say. If you see a perfectionist, a person who's being driven by the need to be perfect. But I turned to him and I said, well, that's a religious statement. And he said, what do you mean? I said, well, who demands perfection. Oh, he says, you know, I'm not trying to talk about religion. I'm not imposing my values on you. I said, of course you are. And you're probably right. But how do you know there isn't a God that demands perfection? And eventually he had to back away. But what I was trying to show him is that you can't help somebody unless you deal with their belief systems. You can't help somebody. Anybody who's got a problem, you've got a problem because, if you're depressed, you've got a problem because of your way of looking at life and what you believe about yourself or about what's going on. Here's a person and somebody says to you, you're this or you're that. And he goes to another person and he says, you're this or you're that. Well, the first person says, inside, that's just not true. And the second person says, you're right. Okay? So the second person is depressed. Why? Well, I'm depressed because of what that man said. That's not true. You're depressed because of what you believe about what that man said. Because that man said the same thing to two people. And one of you is depressed and one of you is not. How in the world can you possibly say that your depression is caused by what that person said? It's what you believe about what that person said. The power of the lie at the root of your, at the base, you say, the root of your soul is absolute. And that's the reason why in 2 Timothy 2.25, we're told, it says there where Paul says, God may grant that they may repent and know the truth and escape the snare of the devil. That, I don't know why people don't go to that verse. It's one of the key verses in the whole Bible about what, how to deal with the devil. Listen, how do you deal with the devil? Mumbo jumbo? Hmm? Putting the poor person in the ring of Bibles? Saying in the name of this, in the name of that, I command? It's not what it says. 2 Timothy 2.25 says, The way to deal with the devil is through repentance. But what is repentance? Seeing the truth. Getting a grip on the truth. That's the only way to get out. Now, we're going to have to talk about what that means tonight, and that's the idea of talking, because I want to talk to you about three kind of classes of lies. And that's essentially how the devil works. That's essentially what the Bible says you've got to do. It's a profound thing to understand that. It means that you have to realize that the lies that are at the root of your soul, the things that are distorting your life, may have come there from this person or that person, or from friends, or from the world, or from a culture, or from the pop culture, from your peers, from your parents, from your extended family. But the reason they're stuck there, and the reason they're operating there, is in a certain sense, they are like the piano, and the devil's the pianist. Sorry to make such an awful illustration for the pianist over there. But you see, there's no doubt, when the Bible says in Ephesians 4.27, don't let the sun go down on your anger, don't give the devil that kind of foothold. Why are you so bitter? Because I believe this person has done this. He's ruined my life. Oh, has he? If you believe he's ruined your life, your life is ruined. And the devil is playing that. You see? You have given him the strings, he's hitting them. You have given him the piano, you've given him the notes, and he's playing them. Or 1 Timothy 3.6-7, it says, don't give a rookie a great job, because that person may be puffed up with pride, and fall into the snare of the devil. There you go again. The pride, your belief about yourself, your thinking, the bitterness, that's what gives the devil a foothold. How do you get out of that? You see the truth. You repent. That means you say, this is so silly. Why am I so bitter against this person, for example? Ephesians 4.27. Why? At the root, because I think that this person has really taken something from me that I have to have to be happy. Oh, really? So you examine that. How do you deal with the devil's influence in your life? Well, it's sort of like this. What if you had a piano in your room, and you had an invisible piano player that kept on coming into the room and playing? Every time you went to grab him, he was gone. After all, you can't see where he is. What do you do with an invisible piano player that's constantly keeping you awake at night? It's very simple. You get rid of the piano. You won't be bothered by the invisible piano player anymore. What do you do about the devil? You attack his foothold. You attack what you can see, and that's the lie. You challenge it. You come against it. Now, obviously tonight I'm going to talk about one set of lies, and as you see, if you've tried to figure it out from the bulletin, the first set of lies is what I call... Satan are accusation and temptation. The devil is an accuser and a tempter. He's sort of the opposite of the Holy Spirit, because the Holy Spirit, of course, is a troubler. I mean, the Holy Spirit gives you comfort, you know, my peace, and Satan is a troubler. And the Holy Spirit brings holiness, and Satan seeks to tempt you into unholiness. Those two strategies, though I'm not going to talk about temptation tonight, I need to start off by saying these two strategies are two opposite complementary sets of lies. Now, you say, how can they be opposite and complementary? Very, let me give it to you kind of in the most brief possible way. Anyway, there's two ways in which Satan lies to you. Temptation means he tries to make you think, he tries to make you take sin too lightly. He tries to say, it's not that bad, it's not that big a deal, they'll get over it, you'll get out of it, you can always repent later, everybody's doing it. Now, I could give you about 300 of those lies. You see what those things are? But every one of you, every one of them tries to make you take sin too lightly. Well, I know when I was a kid, I used to think that's true, but I've been reading a lot of reports that that's a very normal, that's a very normal kind of behavior now. I know I was raised to say that, but everybody is doing it now. Try to make you take sin too lightly. That's a whole set of lies we're going to call temptation. But what's really awful about Satan, and he is such, such an old liar, is he almost always uses these two things, the temptation and the accusation, in a complimentary way. Because temptation are a set of lies trying to get you to take sin too lightly, but accusation is a set of lies that tries to get you to take sin too heavily. You see, on the way into a sin, he's saying, you can always repent later, it'll be okay. And as soon as you get in there, he'll say, you'll never get out of here. You see, on the way in, he says, you can always ask for forgiveness. On the way out, he says, why would anyone want to forgive you for this? On the way in, he says, you can always get out of the way out. He says, why did you ever get in? You'll never get out. It's over. You call yourself a Christian. Now, you see, those are two sets, but of course they work perfectly well together. In a sense, the reason I'm starting with accusation, though, is I think Satan tempts. In order to accuse, I don't think it's the other way around. It's a one-two punch. What is a one-two punch? Now, I don't know much about boxing. From what I can tell about a one-two punch, the one is not the punch that knocks you out. The one is the punch that sets you up for the other punch. So if you're a right-hander, your one punch should be your left, right? Because that's not going to be as strong. Your left punch gets the person to open up so that you can knock them out with your right punch. Temptation is Satan's left hand, and he's a right-hander. The reason, listen, there is no doubt about it. The reason that, for example, Jesus was always saying to the Pharisees, you know, the prophets and the whoremongers get into heaven before you. Satan was, Jesus was never upset, as upset in a certain sense, with the problems that come from a licentious life. But what Satan does with you after that, put it this way, Satan tries to get you into sinful situations so that he can absolutely keep you from experiencing the grace of God in your life. The thing he wants more than anything else to keep you from is the understanding of the gospel of grace, the understanding that you can be accepted in Christ, the understanding that you're righteous in Him. Now, that's what I want to talk to you a little bit about. Let's talk more about this now. Let me define accusation. The word Satan means prosecutor. So you see what I mean when I say that temptation and accusation are the left and the right, and Satan's a right-hander. The word Satan means prosecutor. In the book of Job, one of the weirdest things, unless you understand this, it doesn't make much sense, it's one of the weirdest things about the book of Job, is that at the beginning of the book of Job, there's Satan talking to God. And God says to Satan, Have you seen my servant Job? There is none like him in all the earth. And Job says, pardon me, and Satan turns and says, Does Job serve God for naught? Does Job serve God for nothing? And what he was saying is to God, And that's the main reason I got to give it a baby a little bit. I meant to be a friend of God. Pardon me, and Satan turns and says, does Job serve God for naught? Does Job serve God for nothing? And what he was saying is to God, this Job guy, he's not serving you, he's using you. Of course he's serving you because of, you know, he says he serves you because of, look at all the great things he's got. He's got sons and daughters and he's got wealth and he's got prestige. Take these things away from him and then you'll see that he's been using you, he'll curse you to his face. What's Satan doing up there talking about Job like that? And yet, in the book of Revelation, there's an extremely interesting and odd place where we're told this, now the salvation and power and kingdom of our God and the authority of Christ has come, for the accuser of the brethren is thrown down, who accuses them night and day before the Lord. Now, it comes to this, Christians were meant to not just be loved and forgiven. They weren't supposed to just be loved and forgiven and accepted by God, they're supposed to know that they are. Those are two different things. See, if a person is fabulously wealthy, has been given an incredible inheritance and it's sitting in the bank and all he's got to do or all she's got to do is walk in and sign a check, but she doesn't know it, then she lives in poverty even though she's rich. I mean, is she rich or poor? And the answer is, mm-hmm, yes and no. No, she's rich legally, she's rich in theory, more than that, she's legally rich, but she's not actually rich. So in the same way, it's one thing for a Christian to be saved, that means to be absolutely forgiven, like the Bible says, to be completely accepted, to have the Father look and say, I love you completely, there's no condemnation, all of your punishment has been thrown into the heart of Jesus Christ, I have nothing for you but love and goodwill. It's one thing for you to be in that condition legally, it's another thing for you to actually be living out of it, to be making withdrawals from the bank. Now, if you do make withdrawals from the bank, these are the things that should characterize a Christian. One is absolute fearlessness. For example, Christians should not and are not, if they understand this, afraid of death. And because they're not afraid of death, what would you be afraid of short of death? Why should you be afraid of anything? If you realize the worst thing that could possibly happen to me is the best thing that could happen to me. You know, that's the reason why, I just love that George Herbert anthem between, you know, the dialogue between Christian and death. And the death says, you know, let losers talk, thou shalt die, my arms shall crush thee. And the Christian turns around and says to death, spare not, do thy worst. Because if you crush me, I shall only be better than before, and thou so much worse, thou shalt be no more. That's the attitude of a Christian toward death. And because it's the attitude of a Christian toward death, because you know you're accepted, what short of death could you be afraid of? Another thing. Secondly, if you're drawing on this, if you're drawing on this account, you might say, this knowledge of complete forgiveness and acceptance, secondly, it means Christians are absolutely able to handle criticism. I mean, at this point, you start to say, wait a minute, yeah, that's right. Because you see, look, criticism all depends on who's doing it. On the average, I could be wrong about this, most of you probably have enough self-esteem so that if a five-year-old comes up to you that you've never met and says, I hear that you're a bully, you're probably not going to go home and say, oh, no, I'm ruined. You know, you'd say, well, who told you that? And he said, this six-year-old over here told you he was a bully because you made him, you know, pull his pants up in the class and told him he had to go to the bathroom over in the little boy's room. And you're a bully. You know, you're going to say, because it's a five-year-old. Who cares what a five-year-old thinks, right? Because you've got what? Well, see, you've got other people who do not think you're a bully, who think you're all right. But you see, the point is, a Christian is somebody who's got the final verdict, he's got the high regard, he's got the recommendation of the only person who counts, and that's God. And that means that anybody who comes up to you and gives you criticism, whether it's well-meant or not well-meant, should not shake you down to your roots. It's going to shake you because you're a human being and it's a human being and you need human fellowship, you need human relationship. But on the other hand, if you're drawing on your account, you see, in a sense you can say to other people and the world exactly what you say to death, and that is, spare not, do thy worst, nothing that I really need. Good morning. I'm not going to let you eatuser. Oh, go ahead. Thank you. death, and that is, spare not, do thy worst. Nothing that I really need can you take from me. I've already got, my life is in with God in Christ. You know, you've heard this from me before. You're not my peace, you say to the world. You're not my peace, you say to your peers. He's my peace. I know what he thinks of me. See, thirdly, if you're drawing on this account, I said, first of all, you're not afraid of death, really, anything else. You can handle criticism. Thirdly, there's a boldness in prayer, a tremendous boldness in prayer, because the person who owns the world has said, ask me anything, and I will give you either what you ask for or something better. That's, in a nutshell, what the charter of prayer is. The charter of prayer is if you belong to Jesus, if he's your Savior, the Father says, ask anything in Jesus' name, and because I love you and care for you, I will give you whatever you ask for or something better, something that you would have asked for if you knew everything that I know. And therefore, a Christian who's really sure about his acceptance or her acceptance with Christ really understands that, has a conscience that's clear and free from accusation, has this tremendous boldness in prayer, and really expects great things, and is continually, every time you go into prayer, just released with a sense of the freedom of knowing that the one who owns everything is my Father. And there's another, let's see, I guess I could say, oh, one more thing. A Christian can handle trials without feeling like they're punishments. See, the natural and normal human reaction, almost like a knee-jerk reaction, when one thing after another thing after another thing after another thing starts to go wrong in your life is, what do you say? I'm being punished. I mean, it's almost, it's just, it's like a reflex. When things go well, somebody says, well, you must be living right. Haven't you heard that? That's just a joke. That's just a, that's an idiomatic expression. But underneath it, if things are not going well, you say, what am I doing wrong? I'm not living right. Unfortunately, we take successes as evidence that we're living right. We take failures as evidence that we're being punished. That's the normal way the human mind works, because we're all essentially self-righteous. That is, we feel like if any, if, if something's going to go right in my life, it's got to be my accomplishment. A Christian, when they get into trials, is able to always do it without the guilt. See, I think the trials are very, very hard to bear up under. But when you add to the sorrow, a sense of guilt, they become absolutely crushing. See, the difference between a Christian, in a sense, and a non-Christian, who are suffering the same trial, is the Christian has the suffering, the sorrow, but the non-Christian not only has the sorrow, but the confusion and the guilt that goes with it. The confusion is, why is this happening to me? Why would God let this happen? I must be doing something wrong. And of course, if you look around, you're going to always find something you've been doing wrong. Always. So suffering comes into your life and you look around, what am I doing wrong? Take your pick. Maybe I'm being punished for that. Maybe I'm being punished for that. Maybe I shouldn't have cheated on my income tax. Maybe that relationship was wrong. You know, it doesn't take much. And you see, whenever you start to fall under suffering, because your conscience is not clear, suffering is three or four times worse. Now, a Christian is somebody who's drawing on that account. Remember, the rich woman, for example, doesn't know she's rich, so she's rich legally, but she's not rich actually. A Christian is like a person with this incredible account in the bank, the complete love and acceptance of God, because Jesus has done everything for us. There should be fearlessness. There should be boldness in prayer. There should be an absolute, in a sense, ability to take criticism, so there's actually a kind of joy and confidence and poise in all of our relationships. And there should be this ability to take trials and troubles. But what's the matter with us? Because it's not true. Because Satan, more than anything else, wants to attack our conscience. Because if he can attack the conscience, and if he can get after us there, if he can make us doubt what the Bible says is true of us in Christ, then what he actually does is he effectively keeps us from drawing on the account. Now, some of you have heard me use this because it's such a great illustration. Charles Spurgeon, the Baptist preacher, was once asked, can a Christian lose that account? Can a Christian, a real Christian who's received Christ as Savior, can you ever lose that account? Can you be taken away from your inheritance? Can you lose your salvation, in other words? And Spurgeon, of course, said, no, of course not. And he said, let me put it this way, though. He says, if salvation is the boat on the way to heaven, he says, you can't fall off the boat. But you can fall on the boat, break all your bones, and spend the whole trip in the infirmary. my garden. . . Thank you. being of any use to the cruise and not having any joy in the cruise. And in the same way, he's making the very same approach by saying, if you've got zillions of dollars in the bank, but you don't know it's there, or for whatever reason you're effectively kept from getting to the account, then you're actually living in poverty, even though you're actually a rich person. Satan knows he can't get rid of that account that's in the bank. He has nothing he can do about that. Nothing. He wants you to think that he can take it away. He can't. But what he can say is he can convince you that it's not really there. Now, how does he do that? That's what, that's accusation is an attack on the conscience, either using real standards of righteousness or false ones. Now, let me just give you a couple of examples of how he can do the accusation. Here's one. First of all, he takes a real sin, a real sin of omission or a real sin of commission, and he convinces you because of that, that God can't be pleased with you, that in some way or other God is, God can't possibly, if you're saved, it's only barely by the skin of your teeth. You really shouldn't pray. Hmm? Satan comes after you like that. Uh, and that's the reason why very often when you feel when you, when, when your flaws and your, and your wickedness and your sins have come up in front of you and you feel because of that, I can't pray because that I feel unworthy of going to church. You are already duck soup and Satan is the chef and you're the duck. Now, how does he do that? For example, here's a variation. One of the things he does is he takes your past. See, even if you're living a relatively, you know, a relatively kind of stable Christian life, one of the things he'll do is he'll go to your past. There's a lot of ammunition in your past. I remember once, uh, I, I, I knew a 72 year old man who, after a life of really hard, nasty, uh, licentious living was gloriously converted and had a tremendous joy in that salvation. The very next day, actually was actually later that night at 3 AM in the morning, he showed up at a pastor's door in tears because he'd gone home and he laid down in bed and he said, I'm going to have a night best sleep I've had ever in my entire life. And suddenly he remembered something he hadn't remembered in years. 30 years ago, he suddenly remembered a night in a bar in which partly under the influence of alcohol, he had, he had made a, he had, had said some tremendously blasphemous things. He had challenged Christ. He had said he didn't believe in Christ. And if there was a Christ, that he could go into hell himself. And he hadn't remembered that in years. And all of a sudden, it was, it was being played out in front of him as if it was right on a videotape, as if somebody had this wonderful VCR and was playing it back. And he was in absolute agony. And next thing you know, he's on the doorstep of the pastor saying, how in the world could somebody like me who said something like that be accepted by this great God? You know, what is that? That's the fiery dart of the evil one. No doubt about it. Or he can also not only use your past, but he can very often use regrets. You see, some of your sins, even though you might say I'm forgiven for them, you say, I believe intellectually I'm forgiven for them. The trouble is a lot of you are still living with the results of some of those sins. And I don't want to go into details. Actually, it's too painful. But there are certain situations where you say, I made a foolish mistake. I was proud. I was wrong. I was stubborn. Or I was, you know, I knew I violated a standard. I violated my conscience. Never should have done it. And you're still living with the result of it. And you often hear a voice that says, your life is on plan B, if that. It may be plan C. It may be plan D. Yeah, he's forgiven you. But think of what you could have been. Now, that voice is not just the voice of your heart. Not if you understand what the Bible says about demonic activity. No, you're not possessed. No, you don't need an exorcism. You need a defense attorney. That's a prosecutor. That's a prosecutor that's really saying, you're still guilty. Because if God had really forgiven you, he'd remove all of the results of this sin. Yes, you married the wrong person. Yes, you were stupid when you married the wrong person. And now look at your life. And if I was really forgiven, it would all be made better. That's really what, that's what's going on. That's the reason why very often you find yourself cast down. And that is demonic influence. And the answer to that, of course, now I, you know, I'm getting just a bit ahead of myself. But you see, the way you deal with a prosecutor is you need a defense. You need a case. You need a defense attorney and you need a case. You see, the answer to that is, if the Bible says that there is no condemnation for me, for those who are in Christ Jesus, that means then the result of the sin that I'm still living with is here because God's got a purpose for it. must not think of it that way. That's the reason why when that sort of thing happens, you've got to, when you talk about my life is on plan B, you've got to start to take a look at all these situations in the Bible that talk about that. How Jacob, when his life so-called was on plan B because he'd sinned against his father and he'd lied to his brother Esau, plan B meant he ran away and he was cast out of his home and he lost all of the wealth that he should have had through Isaac. He never got any of it. It all went to his oldest brother anyway. Those of you who know the story, ever think about that? And yet what he did was, because of his sin, he runs right into the arms of Rachel, the love of his life. Well, he said, I guess it was all right. But the point is that God can't put you on plan B. He doesn't. The ramifications, the things that are going on in your life now as a result of those old sins are no longer operating as punishments. They're not. And there's example after example after example in the Bible that said if they're still there, it's because they're taking you to a place where you need to be to meet the people you need to meet, to do the service you need to serve. That's a defense. Do you believe that? Do you understand that? That's the truth. Another variation on this is when you have a... Boy, you know, we're never going to get through all this. I better rush here. Another variation on this is a recurring sin. One of the things that... See, Satan, especially as your theology develops and you get a better grasp on the idea that you're accepted in him, he's got to find variations on this idea of getting you to pour, P-O-R-E, as Thomas Brooks says, he's trying to get you to pour more over your sins than over your Savior. He's trying to get you to look at and think about and reflect on and taste your sins more than you taste your Savior for you and what he's done for you. One of them, I said, is regrets. One of them is your past. One of them is the idea of recurring sin. Because very often there's sins that are in our lives, there's things that we're doing that are not easy to get rid of. And you become a Christian and you say, now things are going to go better. And actually, they do go better. And you can see progress. But at certain points, because you find that recurring sins keep coming back, there's times in which you look at it and you hear a voice that says, you are no different than you ever were. You are no better than you ever were. A Christian wouldn't do this. A Christian wouldn't keep doing this. You call yourself a Christian. What makes you... What right have you got to put his name in your mouth and to call upon his name? And, of course, the answer is you go back to the Scripture and you take a look at Abraham. And you look at David. And you look at Peter. And you look at the people who really were Christians who really did relapse. And the power of sin and the indwelling power of sin in a real Christian's life is powerful enough that it can happen. You need to go to the truth. See, this is not a matter of mumbo-jumbo. It's not a matter of incantation. It's not a matter of in the name of, out I need to... It's a matter of getting to the truth and digging it down in there. Now, that's all under the first kind of accusation. God, Satan gets a real standard of righteousness and he tries to grind your face into it, into the dust. And he tries to get you to think more about your sin than about what your Savior did about the sin. How do you know the difference between the conviction of the Spirit and the accusation of Satan? You know, the Spirit convicts us of sin, too. But Jesus says the Spirit convicts us of sin, if you're a Christian, by showing you how much he loves you. The way the Spirit convicts you of sin is by saying, he has absolutely accepted you, so how can you treat him like this? The accusation of Satan is, because you treat him like this, he's going to reject you. The Spirit would never, ever, ever argue like that. Ever. The Spirit's argument is always from the fact you're accepted. That's the basis for the Spirit's argument. We went over that a couple weeks ago in another service, in John 14, where Jesus says, the Spirit, the Comforter, the Comforter, see, will come and he will show you that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me, and I'm in you, and you are in me. The whole purpose of the Spirit's conviction is to say, the reason that you shouldn't sin is because you're completely accepted. That's the basis for the Spirit's argument in trying to get you convicted of sin. The devil's accusation is never that way. The devil's accusation never talks about it. It questions your acceptance. It questions your grace. It questions your position. It questions your standing. And you need to recognize it for what it is and reject it. How do you reject it? You don't just reject it, you reject it with the truth. A second kind of accusation is where he takes a false standard, an idol, something that your world has told you you have to have in order to be acceptable, something that your parents have told you, something that your peers have told you. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. You don't just reject it. the an idol, something that your world has told you you have to have in order to be acceptable, something that your parents have told you, something that your peers have told you. This is a very deep-rooted thing. You may have grown up and you might be feeling that there was somebody else in your life that you were close to who everybody loved. And as a result, you've always compared yourself to that person and you feel like, unless I'm like that, I am no good. Unless I can be like that person, I am no good. These things get very deeply rooted and these are also ways that Satan comes and deals with you and tries to keep you under. You become a Christian and those things are very often still operating. They're false standards, not true standards. A true standard is when Satan says you shouldn't have done that and you shouldn't have done that, the answer is to go to Christ. But when Satan says you should have done that and you didn't, when it's a false standard, something the Bible doesn't say you've got to have. Where does it say you've got to be rich? And yet somebody, someplace may have told you you've got to be rich or, you know, where am I? Where does it say you've got to be beautiful? Where does it say you've got to be desirable? Where does it say that? And yet those things you're ground into the dust on too. Now I've got to quit because as I told you, if you go to the good books, you'll see the books will give you 17, 20, 30, 50 different approaches to accusation. I've often found as a pastor that when somebody comes to me and says, you know, two years ago we worked through this thing and I really, I really began to see that God loves me and cares for me and now I'm all, I'm all tied up. I'm all full of doubts again. I don't know what's happening to me. Very often what I'll do is I'll pull out one of these old, these old textbooks, these old diagnostic manuals, and I'll realize that three years ago there was this device being used and we had settled it, but now I realize it's this device being used on it. And I'll say, well, let's work on it this way. But now what do you do about these things? I have to, I've got to wrap it up. Number one, first and foremost, and we've already talked about it, you've got to continually realize that Romans 8, verse 1, there's no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Talk to yourself about this. How do you deal with these accusations? One is you say, if I'm a Christian, if he's my savior, that means that the sins that are in my life can trouble me, but they cannot condemn me. They cannot damn me. They cannot bring any kind of punishment into my life. They can't. There's a place, Thomas Brooks says, talk this way. Now you've got to remember Thomas Brooks was writing back when, when, when a wife married to a husband, autumn, well, here, read this and you realize he's writing in 1660. He says, the remedy against this device of Satan is to look upon your sins as charged upon the account of Christ. All our sins were made to meet on Christ. As Isaiah put it, he was wounded for our transgressions. He was bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. And with his stripes, we are healed in law. We know that all the debts of the wife are charged upon the husband. So the wife says to the one who has demanded a debt of her, if I owe you anything, go to my husband. And so may a believer say to the law, and so may a believer say to the accuser, if I owe you anything, go to my Christ, who has underwritten me fully. Therefore, I must not sit down discouraged under the fear of those debts with Christ, who has fully satisfied them to the uttermost farthing. You've got to tell yourself that. You've also got to realize, listen, you've got to, here's another way to deal with these sorts of things. You've got to say, my distress over my sin is the best evidence that the reigning power of sin in my life is broken. See, when people come and say, I just don't feel like, I don't feel like I could, because I've done this, because I've done this, I'm just so afraid that God's going to reject me. And I look at them, and this is what Thomas Brooks and these, all these old guys used to say, is they would say, if you're crying because you're so afraid God's going to reject you, he hasn't. You couldn't cry unless God was working in your life right now to help you see that. Only the Spirit of God can enable you to see that. Or, as one of the guys used to say, the stronger the cry, the stronger the child. And therefore, when you cry out and say, oh, I just feel like I might be rejected by God, why would you even be afraid? Wicked people aren't afraid they're rejected by God. Why are you afraid of hurting him? Why are you afraid of him casting you off? Why are you afraid that your loving father has cast you off? The only reason you'd be afraid of that is because he is your loving father. You have to argue with yourself. You've also got to realize that, and this is the final thing, usually when you're in the midst of this kind of accusation, you have a tendency to repent for the wrong sin. Now, here's what I mean. Like, for example, somebody says, ah, you know, I'm so mad at my parents because they didn't love me like they should. But, I'm trying to repent of being so mad at my parents. the worse I feel. And the answer is, sure, of course you feel bad. You know, your parents didn't love you because deep down inside you're afraid, Well, if my parents didn't love me, there must be something wrong with me. I mustn't be a very good person. So when you go and repent for hating your parents, you feel like even a worse person. You're not repenting for the right sin. The right sin is making your parents into your saviors. And in a certain sense, rejecting the grace of God. The real sin is that I'm not letting God's grace be enough for me. That's always the heart sin. And it's a sin if you repent of that, the other sins fall into place. Or the way one of these guys put it, Thomas Brooks again. He says, The last remedy against this device of Satan is to consider that believers must repent, first and foremost, for their being discouraged by their sins.
