TITLE: The Thirst of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: John 19:16-30
TOPICS: Doctrine Heaven and Hell Atonement
SERIES: The Apostles’ Creed; Getting a Vocabulary for Faith
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-thirst-of-jesus/

============================================================

Well, do you believe in global warming yet? Oh, I guess I have to read this, but so you can just listen and fan if you want. No, come on. Let's read the scripture passage on which the teaching is based. It's John chapter 19, verses 25 to 30. Near the cross of Jesus stood his mother, his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus saw his mother there and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, Dear woman, here is your son. And to the disciple, here is your mother. From that time on, this disciple took her into his home. Later, knowing that all was now completed so that the scripture would be fulfilled, Jesus said, I am thirsty. A jar of wine vinegar was there, so they soaked a sponge in it, put the sponge on a stalk of the hyssop plant, and lifted it to Jesus' lips. And when he had received the drink, Jesus said, It is finished. With that, he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. And this is God's word. Now, why are we talking about this tonight? Let me remind you, even though we've had an interruption or two, we're doing a series in December and most of January, which we're looking at some basic concepts, some basic, in a sense, vocabulary, that have to do with the Christian faith or faith and spirituality. And what we did is, we've actually looked at the Apostles' Creed. The Apostles' Creed is something that all churches, and ever since the earliest centuries, have held. It's a summary of what the Bible teaches. We recite it here a couple times a month or whenever we do the Lord's Supper. And when you get to the place in the Apostles' Creed, where it starts talking about the death of Christ, it says, He suffered under Pontius Pilate. He was crucified, dead, and buried. He descended into hell. It's talking about the death of Christ or the Atonement. And what I want to do tonight is I want to look at this passage because these three statements of Jesus Christ from the cross that are recorded in John chapter 19 give you a real great and almost complete overview of what the cross means, what it means that Jesus died for us. Now, it's a little weird in a way to be talking about this on January 2nd. It doesn't seem like the time to be talking about this. Isn't that Lent? It is. Later on, by the way, in the year, if you come regularly here, in March and April, when we get near Good Friday and Easter, we're going to look at, in much more detail, what Jesus' death means, and we're going to look at that in Matthew 26 and 27. Here, we're doing this tonight as a simple overview. And actually, it's more appropriate than you think. All the stuff, all the articles on the millennium, oh my goodness, it's been so, it's just sort of overwhelming. But I read one article in which the writer, she had done her research because she asked a question and she said, I wonder what they were doing at the turn of the last millennium. I wonder what they were doing December 31st, 999. Not 1999, what were they doing on December 31st, 999? Were they celebrating? What were they doing that night? And she was right. She'd done her research. She said they were doing absolutely nothing. You know why? Because New Year's, the new year, in 999, the new year did not start January 1st. Oh, they had their, the Gregorian calendar. They had January, February, March, April, May. And they even had the year. They knew it was year 999 and all that. But what they did was the new year began always around March 25th. Did you know that? Up until something like the 12th century, 11th or 12th century, the Western civilization celebrated the new year. Isn't this great? It was, the first day of the new year was Easter, which meant the second last day of the new year, of the old year, was the Good Friday, which meant at the very end of the old year, you observed and you, and you recognized and thought and reflected on the death of Christ and then the morning of the resurrection of Jesus Christ's new year. Boy, that is considerably better than what we have right now. I don't know if we, they probably won't let us go back to it. They're pretty still upset with A.D. Have you noticed that? Very upset. And if they're upset with 2000 A.D., the year of our Lord, they're surely not going to want to go back to that. But you see, actually, this is a perfectly illegitimate thing. The reason why the new year started the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ is because nothing is more fundamental than this in the Christian faith. Now, look at these three statements. Jesus says three things here. I thirst. It is finished. Mother. mother. And these three statements actually give us a pretty complete picture of why Jesus went to the cross, what he did, and how it changes us. This is a very vast, I don't know why I'm doing this. Sometimes it's good to look at a big, to go high up in an airplane and look down and see something that's very vast and intricate from an aerial view. Sometimes it's good to do that, and that's what we're going to do tonight. Why did he go? I thirst. What did he do? It is finished. How does that change us? Mother, here's your son. Son, here's your mother. Look at these three things together, okay? It's an overview. It may give you a nose bleed. It's going fast. Later on in the week, pardon me, later on the year, we'll look at these subjects when I, as I said in March and April, a little more detail. First of all, why did he go? Why did he go to the cross? Verse 28 says, so the scripture might be fulfilled. Jesus said, I thirst. Very interesting. What does thirst mean in the Bible? In the Bible, thirst is an extremely often used metaphor for terminal, spiritual, agonizing, emptiness, and death. Terminal, spiritual, agonizing, spiritual death, and emptiness. If you go through Isaiah, go through Jeremiah, go through the Psalms, when people are away from God, they're said to be thirsty. And you have a number of places in Jeremiah and Isaiah where it says, without God you die of thirst. So you have in Jeremiah chapter 2, verse 13, God says, you have turned away from me, I am the fountain of living water, and you've turned to other cisterns, and you've dug other wells, but you're going to die of thirst because they won't hold water, and so on. Lots and lots of these, this kind of metaphor. Why? Well, there's, what the Bible is saying is, there is something that your soul needs every bit as much as your body needs water. There is something that if you don't have it in your soul, you're going to shrivel up, and you're going to burn up, and you're going to die every bit as much as your body does if you don't give it water. See, what's interesting about thirst, and I don't, I'll spare you the gory details, but if you study what it tells you about death by dehydration, which is a terrible death, a horrible death, and the kind of death that, that the people in, the writers of the Bible understood a lot more about, living in an arid, you know, hot climate back before, there's no technology, there's no air conditioning, there's no refrigeration, there's no running water. They knew something about this, and see, what's so intriguing and almost ironic about death by dehydration is it usually happens when it's hot, right? The sun is coming down, but everybody says that the last stages, the first stages of thirst are an emptiness, and maybe a sense of being shriveled, or, but, but the last stages of death, in the last stages of death, you feel like your insides are burning. It's, it's, it's the burning on the inside, in a sense, that just about kills you. You almost feel like it's not, it's not the sun beating down on your skin on the outside, but on the inside, the sensation of dying by dehydration, dying the terrible death of thirst. Every molecule in your body needs water. You keep water away from it, and then what happens is, it eventually, you, you die through an internal burning. You feel like you're being consumed. You feel like there's a fire unquenchable that has been ignited. There's an inner implosion of some kind. That's how you feel. And the Bible is saying, is if you don't get God at the center of your soul, if you don't get the living God at the center of your soul, if he's not, if you put your, the bucket of your soul down into any other kind, any, anything else but God, any cause more than God's cause, any love more than God's love, anything else, you're going to die of thirst. thirst. And it's going to be an eternal thirst. When Jesus Christ took, told a story about hell in Luke chapter 16, it's a very interesting parable. It's only a parable. It's all metaphorical. But listen, he tells the story of Lazarus and the rich man. And in, in this life, Lazarus is a poor man, and he stays, he sits at the doorstep of the rich man, and he never gets any help because the rich man is a man who loves his power, and he loves his wealth, and he abuses his wealth, and he abuses his power. He doesn't care about Lazarus, doesn't care about the poor, and so forth. And then they die. And the rich man goes to hell, and Lazarus is in heaven, and the rich man looks up, Jesus says, and sees Lazarus in heaven with Father Abraham, and he calls out. And essentially, what the rich man says in the parable is, I thirst. What he actually says, he says, Father Abraham, he calls him. This is in Luke 16. He says, tell Lazarus. some water and cool my tongue with it, because I am in agony in this fire. Hmm. Now, it's pretty interesting. Not only do you get not a word of repentance from the rich man in hell, no asking Father Abraham for forgiveness or anything like that, he's still treating Lazarus as if he's a servant. He's still ordering Lazarus around. He says, send Lazarus. He's still my waiter. He's still, he's still an errand boy. He's still beneath me. In other words, Abraham is, pardon me, the rich man is still holding on in hell. That's why he's in hell. That's what hell is, as I'm trying to show you here. He's still holding on to his power. He still, he still put his soul, he's sucking on the power. He's sucking on that. That's what's going to satisfy me. Of course, you all know, do you not? If you're dying of thirst on a raft in the middle of the ocean, the worst thing you can possibly do is put your mouth down into the ocean water, because the more you drink that, the faster you're going to burn to death. The faster. Abraham looks down at Lazarus, and what does he say? He says, son, you have your good things. What Abraham is trying to say is, you've already got what you wanted. Another way to put it is, the main fire in hell is on the inside, just like death by thirst. What does it, there's a number of people, I'm sure, in this room now, because there always is, in fact, actually, in some ways, I'm one of them, all right? To be honest with you. There's a lot of people in this room that have a lot of trouble with the idea of hell. They have a whole lot of, they have a lot of trouble with, with the biblical imagery of hell, fire. And they think, perhaps, and I don't think this. I mean, I struggle with that, too. And this might help you a bit. I'm not saying it'll help you completely, but this might help you a bit. A lot of people think, ah, this is what hell means. This is what the Bible means by hell. God takes people, and at the end of their life, he throws them down. They say, no, no, no, please, forgive me, please. And God says, no, it's too late. And he throws them in, and he turns the heat up. But if you read C.S. Lewis, The Great Divorce, if you read C.S. Lewis, Screwtape Letters, he's got a much better take on it. And so does a Father Abraham. In hell, the main burning is on the inside. When you put your lips to suck out of anything but God what you need for your soul, you're just going to start to burn. You're going to die of thirst, because every molecule in your soul, so to speak, cries out for God the way every molecule in your body cries out for water. And if you don't give it fresh water, if you don't give it living water, you just shrivel up. You just get unquenchably hot. You die of thirst. When Jesus Christ said, I thirst, what was he saying? Well, somebody says, he was thirsty, that's all. Well, there didn't mean anything more than that. He's being crucified. He's out in the middle of the day. He's, you know, he's in an arid climate. He's midday. The sun's coming down. That's all it means. No, it doesn't. Oh, no. Why not? Because Jesus hasn't said a word up to now about any kind of discomfort or pain at all. Do you know what he's been through already, and he hasn't said a word yet? What? Before his first trial, they blindfolded him and hit him with their fists and said, prophesy. And then after his second trial, after his first trial, they scourged him. They whipped him. You know, a scourge was not just a whip. At the end of every single one of the strands, you know, of the whip, at the end of every one of the lashes, there were pieces of bone or pieces of metal attached so that when you scourge somebody's back, you just literally rip the back. Over and over, they put crowns of thorns on him. They struck him in the face with a club. They, and what does it say? Over and over, you know, nails. Over and over, it says, he did not open his mouth. He never, ever, ever said, I hurt. He never said, ouch. He was like, it's, oh, the Bible stresses that all the gospel writers stress. He never said a thing. He never complained. He never opened, all that. Beating, nails, crown of thorns, see. Clubs, pierced. And now, he says, I thirst. You think he was just thirsty? Oh, no. It even says so, that the scriptures might be fulfilled. What scripture did he have in mind? Well, here's one. It's pretty remarkable. Psalm 22, I am poured out like water. My strength is dried up like the piece of, like a piece of earthenware in the furnace. My tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth, and you lay me in the dust of death. You say, well, how? of Psalm 22 is, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Why is Jesus Christ now crying out about his thirst? Why is he doing it in biblical language? Here's what he's saying. He is experiencing something that the scourge, the whip, the spear, the nails, the crown of thorns, the clubbing in the face and on the head, those things were like mosquito bites compared to this. He was going to hell. When he says, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Is that hyperbole? When he says, I thirst, is he really, really just thirsty? Could that possibly be after all he's been through? No. Why did he go to the cross? Now we know. He didn't go just to get beaten for you. He didn't go just to get pierced for you. He didn't go just to get stabbed for you. You know, other people could do that for you, and they have. Other people for their family, for their friends, for their nation. They can go through all that. Jesus didn't do that. And until you understand why he went, you want to understand the magnitude of why he went, you want to understand the magnitude of what he did. And that is, he went to hell. On the cross, he descended into hell. You know, there's a, you know that song out of Man at La Mancha, it's this sort of the signature, the famous song out of that musical called The Impossible Dream. And there's one, there's one, there's two lines there where he's singing about, you know, how he wants to live his life. And he says, to fight for the right, without question or pause, to march into hell for a heavenly cause. Well, that's hyperbole. What wonderful rhetoric. To march into hell for a heavenly cause. Of course, nobody's really ever done that. Oh yes, one has. Do you understand? If you understand, Jesus Christ was not just beaten for you, he wasn't just nailed for you, he wasn't just speared for you, he wasn't just stabbed for you. On the cross, that could have happened for three hours. You can be beaten for three hours. You can be stabbed for three hours. You can be in that kind of pain for three hours. But on the cross, Jesus Christ experienced eternal spiritual death. He experienced what you and I would experience if you were sent into hell forever. If you had that internal implosion. If you essentially experienced the holocaust of the fire of separation from God exploding in your soul. He would have felt as if he was lost forever. He thirsts. He went to hell. That's it. He did it on your behalf. In other words, he says, I went to hell. I marched into hell so you can have the heavenlies. I marched. I took the desert so you could have the garden. I took the eternal thirst so that you could have the fountain of life. And that's what he did. Nothing less. That's far more than most of us think about when we think he's died for me. So unless you understand why he went. Unless you see he marched into hell for you. Right there. You won't understand the second point. So if you don't understand the magnitude of the first point, you won't understand the magnitude of the second point. What is the second point? The magnitude of the second point. What did he do? That's why he went. But what did he do? Because he went like that. Because he went to do that. Here's what he accomplished. Verse 30. It is finished. Now, you know, that's a one. I love this verse. I mean, I love this word. It is finished. I think about it. It's an ancient and famous English rendering of a single word that John tells us Jesus spoke on the cross. And that word is tetelestai. One word. But to translate it, it is finished, isn't quite right. When he says, it is finished, in English, it doesn't really get across too well. And here's why. It is finished sounds passive, doesn't it? It sounds like what it is finished in English means it's over. But that's not what he's saying. When he says tetelestai, you can maybe even see it if you know a little bit about these stems. Tetelestai is the Greek word for design or plan. Okay? And what he's saying, therefore, is not something has happened to me. He's talking about something he's accomplished. In other words, Jesus Christ, I'm sure he didn't yell this because he's dying of thirst. You can't yell when you're dying of thirst. But what Jesus Christ has really said, let me give you a better translation. And it's an amazing thing. It's an amazing thing. Here's Jesus Christ, nobody more helpless than Jesus Christ. Stretched out, nailed, his hands are nailed, his feet are nailed. He can't, he can't scratch his nose. He seems absolutely and completely powerless. Absolutely. helpless in every way. Yet this is what his last words are, properly translated. I've done it. I've done it. I've accomplished it. And, of course, some commentators, you may have heard this, some of you, commentators will tell you there's a particular Greek tense here that's more perfect and more perfected and more certain than we have in the English language. What he's really saying is, I've done it and it is utterly finished. It is complete. I've done it and I've done it completely. I've accomplished it utterly. And what has he done? I mean, what is his purpose there? 1 Peter 3.18. Jesus Christ died for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring us to God. To bring us to God. Now, what that means is, he is saying this. I have traversed, he says, the infinite distance between you and God and there's not an inch left. I have done everything necessary to bring you right into his arms. Everything. There's not one thing left for you to do. I've done it. I've done it completely. It is absolutely and utterly finished. Nothing else for you to do at all. Period. And he died. Now, here's the fact. You say, oh, I've heard this before because I come to Redeemer. A lot of you say, I've heard this before. The idea is that Jesus Christ on the cross did not just suffer in some vague way, but he experienced hell on the cross, which is the full brunt of everything we would possibly deserve. That means, therefore, on the cross, he didn't just sort of get us a sort of general kind of pardon, but rather he accomplished everything. He gave us, he accomplished everything. Everything necessary for you to be blindingly, brilliantly beautiful in God's sight right now, the moment you accept what he's done. If you could summarize Christianity into one word, it would be this one. It is finished. Buddha, when he died, those last words, according to tradition, were, strive without ceasing. The last words of Jesus Christ is, don't you dare strive. I have done all the striving necessary. Two utterly different endings to the lives of those men. Religion says, finish the work. The gospel says, receive the finished work. Religion says, if you finish the work, someday God might give you acceptance and love and blessing. The gospel says, receive the finished work of Jesus Christ, and you get love and acceptance and all that blessing now, immediately, fully, completely, totally. Do you believe that? I tell you, you don't. I mean, I don't. You say, what do you mean you don't? Aren't you telling us about this? What do you mean you don't believe it? Do you go home and say, oh, I don't believe it? I mean, I don't believe it. But there's two ways to believe something, you see. There's two ways to believe something, as you know that. And I remember years ago, a friend of mine was driving without, without, he was driving without a seatbelt. And I said something to him about, you know the statistics, don't you? You know, you really should drive with a seatbelt. And he said, yeah, yeah, I know, I know, I know. And then I visited him maybe a year later, and I noticed him put a seatbelt on. I said, gee, now why do you put your seatbelt on? And he used to not. He says, well, I visited a friend of mine who was in a car accident. He didn't have a seatbelt on. He went through the windshield, and he had about, you know, 112 stitches in his face. And now I always wear my seatbelt. Now, I said, ah, are you saying you really didn't believe it before? He said, well, I did believe it, but I didn't believe it. And I did believe it, but I wasn't affected by it. I didn't get any new information when I saw him there, but all the information became sort of new to me. And you see, it's one thing to say I believe that Jesus Christ completed the work on the cross. It's another thing to know it, to really believe it. Let me show you, let me give you four real, let me give you four mistakes. People are trying so, I see people trying to become Christians and to live like Christians, but because they don't know the magnitude of what he did on the cross, they're fouling it up. An example, I know a lot of people who are trying to become Christians, and here's how they do it. They say, ah, I have screwed up my life, but what I like about Christianity is Jesus will forgive me, and he gives me a second chance. Jesus will forgive me for all this mess up, and now he'll be with me, and now this time I'm going to be the man I should be, or the woman I should be. Yeah, I'm going to be the husband, the wife I should be. You know, finally, Jesus is going to give me a second chance to run that race. No. Now listen, be careful here. Don't misunderstand me. Obviously, grace is not less than a second chance, but Christian grace is less than a second movie that said this, that, you know, got this across to me during the holiday break. A really good movie, which we rented, is a German movie with English subtitles called Run, Lola, Run. Have you heard of it? Have you seen it? And it's about a woman who has a crisis. And for 20 minutes, she tries to deal with a crisis. And at the end of the 20 minutes, she really blows it. She gets shot right through the chest and killed. And as she's falling down, she says, I want another chance. And suddenly, because it's a movie, she's back at the beginning and she has a second chance. She goes right back 20 minutes ago. So she runs out the door to try it again. And she tries another set of strategies in order to try to deal with her crisis. And at the end of that 20 minutes, she gets there and her boyfriend, who she's trying to save, gets run over by a truck. And he's laying there dying. And they look down at each other and say, oh, we only had one more chance. And because it's a movie, they go back a third time. It's 20 minutes back. And they have the same... And she runs out the door. And this time, she does it right. And they're rich. And they're happy. And they're off the hook. And they're together. And it's wonderful. Isn't that wonderful? Because grace is what? Grace is a second chance. Well, yeah, it's at least that. But Christian grace is more. Because God... Listen, you must be very careful. I see lots of people saying, I'm going to ask Jesus into my life. I'm going to really live for Christ now. And what you really are saying is, even though you have a general idea that Jesus Christ has pardoned you on the cross, and he forgives you on the cross, you don't understand it's complete. Because what you're really doing is you're saying, now I've got one more chance to prove that I'm worthy of him. That's what you're doing. Jesus Christ died on the cross so I could have one more chance to prove that I'm worthy. No. Jesus Christ died on the cross to be your worthiness. Jesus Christ doesn't just put you on the track and now you're off again. He was shot for you. He was run over for you. He was destroyed for you. He has paid it all to Telestai. He has done it all. And there's a lot of people who, when they say, I'm going to give my life to Christ, what they mean is, I'm really going to try hard to really finally be worthy. And they don't understand. It is finished. And as a result, a lot of people kind of get into Christianity, I'm going to try hard, I'm going to pray, I'm going to come to church, I'm going to read the Bible. And you know what? After a while, Christianity will be a huge drag. And you know some of it is. It's a grind for you, isn't it? It's a grind. You've been trying to turn your life around and it's been a grind. I'm not saying it's not going to be hard, but it shouldn't be a grind. And at least look at yourself and ask, is it possible? Here I've tried to become a Christian, but I don't really understand. It's finished. That he loves me now. That he is my worthiness. That he is my holiness. That he's completed the race. That he's gone all the way to bring us to God. He's traversed every inch. That when I receive him as my Savior, when I say, Father, accept me into your family and love me because not of what I have done, but what Jesus has done. When you say that, you've come all the way. You're not back on the racetrack again. Let me give you another problem. Not only do people, because they don't believe it is finished, not only do they kind of screw up trying to become Christians, but a lot of people, because they have become Christians, but they're not living the Christian life very well because they don't know it is finished. Let me give you three kinds of people like that. Some of you have what I would call Christian inferiority complexes. You're always feeling inadequate. You're always feeling like you can't live up. And you do. And many people may not know this at all. You call yourself names. You beat yourself up physically. You beat yourself up, certainly spiritually and psychologically. You flagellate yourself. You hurt yourself. And you're a Christian. But you say, but I'm so sinful. And I feel so inadequate. You know, one of the tests of this condition is you cannot take criticism at all. You're unbelievably defensive. Well, what's your problem? You don't know. It is finished. Oh, you say, oh, I know that I'm a terrible sinner, that I'm only a Christian by the mercy of God, that I could never earn my salvation. I know I'm not good enough. But you know what? You're still trying to finish Christ's work for him. You're still trying to add. You know why? Why? Because you're, because, listen, friends, in Christ you were already beaten up. In Christ you were crowned with thorns. In Christ you were scourged. And all that stuff. And you're trying to complete the work. He's already been beaten for you. He's already gone through all that stuff for you. You're trying to finish his work. You're trying to say, if only I'm, if I hate myself enough, if I knock myself down, if I feel bad enough, then maybe God and other people have pity on me. You're not living with a poise. You're not living with a confidence. You're walking around with an inferiority complex because you don't know it is finished. You don't know that in Christ you're blindingly, brilliantly beautiful to him. where you are. Let me give you another example. There are people around, and by the way, this is the hardest one to know if it's true of you. There's people who have an inferiority complex because they're trying to beat themselves and finish because they don't know it is finished. There's a lot of Christians walking around who I have to say, I'd have to say, they actually have more of a superiority complex. Now, I don't listen, and as a result, you're not living like Christ, and it's because you don't know it is finished. Now, this is no good if you're saying, oh, I know people like that. Listen, would you do me a favor? Just turn this off. If you're not like that, just stop thinking about anybody else because if you say, oh, I know people with that superiority complex. I know people who are proud like that. I know people like that. Oh, really? I know people who think that they're morally superior to other people. Oh, do you? Interesting. Listen, do you hear what you're doing? Let me give you three tests of this condition. Are you the kind of person that really can't stand being around folks who don't live and act right? They don't believe the right things. They're not living in a moral way. Do you have trouble being warm to people like that? Do you have trouble being around them? Do you have trouble being friendly to them? You just can't stand people who just don't live right. That's because you feel like you're morally superior to them. Let me give you another test of moral superiority. Grudges. If you can stay angry at somebody, you can only be angry at them when you're saying to yourself, I could never do something like that. See, if somebody's wronged you and you say, I would never do something like that, you're going to be angry at them. If you know that you are absolutely capable and you are no better than they are, you won't have too much trouble forgiving them. It'll still be kind of hard. But if you can't forgive somebody, there's that moral superiority. Why? Where does it come from? You don't know it is finished. You're trying to finish God's work too. You're trying to finish it. You're saying, look at how good I am. Look at what I'm doing. I'm living right. I'm believing right. I'm doing all these things. You don't know it's finished. If you knew it was finished, if you knew that your only hope was the finished work of Christ, you would not have that kind of moral superiority. You see, rigid people, proud Christians, condemning judgmental Christians, because you don't know it's finished. Just like poor, wimpy, insecure, nervous, inferior Christians. You don't know it's finished. One more. Driven, addicted Christians. Some of you, and you know, a lot of, most people don't know this about you, right? Some of you are addicted. Now, there's various ways to be addicted. You can be addicted to work. You're working too hard. You can be addicted to love. You get obsessive kind of crushes on people. Some of you just might be addicted to something physical. You know, there's certain ways in which you get high or you have pleasure. Now, you know what's so interesting? Everybody, every little psychobabble person, everybody who talks psychobabble, they all know what's wrong with you. It doesn't take a rocket scientist or a psychiatrist. You know what they say? If you find yourself being drawn into these things and you can't seem to stop yourself, well, they're right. Even the talk show hosts know what's wrong with you. You don't like yourself. But you see, the way Jesus will analyze you is a little more profound, but it's basically the same. You're trying to complete yourself. You don't feel complete. He says, I've completed you. You don't feel worthy. You say, if I had this, then I'd feel good about mine. You don't like yourself because you don't see it's finished. You're not satisfied with what he's done. You're not resting in it. You're doing this and this and this to feel worthy. You're doing this and this and this. Then I'll feel completed. Then I'll feel beautiful. Then I'll be significant. And that's why you're driven. Virtually all of our problems come from the fact that you may get this right on the exam. What if I say, how much did Jesus do on the cross? A, half of what you need to get to God. B, three quarters of what you need to get to God. C, one quarter. D, everything you need to get to God. How many people would get that wrong? And yet we're all getting it wrong. We're getting it wrong every day. You're not putting your seatbelt on. You don't believe it. You don't believe it. Now, lastly, if you see the magnitude of what he did, if you see the magnitude of why he went and the magnitude of what he did, last of all, you will be utterly changed in the way in which you live. Now, you get that, actually, from the last. Now, I'm only going to touch on this. The last thing we see him say, well, it's actually the first of the three, but the last of the three statements we're looking at tonight is where he looks down from the cross and he says, mother, Mary, woman, that's your son. Son, John the disciple, that's... there? Well, it's actually quite significant. It would be great to have a whole sermon on this, but you're not getting one. But here's what he's doing. You have to remember that this is back in a time in which there were no nursing homes, there's no social security, there's no pensions. When you have a widowed elderly mother, the only way she won't die is one of her grown children has to take her in. See, this is back before there was Medicaid, this is before social security, and it's before they built Florida. And because they hadn't built Florida yet, older mothers had to live with their grown children. And she was living with Jesus, but he's about to die. So he has got to make provision for her. So what he's doing is he's looking down from the cross and making provision. But wait a minute, culturally, who should be caking her? He's got brothers. John chapter 7 says he's got a bunch of brothers, but his brothers don't believe the gospel. And what he is really saying is, he is saying, mother, son, at the foot of the cross, all other relationships change. Now, other people who are at the foot of the cross, well, put it this way, if you're a Christian and you're here tonight, the other people in this room are your mother, your brother, your father, your son, your daughter, your sister. In other words, Jesus says the cross so completely changes you that the relationship you have to others who also believe in the cross is now the strongest relationship you have. It brings you into a community. See, it's very normal for Christians, for Americans, I mean, it's normal for everybody to read the Bible through their cultural grid. It means we all have assumptions. And so we read the Bible, no matter who we are, I'm not saying just Americans, no matter who we are, we read the Bible and we tend to filter out a lot of things that the Bible says that don't quite fit in with our culture. And one of the things we live in is an individualistic culture. And when we go to the cross, we say, I want to know how the cross will make me happy. I want to know how the cross will make me feel good in my self-image. In fact, maybe as an individualistic American, if that's what you are, up to now, everything may have, you know, been good news. Look at this infinite love. Look at how that changes the way I see myself. Look at how it changes the attitude, my relationship with God. I feel forgiven. I'm complete. That's great. But the Bible says, once the cross comes into your life, it utterly changes your relationship to everyone. It means you no longer belong to yourself. You see, what happens is, if the cross is the thing that really makes me understand who I am, then no longer does my social status matter like it used to. No longer does my family name. No longer does my pedigree. No longer does my race or my culture. And that means that my relationship to other Christians now become the strongest relationships in my life. And if you don't feel that way today, if you don't feel that way at all, it's because you don't understand the first two points. If your life hasn't been utterly changed by the cross, it's because you haven't seen the magnitude of why he went and the magnitude of what he did. You might be thinking of the cross in very general terms. You know, he loves me and he forgives me. And you haven't seen how it completely changes your attitude toward not only Christians but non-Christians. What does the cross mean to you now when you move out toward a person who's very different, maybe even hostile, maybe even an enemy? In the cross, God has said to you and me, because he sent his son while we were enemies, right, to die? In the cross, God says, look at the lengths to which I will go to make space in my life for you if you want to come in. Look what I have done to make space in my heart for you. And that means, see, Christians, when they reach out to people who don't believe, they have a completely different attitude. If the cross has really struck you, it changed your attitude toward others, it changed your attitude toward other Christians, changed your attitude toward other non-Christians, changes you completely. Do you believe this? Paul says, in the cross of Christ I glory, because through the cross the world is crucified to me and I to the world. What does that mean? It means my relationship to the world is completely changed. Nothing bugs me like it used to. Nothing controls me like it used to. Nothing even looks like it used to. That's how absolutely pervasive and that's how sweeping the effect of the cross is on the human life. Have you experienced that? I haven't nearly to the degree I want to in this coming year. Let's go together. Let's pray. We thank you, Lord, that the cross means so much. We pray that tonight we wouldn't be overwhelmed. This is the problem with one of these surveys. It's a fairly overwhelming picture. your help, with the Spirit's help, fix in on, focus in on one way in which we're living and forgetting that it's finished. We're forgetting the completeness. We're forgetting it. Lord, show us some way in which we're unhappy, some way in which we're anxious, some way in which we're bored, some way in which we're angry, some way in which we're afraid, some way in which we're discouraged and despondent, some way in which we're bound and driven, some way in which we're shackled because we just don't believe it. I ask, Lord, that you would help us to see what those things are or what that particular thing is you want us to see tonight. Use the cross to break the chain. Use the cross to change us. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
