TITLE: The Perils of Love (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Sexuality
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-perils-of-love-an-open-forum/

============================================================

You sit down when I come out. No, stay down there. No, stop it. All right, listen. So what was that about? The opera, La Boheme, was based on a book by Henri Mugère, 1851, called Scenes in the Life of Bohemia. And what this means, of course, is that book was an apologetic, it was actually a promotion of a phenomenon that was extremely important in Western culture, had a great deal of effect on Western culture, 19th century Bohemia, which began, the Bohemianism, it began on the left bank of Paris in 1830. The book, which the opera is based on, promotes it, romanticized it, 19th century Bohemianism. But most people have noticed that the opera, that Puccini himself, does not really romanticize the Bohemianism. It's certainly not a political opera. It's not trying to make a point that how great it was. In fact, many people have noticed, many critics have noticed, that Puccini is actually gently, affectionately, even in a sort of celebratory way, doing a critique. So let's ask ourselves, if we want to learn something from this opera about how to understand our world and how to live in it, what was 19th century Bohemianism? What is Puccini saying about it? And what difference does that make to us? What can we learn about it, if anything? Okay, first, what was 19th century Bohemianism? As I mentioned, it arose first in Paris in the 1830s. And here's the reason why. Up until the 18th century, there was a very simple class structure in Europe. There were the ruling classes, and then there were the peasants. That was feudalism, basically. But in the 18th century, industrialization brought about something that had never happened before, the rise of the middle class, the bourgeois. And, along with the bourgeois middle class, was also, for the first time, a very large, visible, miserable, urban working class in the cities, of course. At the time of the rise of the bourgeois, Bohemianism began. And Bohemians were artists, students, and other people who deliberately threw off the conventions of middle class bourgeois morality and moved in with the poor and began to live a life that was a repudiation of middle class values. Now, who were the Bohemians? By the way, the word Bohemian in French was the same word as the word gypsies. Now, gypsies, of course, real gypsies, were despised as wanderers and conjurers by the respectable people of Europe. And that's the reason why the folks on the left bank of Paris happily took hold of that name and proudly applied it to themselves. Now, who were the Bohemians? Who were the people who lived in Bohemianism? There were, Mugère actually says there's three. There are the people who mainly were concerned with artistic concerns. There were people who had mainly political concerns. And then we had people who just wanted to have fun. And the artists, let's talk about that for a second. Before the rise of the bourgeois, artists were essentially patronized by the ruling classes of the aristocracy. They patronized artists. But when capitalism arose and the bourgeois arose, artists for the first time in their lives found that they basically had to live by marketing their work. They had to sell their work to the bourgeois. And, of course, this created a problem because if you actually did your art in such a way that appealed to bourgeois sensibilities, then you could make some money. If you didn't, if you shocked the bourgeois, then, of course, you didn't. And that's what most of the artists wanted to do. And so for the first time, you have an artist class, a class of artists who found themselves really living on the edge of poverty so that they could do the work that they wanted to do. So there was the artists. Secondly, there were the people with more political concerns. There were many people in Bohemianism that really wanted to change the culture. They hated the bourgeois culture. They thought it was filled with hypocrisy and self-righteousness and intolerance and injustice. And they wanted to do everything they possibly could to change that culture. They wanted to create a counterculture that would change the dominant culture. Then thirdly, there were quite a few people who just wanted to have fun. They tended to be younger men who were bourgeois, who would drop out. wanted sexual freedom. And sometimes after they had had some fun, they left and went back into the middle class, got jobs, etc. Now, therefore, what was the sensibility of the bourgeois, I mean of the Bohemians? What was the essence of what they stood for? They stood for independence rather than conformity to social norms and conventions and morals. They stood for innovation rather than conformity to tradition. They didn't care about the way we've always done it. And they especially were against the ultimate bourgeois convention, marriage. They were against the idea of marriage. They believed that sex and love were stifled by marriage, that marriage destroyed freedom and destroyed passion. And therefore, this is the basics. The basis of Bohemianism was to assert absolute individual personal freedom against history, against society, and against family. The individual was all important. Absolute personal freedom. Godier, who was one of the early Bohemians, put forward the charter of Bohemianism in this very famous quote. He says, Bohemianism, this is what they're about. One, to develop freely every idea or imagination, especially those that shock tastes conventions and rules. Two, to hate and repulse to the utmost shopkeepers, Philistines, and bourgeois. Three, to celebrate the pleasures of love with a passion capable of scorching the paper on which we record them. Four, to insist upon love as the sole end and sole means of happiness. Five, to sanctify and deify art, regarding it as a second creator. Such are the underlying ideas of the program which each one of us tries to practice the ideal and secret ordinances of Bohemian youth. So that's Bohemianism. Now, the question is, what is Puccini trying to tell us about Bohemianism? Now, at first sight, and I think this is absolutely right and fair, is he's extremely affectionate toward the Bohemians. All of the characters are drawn lovingly. And act one, when you hear Rodolfo explaining his personal charter of life, it's wonderful. It's marvelous. He says, who am I? A poet. What do I do? I write. And how do I live? I live, he says, which is another way of saying, I just live. And then he says, in happy poverty I squander rhymes and hymns of love. There's the Bohemian ideal. I don't worry about making money. I don't worry about saving money. I don't worry about equity. I don't worry about a career. I am unencumbered by any of these things so that I am free to pursue my art, whatever my art would be. And of course, Puccini, considering he's an artist himself, clearly has affection for the Bohemians. But when you apply the ideal of absolute personal freedom, not to the area of economics, but to the area of sex and love, Puccini shows the strains. Oh, absolutely. Now, what is this? The Bohemian ideal in the area of sex and love is that you must not destroy love through permanent commitment. You must keep your individual freedom. You must not lose your individual freedom. Now, by the way, the Bohemian ideal when it comes to sex and love is still extremely strong in our society. In fact, some people would say it won. And so, for example, not too long ago, now this is not Godier. This is not from 19th century Bohemianism. This is from the Vassar Quarterly, 10 years ago, describing what most of the young women coming out of Vassar thought about sex and love. And this is what the woman who wrote this said. We in our 20s do not have affairs. We have sexual friendships. We do not fall in love. We build relationships. We do not date. We see each other. We don't have lovers. We have significant others that we spend lots of quality physical time with. We disdain intense emotions like grief, jealousy, romantic passion, which leave us vulnerable to a loss of freedom. And therefore, we favor an emotional style of detachment. Now, that's the Bohemian ideal. And yet, both couples, you know, both Marcello and Museta, both Rodolfo and Mimi are struggling tremendously with this. Now, first of all, we know Marcello and He says, Museta, require an прост there, Act 3, you didn't hear it sung, but in Act 3, before the part that we played for you here tonight, and you heard the narrator mention it, Rodolfo leaves Mimi, and he goes and he says to Marcello, you know, I'm leaving Mimi. And Marcello says, that's good, that's fine, because you know what, you've got to keep this sex and love thing light. Enjoy tonight. But, you know, it should be playful, it should be fun, it should be light. None of this long-term commitment stuff. And almost immediately thereafter, and you did hear this depicted, that when Museta is out there flirting, you know, what's going on then? Marcello cannot live with it. You know, he says, you frivolous flirt, and Museta reminds him of the bohemian ideal. She says, I want my full freedom. What are you shouting about? We're not married. I make love to whomever I please. I hate it when lovers act like husbands. And yet Marcello has had a problem, and here's what his problem is. He has sensed deep in his soul that because he loves her, some loss of individual freedom is proper. Some loss of individual freedom is proper to love, and he can't love her unless they would both lose some freedom. He's straining against the bohemian ideal. But, of course, the one who's most straining is Rodolfo and Mimi in particular. Here we have something considerably more poignant and considerably sadder. Again, as the narrator told you, originally, in the beginning of Act 3, Rodolfo has left Mimi. Why? And after a while, Marcello finally gets him to say, I think she's dying. And there's two reasons given by Rodolfo, and actually by the opera, for why you must avoid, this is the bohemian ideal, you must avoid giving your heart to someone permanently, totally, exclusively for your whole life. You must avoid that. You can't lose your individual freedom like that. Why? Number one, if you give yourself to someone permanently, totally, exclusively, first of all, you lose emotional independence. See, what Rodolfo is saying was he realizes that Mimi is dying. And because she's dying, he just can't stay with her because he's going to go down with her. If his heart is bound up with her, he's going to go down with her. And so he's telling Marcello about this, and then he realizes that Mimi has overheard him. And then he runs on out, and with all this guilt, and, you know, you heard this going on, she says, because she wants to lose all that individual freedom, and she says, I'm yours for life. And what does he say? Well, let's stay together until spring. And then she says, oh, if only winter would last forever. And then he says, we'll stay together until spring. He compromises. He says, well, I really should be away. I don't want to be that emotionally involved. So the first reason, according to the opera, that we're supposed to seek for that individual freedom is because if you give your heart to somebody, you lose emotional independence. But secondly, you also are told in the opera that you lose actually artistic independence. And it's very interesting. Again, that was not depicted tonight, but in the beginning of Act 4, when Rodolfo and Marcello are back and they're broken up again with their girls, their women, the four men sing about how, well, at least we have artistic freedom. And it's true. By the way, that is true. That's the only way to true artistic freedom. Did you know in 1979, Sally Potter made an extremely interesting, I guess what they call indie flick, only 34 minutes, called Thriller. And do you know what it is? It's a feminist deconstruction of La Boheme. It's very interesting. 34 minutes, Sally Potter, Thriller. And you know how it starts? Basically, it's Mimi shows up. She's the narrator. And she's looking back on the opera, trying to figure out why the heck I had to die in this opera. Why did Puccini have to kill me off? Why did I have to die? It's very, very interesting. And she goes back through and analyzes it and comes to the conclusion that the reason she had to die was patriarchy. She says, in the thriller movie, she says, Hey, what if I hadn't died and we had stayed together? I would have had children. He would have had to get a job. We would have had to get work in order to support ourselves. And then we would have lost artistic freedom. And actually, that's alluded to in the beginning of Act 4. Of course, she's right in the deconstructive feminist Mimi in the movie. And see, if you give yourself, you lose. But if you don't give yourself, you lose more. C.S. Lewis has put it perfectly. This is the horns of the dilemma. The Puccini so wonderfully and vividly shows our character. dilemma. This is the way that C.S. Lewis puts it. He says, love anything and your heart will be broken. If you want to make sure to keep your heart intact, you must give your heart to no one, not even to an animal. Lock it up safe in a casket, but in that casket, safe, dark, and motionless, it will change. Your heart will not be broken. It will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The alternative to tragedy or to the risks of tragedy is damnation, since the only place this side of heaven where you can be free from all the risks of love is hell. Now, you see this incredible dilemma? The bohemian ideal, absolute individual freedom. Don't give your heart permanently and exclusively to someone else. It's partly right. There's a real problem with that. There is possessiveness. There is jealousy. There is a need to revolve your whole world around the person you're in love with. There's a loss of identity. It's a problem, but it's a bigger problem not to give yourself to anybody. If you avoid breaking a broken heart by not giving your heart to anyone, your heart becomes unbreakable, and that's even worse. And so, in the end, on the horns of this dilemma, it's pretty intriguing, and many critics have pointed out, here we have this celebration of bohemianism, right? Isn't that what La Boheme is about? But look at the end what happens to everybody. Museta is praying, asking for God. She's praying. They're all getting together and selling their possessions. What happened to all this raucous individuals? And of course, Rodolfo has lost his heart. His heart is bound up with Mimi. And as Mimi dies, he goes into despair. And as a result, many people have said, in spite of all the celebration of bohemianism, basically, La Boheme is a conservative opera. It's into traditional values. Well, now, question. So what do we learn from all that? What do we learn from that? Here's what I think we actually can learn from that. Puccini is a great artist, and like all great artists, he's not obvious. If you ask Puccini, do you like the bohemians or not? Are the bohemians these wonderful free spirits who are revealing the hypocrisy and self-righteousness of bourgeois society? Or are these bohemians these self-indulgent, selfish adolescents who need to get a job and get married and have children? Which is it? And see, Puccini somehow says both. It's great art. Because there's a sense in which he is very, very, very affectionate and seems to be celebrating and appreciating deeply bohemianism at the same time as giving a critique. Now, that may sound kind of mushy, so it sounds like the answer is yes and no, yes and no. But you know what? Christianity will give you a model that will help you, I think, understand the wisdom of that balance. I'm not here to score points for Christianity on the basis of the art. I'm here to use Christianity to help me understand the art and help you understand the art. But here's a way to think about it. In Luke chapter 15, there's this very interesting parable told by Jesus. It's called the parable of the prodigal son, but actually it's a parable of a father who's got two sons. One of the sons is a bohemian. One of the sons takes his money and throws off all of his father's and family's moral standards and social conventions, and he goes off away and he squanders his money and he lives in poverty and he consorts with prostitutes, riotous living. He's a bohemian. The other son is a bourgeois, the elder son, the elder brother, and he is very moral and he is very upright and he is very conventional, but he's also cold and he's condescending and he's self-righteous and he's hard. What's intriguing is that Jesus shows the father, who of course represents God, alienated from both. This isn't a culture wars thing. Here's the liberal, here's the conservative. Well, which is it? Jesus will not be pushed into those kinds of polarities, neither will Puccini, but he will not be pushed into those kind of polarities because the father goes out to the bohemian son and urges him to come in, and he goes out to the bourgeois son and he urges him to come in. He's alienated from both, but what's intriguing about the parable is in the end, the bohemian is saved and the bourgeois is not. Why? Well, it's not because... the bohemian son's life didn't work. The ideal of absolute personal freedom doesn't work. The idea that I'm not going to give my heart to anybody, I've got to keep myself completely unencumbered emotionally and artistically so I can do what I want to do, it doesn't work. It's not how the human heart works. It's not the way relationships work. And yet, the honesty and the authenticity of the bohemian son is a means of grace. As far as Jesus is concerned, evidently, that the moralism and the religiosity of the bourgeois, the respectable son, is more spiritually stultifying. He doesn't realize, both of the men are being their own saviors and being their own lords and being their own gods, yet the bohemian's authenticity is the one, you know, that he comes to his senses and the other one does not. Now, what does that mean? Pretty intriguing, is it not? Jesus doesn't choose between the two, but he gives you an understanding of the two and shows you how that they are both right and they're both wrong. In other words, listen, let me wrap up like this. Christianity also gives you a way out of the conundrum, away from the horns of the dilemma. The bohemians are right about love. You can lose your individuality. There can be idolatry. There can be incredible neurotic possessiveness and obsession. But of course, as we've seen, not to give your heart is also a great disaster as well. So what do we do? Well, according to the Bible, God looked down at us and knew that the only way to love us was to involve himself in our suffering. God knew how bad off we were. God knew we were dying of consumption. God looked down at us and he was willing to love us. And of course, the way the Bible puts it is God knew that the only way he could love us was to die on the cross. But he did. And if you do that, if you would look at that and see what God did, what Jesus did, if you see him as the great lover of your soul, if that's the main source of your love in your life, then you can move out into human relationships with a kind of freedom. You're free in a sense because you know that if I don't get human love, I've got the real love that's going to really, the love at the heart of the universe is really what I need. And so what that does is it allows me to move out without neuroticism, without obsession. Ironically, it frees you to really give yourself and not just use other people. So in the end, the question that comes up is, are the bohemians good or bad? Are the bourgeois good or bad? Who's right? And of course, the answer is yes.
