TITLE: The Great Awakening
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 28:1-20
TOPICS: Easter Understanding the Gospel Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: St. Matthew’s Passion; The World’s Last Night
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-great-awakening/

============================================================

The scripture reading for today can be found in Matthew 28, 1 through 20. After the Sabbath, at dawn, on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary went to look at the tomb. There was a violent earthquake, for an angel of the Lord came down from heaven and was going to the tomb, rolled back the stone, and sat down on it. His appearance was like lightning, and his clothes were as white as snow. The guards were so afraid of him that they shook and became like dead men. The angel said to the women, Do not be afraid, for I know that you are looking for Jesus, who was crucified. He is not here. He has risen, just as he said. Come and see the place where he lay. Then go quickly and tell his disciples, He has risen from the dead and is going ahead of you into Galilee. There you will see him. Now I have told you. So the women hurried away from the tomb, afraid, yet filled with joy, and ran to tell his disciples. Suddenly Jesus met them. Greetings, he said. They came to him, clasped his feet, and worshipped him. Then Jesus said to them, Do not be afraid. Go and tell my brothers, go to Galilee, and there they will see me. While the women were on their way, some of the guards went into the city and reported to the chief priests everything that had happened. When the chief priests had met with the elders and devised a plan, they gave the soldiers a large sum of money, telling them, You are to say his disciples came during the night and stole him away while we were asleep. If this report gets to the governor, this will satisfy him, we will satisfy him and keep you out of trouble. So the soldiers took the money and did as they were instructed, and the story has been widely circulated among the Jews to this very day. Then the eleven disciples went to Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus told them to go. When they saw him, they worshipped him, but some doubted. Then Jesus came to them and said, All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Therefore, go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I have commanded you. And surely I am with you always to the very end of the age. The last ten minutes I've been frantically trying to remember some Goethe quote to give you, in case some of you came expecting me to quote from German poets, and I don't want anybody to be disappointed, but I don't have any. What I do have, however, is something that I've learned in the last couple of months, as we've been looking at Matthew every week. Every week we've been looking at something that Matthew, some account by the Gospel of Matthew about the last events of Jesus' life. And now we come to the last one of all, which is the event after his life, the resurrection. And we've seen every week this literary method. The literary method of Matthew is, he doesn't just give you an account of the event, but he always embeds in the event some very significant sayings of Jesus. And the effect is this. Matthew is not just reporting the historic event, and then leaving it up to us as the readers to interpret it as we will. By putting in the words of Jesus into every event, he's actually giving us Jesus' own interpretation of the event. And therefore, when he shows us the Lord's Supper, when he shows us the arrest, when he shows us the crucifixion, when he shows us the resurrection, he always gives us Jesus' own interpretation of what it means. And therefore, we can't just read it and say, well, I think it means this, and someone else says, well, I think it means this. We get Jesus' own interpretation. Now, if that's the literary method, which is actually, I have to admit, just dawned on me after many years of reading Matthew. It just hit me in the last few weeks as we've been doing this study together. If that's the case, where does Jesus explain the meaning of the resurrection? In Matthew 28. The reason this long passage has been read to you is this reason. Over the years, I have, like most people, always thought of the first part of Matthew 28 as an account of the resurrection, and the last part, where Jesus says, all authority is given unto me. Very famous. am with you even to the ends of the world. That's always been called the great commission. That's a word, a phrase, and it's always been sort of split off from the rest of the chapter and understood and studied all by itself. I began to realize as I was looking at this, where does Jesus explain his resurrection in this chapter? Where's his words interpreting the meaning of the resurrection? And the answer is it's those last words. The last words are really not, well, they are telling us a great deal about mission and commission and so forth. But what he's actually doing is he's answering this question. Where is Jesus today? Where is he? And Jesus is explaining where he is. He is four things. He tells us right there. He's by the right hand of the throne of the universe. He's in the ministry of the gospel. He's with the community of his people and he's at the end of the world. Got that? Where is Jesus? He's by the right hand of the throne on high. He's with the ministry of the gospel. Pardon me, he's in the ministry of the gospel. He's with the community of his people and he's at the end of the world. That's the meaning of the resurrection. Because he's raised, that's where he is. Now I know that that's what I just said was very opaque and that's why I'm going to explain it. That's what the sermon is about. So let me tell you what Jesus himself says is the meaning of the resurrection. Where he is now. Four things. First of all, because he's raised from the dead, he says, all authority in heaven on earth has given me. Paul, St. Paul puts it in a very great way. In Ephesians 1, he says this, when God raised him from the dead, he seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms far above all rule and authority, power and dominion. Jesus Christ, when he was raised, he was seated at the right hand. Now what the right hand of the throne and the seat, because we have mostly legislatures and presidents, we don't have thrones around that much anymore except in museums, this might not immediately hit you. But what is he saying when he says, I have been, or when Paul says, when Jesus says, I've been raised to the right hand of the throne. The right hand of the throne, first of all, was the place of, was the place where royal power was executed. In other words, the prime minister was at the right hand. If you had a throne, here was the king, who would be at the right hand? The prime minister, the one who executed the royal power. So it was the place of rule. But secondly, it was also the place of favor. The person who was at the right hand of the throne had the favor of the king. And so it was not only the place of rule, it was the place of favor. It was not just the place where the divine power was executed. It was also the place where the divine power was interceded for. If you were at the right hand and you asked for something, you always got it because you were at the place of favor. Now, what's all that mean? Let me give you a case study. The book of Acts tells us about one of the early Christian leaders. His name was Stephen. And we are told or given a historical account of how he was taken in and tried for heresy because before his faith, he was one of the early Christian leaders. And he was executed. He was stoned to death. And we're told that during the trial and during the accusation and even during the execution, he was a person of enormous calm. The text says his face was as the face of an angel. And the text also says that as he was dying, he was praying for the forgiveness of the people who were killing him. So it was an enormous calm. And yet also, there was a tremendous fearlessness. And if you read the speech that he gives in front of the people who were about to kill him, utterly fearless, tells them the truth, calls a spade a spade, reveals their hypocrisy. Where does he get this enormously calm fearlessness, relaxed courage? Where does he get it? Well, this is what the text tells us. That very same passage that describes his execution says this. Right before he died, it says, Stephen, full of the Holy Spirit, looked up into heaven and he saw the glory of God and Jesus at the right hand of God. Look, he cried, I see heaven open and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God. There it is. Look, first of all, why was he so calm? Why was there such acceptance? Why was Stephen able to handle his imminent death with such calm acceptance? The answer was, he saw Jesus Christ at the place of rule. He saw Jesus Christ at the right hand. He saw that history was not out of control. He saw that his life was not a tale told. that even though he wasn't sure how it was working out, he knew that glory and good was being worked out through what was about to happen. Well, how did he know that? Here's why. Because the one who loved him enough to die for him was now in charge. The one who loved him enough to die for him, he knew was now in charge. He got a vision of Jesus at the right hand of the Father and therefore there was this enormous acceptance. But that's not passivity. He wasn't just resigned. At the same time, as I mentioned, if you read the text, you'll see there was an enormous fearlessness. There was a fierceness. There was a resistance as well. He was not afraid of dying on the other hand at all. He was willing to call them hypocrites and so on. And here's the reason why. Because when Jesus Christ was at the right hand of the Father, that's not just the place of rule, but the place of favor. It's not just the place for the prime minister. It's the place for the defense attorney. And when, in other words, Stephen is on earth and every power, his family, his tribe, his people, the religious authorities, the civil authorities, they're all calling him liar, betrayer, heretic. They were condemning him. You failure, you slime. Him. And he didn't care. Why not? He saw Jesus Christ at the right hand of the Father. Do you know what that means? In 1 John chapter 3, I think it is, 2, excuse me, the book of John, John says this, Beloved, I ask that you do not sin. But if anyone does sin, we have an advocate with the Father, one who speaks to the Father in our defense, Jesus Christ, the perfectly righteous. Here's what Stephen is doing. Stephen says, he looks at all the people. He looks at everybody condemning him. He looks at all their evaluations. He looks at all their assessments. He looks at all their, all of the, all the things that they're saying. And he says, I don't care. I don't care what you think. I do not take my identity from you. I do not take my cues from you. Jesus Christ is in front of the only power, the only throne that counts, and I'm seen in him. He's my advocate. In other words, on the one hand, you don't have, Stephen is not passive saying, oh, well, I can't help it. I'm going to die. That's life. On the other hand, he's not active in the sense of being fierce. I'm going to stop it. I'm going to overcome this. There is this enormous dialectic in his life of absolute calmness and acceptance and absolute resistance and fearlessness. Why? Because he knows where Jesus is. To the degree you grasp that, to the degree you grasp that the one who loved you and died for you, the one who loved you enough to die for you, is at the right hand. He says, all authority has given to me. I'm at the place of rule. I'm at the place of favor. I am your representative. I am your Lord. I am your brother. I am your friend. I am your king. And that's where I am. To the degree you grasp that, to that degree you will walk through life with confidence and with calm fearlessness. Are you doing that? If you don't, you don't understand. If you aren't, you don't understand where he is. The first thing we learn here is, where is he? He's by the right hand of the throne of the universe. Number one. The second thing he tells us about where he is and what the meaning of resurrection is. He says, therefore, go and make disciples. Now, who are the, he's saying, he's saying, when you go and make disciples, I'll be with you. I'm present in the ministry of the gospel. Now, look at, he even goes on a little further and says, what does it mean to make disciples? He says, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Son, the Holy Spirit, and teaching them to obey everything I've told you. And so what he's talking about is when people take the message of Jesus, when people take the words of Jesus, when people take the gospel of Jesus, when the accounts, when the accounts of his life, the accounts of his words, the accounts of his work, when they are expounded or taught or preached or when they're read or when they're listened to or they were meditated upon or they're reflected on, there is a special, special promise here. In Ephesians 2, 17, Paul writes to the Ephesian Christians. And he says, you know how you were converted. Christ came and preached peace to you who were far and you who were near. How can Paul say that? Jesus Christ was never in Ephesus. He was never in Asia Minor. He never went to the places where Paul was writing these letters to the Christians there. How can he say Christ came to you? Listen, one of the things that's great about my kids now, I have three sons and they're all grown up and nobody knows what they look like. So they come to church and you don't know who they are. And sometimes they report. I remember Michael came home one time and said, gee, dad, it was a, somebody obviously had tried to get a friend to come to church for the first time. And they came and, you know, he was. got up and he turned to his friend. He said, well, you know, this really wasn't one of his better sermons. And, and yet I remember that same Sunday, somebody came to me and said, this is one of the best sermons I've ever heard. I started to figure out what's the matter with these people? And, you know, it's so, it's, you know, it sounds, it sounds very complimentary and it's a huge honor when somebody gives a testimony and says, I came to church and I heard the gospel. And yet I have a good friend of mine, a man who I have a lot of respect for. He's a retired minister now named Frank Barker. And I was in a meeting years ago with him in which a number of people were coming in and they were, we were examining people about whether they should go into the ministry. And most of them tried to explain something about their background. And they used to start this way. They said, I went to church growing up, but in that church, I never heard the gospel. Like one after the other came in and said that. I remember at the end of one of them, Frank turned to the rest of us and he says, I want you to know there's some, there's some young people growing up in my church right now. And they come to every, they come to church every week and I preach and I want you to know that they don't hear the gospel either. He says, it's not because I'm not trying. There's something mysterious in the word of God. Jesus Christ says, I'm not like Lincoln. I'm not dead. So that when you read the Gettysburg Address, you get some general understanding of the spirit of Lincoln. I am alive. So that when you read my words and you read the accounts of my life, wherever the gospel is ministered, something mysterious can happen. I will come and meet you in the word. I will come and meet you in that ministry. I am there with those who are seeking to bring the gospel to people. That's the reason why when you get up on a given Sunday and say, that wasn't one of his better ones, that's my fault. That's because of me. But when you get up and say, that was one of the best sermons I ever heard, has nothing to do with me. It's because Jesus has come to you. Jesus was preaching to you. See, that's the reason why somebody can say, that wasn't very good. And he'd probably be right. And somebody else said, that was incredible. What has it got to do? It doesn't have much to do with the preacher. Jesus says, because I'm resurrected, I want you to know that you will not just know me doctrinally. You will not just know me practically. You will not just know me by trying to follow my commandments in the sort of general sense of doing what I want you to do and living, you know, a theologically correct way. There is the possibility, because I'm resurrected from the dead, of spiritual intimacy with the infinite, spiritual intimacy, through my word, through my gospel, through the accounts of my life. Sometimes when I am, I will come to you when you're reading and you're listening, when you're hearing, when you're reflecting, and I'll make myself real to you. And that's how you find him. That's how you find the resurrected Lord. It's in the ministry of the gospel. It's, it's, he comes to you. Do you know what he's, do you know that? By the way, if you're a Christian and you say, I know I'm a Christian, why do you need to know that? Don't you dare just get, you know, run by your Bibles in the morning for five minutes for a little bit of inspiration. Sit down with his word, sit down with the descriptions of who he is, sit down with the scripture and realize that he's, he's present. Realize that he could come to you, realize that he could teach you, he could tell you something, he could show up and he could tell you something right that day that you'll never forget. And if you're not a Christian and you know, you're not a Christian, or you're not sure if you're a Christian, here's the one thing you can, you must not approach this as a totally rational cognitive thing. You should sit down with the scripture and say, I don't know if you're there, but if you're there, will you make yourself real to me? Because you see, if he is there, that's how he'll work. He won't do, he won't strictly work through the cognition. He also works through the heart. So the second thing he says, because I'm resurrected, not only is there the possibility of calm fearlessness, but there is the possibility of spiritual intimacy. Because he is not just at the right hand of the Father, he's also in the ministry of the gospel. Thirdly, the third thing he says, where is he? What does his resurrection mean? The third thing he says, and I'm going to use the old King James translation of the last verse. You know, you read the NIV translation, but you might, some of you might remember the old King James version of that last verse is actually a better one. It goes like this, and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Now, you know that little word, lo? See, you notice in the NIV, it says, and surely, boy is that limp, surely. See, there is a Greek word there that's best translated, behold, edon, behold, which means, look, surprise. And he says, let me tell you this incredible surprise. And he tells us two things here. First of all, he says, I'm with you always. Now, being Americans, and being the radical individualists that we are in our culture, very individualistic. when you and I read that, what do you think of? When you see Jesus say, and lo, I am with you always, what do you think that means? You know how you interpret that? You say, what that means is, he's with me always. So when I walk through Central Park, he's with me, there in Central Park. When I walk along the East River, he's there with me on the East River. And even if I go on to New Jersey, he was with me in New Jersey. He goes with me to New Jersey. And isn't that wonderful that he goes with me no matter where I am? And you know what? That's not what it means. I am very sorry. By the way, he will go with you in New Jersey, but that's not what this is talking about. Okay? And here's what he is saying. It's a plural. It's you plural. This is one of the problems with the English language. We don't have, unless you live in Alabama, we don't have a you plural. What he's actually saying is, and lo, I am with you all. And here's what he's saying. He says, because I'm a risen Lord, you will find me in community. Because I am not a dead person that you learn through historical research, but I'm a living person. Therefore, you best know me in community. In fact, the average American Christian who says, in response to the question, 80% of American Christians say, I can be a strong Christian without going to church. And Jesus Christ says, you're not going to find me all by yourself. There's no better explanation of this, no better explanation of this, than the one given by C.S. Lewis in his famous book, The Four Loves. And Lewis was referring to, one thing he learned, he was part of a group of three very close friends. C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams, three writers, were very, very close friends. And when Charles Williams died, though that was a great tragedy, C.S. Lewis thought at least what that meant was, he wouldn't have to, in a sense, share Ronald, that's what he called J.R.R. Tolkien, he wouldn't have to share Ronald with Charles anymore. He figured now that Charles was gone, even though that was a terrible loss, he'd have more of Ronald. But this is not what happened. And this is what he says in The Four Loves. C.S. Lewis says, quote, In each of my friends, there is something that only some other friend can fully bring out. By myself, I am not large enough to call the whole person into activity. I need other lights than my own to show up all his facets. Now that Charles is dead, far from having more of Ronald, having him to myself, so to speak, I have less of Ronald. I shall never again see Ronald's reaction to a Charles joke again, for example. So we possess, listen to this, So we possess each friend not less but more as the number of those with whom we share him increases. You see that? We possess each friend not less but more as the number of those with whom we share him increases. In this, friendship exhibits a glorious nearness by resemblance to heaven itself. For every soul, seeing Christ in her own way, communicates that unique vision to all the rest, increasing the fruition which each has of God. That is why the seraphim in Isaiah's vision are crying, Holy, Holy, Holy, to one another. See, what Lewis discovered is that he lost the part of Ronald that only Charles brought out when Charles died. Instead of getting more of Ronald, he had less of Ronald. Then he says, now wait a minute, wait a minute. If it's really true that just a normal human being, that no one person can draw another human being out completely into activity, but we need a group of each other to really know one human being well, how much more is that true of Jesus? And here's what that means. Your Christian friends see parts of Jesus Christ that you will never know or love unless you know and love them. Your Christian friends see things in Jesus you'll never see, you'll never know, because of who they are, because of what they've been through, because of their experiences, in a sense, because of where they're standing. You know, take a look at an object. Any place you stand, you see the same object, but you see it differently. It depends on where you're standing. You see a different aspect, a different side. Now, your Christian friends know parts of Jesus Christ that you will never know or love unless you know and love them. Why? Because he's real, because he's risen, because he's a real person. He's not someone that you know through historical research. He says, lo, I am with you all. I am with you in the community of my people. That's where you're going to really find me fully. And so now we see three things. Where is Jesus? Where is the rest of the world? the ministry of the gospel, in the community of his people. And if we understand that, we see we have the potential for enormous fearlessness, calm fearlessness. We have the potential for spiritual intimacy and with the potential for deep relationships with other people who believe in him. But lastly, there's one more thing he says. Where is he? Lo, I am with you always, and the old translation, which is better than this one, to the end of the world. Where is Jesus? Where is the risen Christ? He's at the end of the world. What Jesus Christ is saying is, when the world's history is over, I'll be there. In fact, what he's saying is, because I'm risen from the dead, I am the world's happy ending. The history of the world, what will the ending be? Think of the world's story. Yeah, the world's a story. You have a story. I've got a story. But altogether, the world has a story. What is the world's story? How is it going to end? And Jesus Christ says, I'll tell you how it's going to end. I'll be there. Because I'm risen, I will wipe away every tear. I'll make everything right. J.R. Tolkien, since we're mentioning him, there's a place where Tolkien says, one of the big problems we have in the modern world, is we think of drama as real art, and we think of the fairy tale, the fantasy, the romance, as not true art anymore. See, he says, for example, he uses two words, discatastrophe and eucatastrophe. Discatastrophe, which literally means a bad catastrophe, is a catastrophe that ends in sorrow. Eucatastrophe starts with the words EU, which is a Greek word that means good. Eucatastrophe is a catastrophe that ends in joy. A turn of events. See, life out of death. See, triumph out of what looks like defeat. You know, triumph out of what looks like a complete failure. A eucatastrophe. Now, he says, the essence of drama is tragedy. Discatastrophe. But he says there's a kind of art form, which he calls fairy stories. And he says, that art form is the happy ending. The success beyond hope. And he says it's something, of course, that we now, in the 20th century, insist is only for children. That's never been true. Fairy tales were not for children. Legends were not for children. The old stories were not for children until the 20th century. This is what he says about them. It's very, very interesting. He says, it's the mark of a good fairy story of the highest and most complete kind that however, listen, however wild its events, however fantastic or terrible the adventures, it gives when the turn comes, the eucatastrophe, when the turn comes, it makes you catch your breath. It gives a beat and lifting of the heart near to tears, tears, usually accompanied by tears, as keen as that given by any form of literary art and having a peculiar quality. In the turn, the eucatastrophe, we get a piercing glimpse of joy and heart's desire that for a moment passes outside the frame, rends indeed the very web of the story, and lets a gleam of joy come through. Now, what's he talking about? What he's talking about is fairy stories, fairy tales, romances, fantasies, where everything looks dark and all kinds of discatastrophes are happening, all kinds of terrible things. Things look worse and worse and worse. Things look like there's no hope and all of a sudden, all of a sudden, there's a turn. And all of a sudden, beyond anything we could have imagined, it's all right, happy ending. The 20th century has said that's for children. It punished Steven Spielberg for years because all of his movies had happy endings. And they said, that's for kids. And they wouldn't give him an Oscar until he started making movies that had nasty endings, sad endings, until they ended in discatastrophe. You see? All the stuff that had eucatastrophe, no, no, no, no, that's for children. And here's why. The modern world says, oh, look at that. You know, here you're crying at the end of the Superman story. You're crying at the end of E.T. You're crying at the end of Star Wars. You're crying. It's wonderful. It's incredible to see. But that's for kids. You know why? Because the modern world says, life's not like that. The universe is not like that. But Jesus Christ says, oh, yes, it is. Jesus Christ says, the world is like that. The crosses will be swallowed up. In a resurrection. I stand at the end of the age. I am the world's happy ending. See, there's a place at the end of Lord of the Rings, Tolkien's great novel, in which one of his heroes wakes up. His name is Sam. And Sam looks up, and this is what he said. He says, Gandalf, he says, I thought you were dead. But then I thought I was dead. He's everything. Jesus Christ? Yes, everything sad is going to come untrue. That's what the happy ending is. And Tolkien goes on and says this, the gospels contain the story of a larger kind which embraces all the essence of all fairy stories. The gospels contain the greatest and most complete conceivable eucatastrophe. But this story has entered history and it's true. It's entered the primary world. The birth of Christ is the eucatastrophe of our history. The resurrection is the eucatastrophe of the incarnation, the story of the birth of Christ. This whole story ends in joy. There is no tale, he's talking about the gospel, there's no tale ever told that we would rather find was true and none which so many skeptical men have accepted as true in its own merits. To reject the gospel story leads either to sadness or to wrath. Story, fantasy still go on and one should go on, but the gospel has not abrogated legends, it has hallowed them, especially the happy ending. What difference does that make? If you believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, when you get to the end of any Steven Spielberg movie, when you get to the end of any story, any legend, any great story that just has you filled with tears of joy because of life out of death, because of triumph out of defeat, and there's so many of those stories like that. And remember, he described it. You cry, you weep, you say, yeah. If you believe in the resurrection of Jesus Christ, every time you see one of those stories, it's going to heal your heart a little bit because you're going to say, and this will happen. The end of the world will be like this. The stories are all true. There is a knight who will slay all the dragons, you see. There is a superhero who will save the world. The stories are true. And if the resurrection is true, then every time you get one of those stories, it'll heal your heart. If the resurrection is not true and you don't believe in the resurrection, every single time you start weeping at a happy ending, you're going to have to tell yourself, but the world's not like that. It'll just sour you and sour you and sour you and pollute you and embitter you. And that's your only two choices. Believe in the resurrection and embrace the art of the world and let it heal your heart. Disbelieve in the resurrection and embrace the great art of the world and it'll do, it'll just take you down. Oh, believe it. Where is Jesus? What does the resurrection mean? The resurrection means fearlessness, spiritual intimacy, deep community, and a joy that swallows up all sorrow, a happy ending that swallows up all the crosses that have ever come into your life? Where is Jesus? All authority is given me, he says. Go and make disciples, and lo, I'm with you all, even to the end of the world. Let's pray. Father, the last part of this service, help us to think of what the meaning of the resurrection would be for us if we took it seriously, if we embraced it. We need that calm fearlessness. We need that intimacy with you. We need that depth of community with others. But most of all, we need to know that there's a happy ending that will swallow up all our catastrophes, all our crosses, in the light of a final resurrection, a final resurrection, that at the end of the world, you stand, the resurrected Christ, the world's happy ending. We pray, Father, that you would help us understand that. We pray that you'd help us take that in and change us with it. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
