TITLE: The Steward-Leader and Multiplication
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Steward Leadership (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-steward-leader-and-multiplication/

============================================================

Hey, Justin, could I have the last slide back? I'm really excited about the fact that even though we're a Presbyterian church, we're starting to get a little passion. We love Jesus. Not just Jesus. That's really good. And by the way, keep that up there. And this is actually a very touching song for me, this hymn, because in my church in Virginia, I discovered when I got to the church in 1975, I was there for 10 years almost, that it was a tradition in the church that whenever they did the Lord's Supper, there was a table down front with the elements and with the bread and the cup, but it was always covered with a veil, with a white linen cloth. And before the Lord's Supper was passed out, was administered, every single time it was the tradition of that church to sing that song. So it was a communion hymn for people, the idea of loving God and loving Jesus and all that. Every single time. And as the elders, there were two old elders who would come up and take the linen cloth off and fold it up while they were singing, and then I, the pastor, would come on down and stand behind and get ready. And it was a bigger deal, frankly. It didn't happen quite as often. And it was a kind of table service, and it's an old Presbyterian approach, and you almost had another sermon at the table. They always sang that. And I'd never heard it before. And the song, by the way, it's really weird. Years and years and years they'd been singing that song. It meant, it really was their love song for Jesus. And yet in all those years, nobody could ever, the congregation never came to consensus on how you sang Glittering Crown. The same thing happened to them every time. Glittering Crown. I'll sing with the glittering, whoops, it's over. The line is over. You're going glit, and the next thing you know, suddenly crown on my brow. You know, so, but it was a lovely song, and it's a love song. And all my older people used to love to sing that song every, for years and years and years. You may change the slide now, Gridley. Thank you. All right. Have you got the handout? Let's talk about the topic for tonight. We're going to, I'll give you kind of the talk, and then we'll have a chance for Q&A. Each month, we've been talking about leaders as stewards. A steward is someone, according to the Bible, who is given responsibility over a set of resources and who then cultivates, multiplies, nourishes those resources. And that's why we've said, I put down here, that a steward is not so much a night watchman as a gardener. Now, there's an awful lot of churches in which the tradition of the minister himself and the, you know, all the leaders, the whole idea is sound doctrine and guarding the faith. In other words, an awful lot of people think of leadership in the church as pretty much a night watchman. I don't think that's what the Bible is getting at at all with the idea of steward. And we've been trying to say, it means getting a set of resources and saying, how do I grow this? How do I cultivate this? How do I increase this? That's what it means to be a leader. And every month, we've looked at something different. We've been talking about how leaders are supposed to be taking their spiritual gifts, their non-Christian relationships, their life experiences, including the worst ones, the sufferings, your sufferings, your time, your money. Every single aspect of your life is seen as a field or a garden in which you're to be growing the fruit of the Spirit and growing new Christians and growing the Christian community and so on. Tonight, we're going to look at a new, one more resource at least. And that resource is leaders themselves. The ultimate way to multiply ministry is to multiply ministry multipliers. The ultimate way to cultivate ministry is to cultivate ministry cultivators. Okay? You can quote me on that. In other words, the ultimate way to really, really be a great Christian leader is to raise up other Christian leaders. This is not at all easy, and it doesn't come natural. And that's what I want to talk about in this third paragraph. I'm a leader, but I'm not a very good leader of leaders. I have to work very hard to be a leader of leaders. What am I talking about? My first executive pastor, Dick Kaufman, used to have a sort of set of... four kinds of people in a church. Now, Dick was a very sweet man, so he never called it quite this. The first is the drones. Another way to put it is consumers. These are people who don't do any work. They only come and they receive, but they don't do anything. They receive only. That's classification one. So first of all, you have drones or consumers. The second classification you have is workers. Workers, people who do the work. They see a job to be done and they do it. They volunteer. They participate. And there's many people who are real workers. They're not just workers. We've got people at Redeemer who are worker bees. They are faithful and they're there and they're diligent and they get a lot of work done. But as Dick would point out, the problem with people who are just workers is, first of all, there's lots and lots and lots of jobs that will never get done with just an individual. You need a group. And there's an awful lot of jobs that can get done by one person but can be done much, much better on a much better scale, quality and quantity by a group. And that's why level three is a leader. And a leader is a person who sees a job to be done but is able to get people together to do the job. And we'll talk about this in just a second. A leader is someone who finds a task and can enlist people to the task and to form them into a group that gets the task done with everybody doing each person's job and making sure that they get the job done and so on. That's a leader and that's very hard to be a leader. I mean, not everybody can be a leader. So there's drones, there's workers, there's leaders of workers, people who know how to get the workers together to do the job. But the highest level, the most fruitful kind of person in a church is what Dick would call the leader of leaders. And a leader of leaders is a multitasker who is also a leader of workers. And of course, by definition, also a worker. If you're a leader, you're a worker, okay? Not all workers are leaders, but all leaders are workers. And not all leaders of workers are leaders of leaders, but all leaders of leaders are leaders of workers. Why? Because a leader of leaders is someone who is getting a group of people to do a job but at the very same time is training other people to take his or her position. Finding other people who could also lead this group. Finding other people who could also lead this task. At the same time you're doing it with a group of people, you're looking around for people who can replace you. And that isn't the sort of thing that everybody's very good at. It's hard enough to be a leader. It's nothing to be a leader of leaders. Some of you actually are naturally even at that. But most of us aren't. And we're going to have to work at it. And that's one of the reasons why we're talking about it tonight, to try to get you more aware, at least the first step of getting aware of what that means. You know, the classic example, since so many of you are small group leaders, not all of you are, but so many are, the classic example is that every single leader of a small group ought to be always on the lookout for, at least on the lookout for an apprentice or somebody who's a co-leader or someone who's an assistant leader or someone who's a potential leader. You should at least be actively looking at your group to find somebody. And more likely, you ought to have somebody who you've basically tapped and who've used, you have said, well, let's do this together or let me, please do it some week before I leave because one of the weeks I'm going to be gone, I want you to do it yourself. And that's, I mean, actually all small group leaders ought to be leaders of leaders, though. Some people do it naturally and a lot of us don't do it very naturally. In a lot of groups it doesn't happen. But we're never going to be the church we ought to be unless every single small group leader is apprenticing and seeking out and raising up new leaders. It's got to happen. It's crucial. It's a difference between really a good church and a great church, I would say. All right, now, but it's not just small group leaders. I'm after all of us. I'm after me. I'm after everybody. How do you do that? Well, here's my suggestion, three things. First of all, number one is going to be you have to know what leaders do. If you're going to raise a leader up, you have to know what leaders do. Secondly, you have to know what leaders are. And thirdly, you have to understand how leaders actually do develop. Once you've identified a person as a leader, how do you help them become a leader? How do you help them grow into leadership? So, what leaders do, know that. Secondly, what leaders are, know that. And thirdly, how leaders grow and develop. Okay? Point one, what leaders do. Here's the definition of leadership. And you know, even though everybody says it differently, I'm really confident of this. Here's the reason why. When I was teaching at Westminster Seminary, I had to teach a course in leadership. And so I went out and I read every single book I could, Christian, non-Christian, every book. And you know what was amazing to me was that even though every single consultant clearly had a brand, these steps their own way so they could charge for them. They all had different names. same thing. And that is, there's essentially, and I'm not saying everybody said there was three parts to leadership, because some people said there were four, but it always boiled down to this. A leader is someone who first enlists to a vision, forms alignment around that vision of a group of people, and then maintains commitment to that vision until it gets done. If you can do that, if you do that, you're a leader. First of all, enlist to a vision means the first thing you do is you get others interested, you get others motivated. You're able to get people to come with you. In fact, I remember, I read one book, and I can't remember where, this is so long ago, so in fact, I may have made this up myself, but I doubt it. I'm pretty sure I read it. But somebody said after reading thousands of definitions of leadership, here's the definition, a leader is someone who gets people to follow you. If you can get people to follow you, you're a leader. If you can't get people to follow you, you're not. There we go. But actually, it's only step one, frankly, I think. And that is, step one is, you've got to say, let's do this, and get other people to say, okay, let's do it. So you have to enlist to a vision. Get people interested in the task. Motivate them, number one. Number two, the next thing is you actually have to get the right people. You say, I want you and you and you to this, and I want you to do this part, and I want you to do this part, it means getting alignment and getting people to agree how they're going to get there. In a sense, enlist means here's where we're going, and forming alignment is, and here's how we're going to get to there. It means very often creating a unified team. It means filling the roles necessary to get the job done. It means getting people into the right roles. That's part two. Part three is keeping things going until the job's done. One, maintaining commitment, keeping people working harmoniously and efficiently together over a long period of time, making sure people get to their benchmarks, make sure people get it done in the deadline, and so on. Now, having said that, again, my friend Dick Hoffman, who really taught me an awful lot about leadership, said that there's almost nobody on the face of the earth that's equally good at all three of these. Even though you're not a leader unless you're doing all three, even the simplest task, basically, of leadership, even if it just means calling people up and getting them to show up at a certain place and making sure everybody does what they're supposed to do, and then everybody gets there and gets it done and then goes home, even if it's something like that, you have to do all three of these things. But nobody's good at all three equally. Here's why. Look at this paragraph. Some of us are better at motivating people, which means enlisting them, than we are at the detail work of following up on people. See, some people are great at vision setting, but we really hate the details of following up and making sure everybody gets the job done. Some people, on the other hand, are much better at recognizing the right person for the job. They say, that's exactly the right person for the job. And they're better at that than they are selling the person. See, some people are great at motivating people. Oh, you want to come and do this, but very often you're a good vision caster, but you're not very good at actually assessing whether this is the right person for the job at all. Other people are good at assessing whether that person is good for the job, but they're not very good at motivating to do it. Some people, for example, are better at casting a big vision than they are at the patient constant peacemaking. Because I'll tell you, if you want to get a job done, maintaining commitment means peacemaking. Constantly dealing with ruffled feathers. Constantly dealing with discouragement. Constantly kind of helping people buck up and get out of each other's hair and stop keeping them from stepping on each other's toes. Having said that, nobody's good at all three. Everybody's got to do all three to some degree or another to be a leader. And when you actually look at somebody, you need to find somebody who can motivate other people and who have a certain amount of wisdom about how things get done and seem to be responsible. I'll get to that in a second. And this is what a leader is. Now, admittedly, it's one thing to ask somebody to be the leader of a small group versus somebody being a staff person leading a whole ministry of other full-time staff people. I mean, we're talking about vastly different levels of complexity here, and yet I believe all leadership tasks have those three parts. So that's the first thing you have to see, what leaders do. Now, the second thing. How do you identify a person as a leader? Especially, how can you be sure if the person isn't in a leader role right now? You know, they're just coming to your small group. How do you know? Well, obviously, as I'm going to show you under point three, the only way to really know whether a person is a leader is to try them out. But how do you even know who to try out? And I suggest that there's three things you've got to look for when you're trying to recruit somebody to be a leader. Three things. Now, here's what they are. Next page? I don't know whether you have the same... What's at the top of your second page? Maturity? No? No? No? No? to the place where it talks about maturity of Christian character. You see that? All right, here we go. There's three things you ought to be looking for in a person who might be a leader. The most important thing by far, I want to have here, is Christian maturity. Character is more important than skill. Oh, my goodness. See, listen. There are some people who are not real good at vision casting. But if they're really humble, godly people, really humble and godly, they're attractive enough that people will probably follow them, okay? There are some people who are not real organized. But if they're humble and godly, they'll probably have enough wisdom not to make major errors. A person with tremendous skills but who has got major flaws in wisdom, they're proud and abrasive rather than kind and gentle. A person with skills without character, stay away. It's so tempting because when you see somebody who's got these major character flaws, clearly they're not growing much in grace. But they've got, you know, they're dynamic or they're incredibly organized or they're incredibly skillful in this or that area. Be careful. Because the weird thing about it is the character can compensate for a lack of gift in a certain area. Like I just said, a godly person will be attractive even if they're not this dynamic vision caster. You ever notice that? There's some people who are just not dynamic and they shouldn't be leaders, but they're so sweet in Jesus that people still, you know, follow them. So strong character can compensate for certain weak skills sometimes. But I'll tell you one thing is that strong skills cannot compensate for lack of character. It just doesn't work the other way around. So here's four areas that I look for if I'm trying to figure out is this a person who maybe has enough maturity of character to lead. Again, we're thinking of so many different possibilities in a way this is hard to do. You think everything from volunteer, you know, anyway. But if you're thinking about an usher captain or a small group leader or as different as they are, here's what I look for. Self-management disciplines. See where I am now? Self-management disciplines mean are these people who just tend to get things done on time? They're not totally controlled by outside circumstances. If you have a person who always seems to be controlled by outside circumstances, anything that comes up and they're late, anything that comes up and they miss, getting work done on time when you ask them to do something, keeping commitments, being fairly consistent, being pretty honest, that's self-management disciplines. Secondly, interpersonal disciplines. Now, very often, by the way, people who are great at the first one are terrible at the second one, and that's a character flaw or vice versa. Interpersonal disciplines, sensitive to others, gentle when confronting, a good listener, teachable, patient, not controlling. Many times, people who are good at the interpersonal disciplines are poor at self-management. And sometimes people who are really good at self-management are, you know, abrasive. Number three, gospel disciplines. And that is the kind of character that you've heard us talk about in the sermons for forever. It means people who use the gospel in their hearts so that there's a graciousness rather than a lot of anger, that they're quick to repent, quick to admit when they're wrong instead of getting real defensive, grateful and joyous and not, I mean, everybody's going to get down, but not chronically despondent, you know, not chronically self-pitying. Those are gospel issues. And then lastly, spiritual disciplines. You want to see somebody who seems to know something about the Bible, perhaps. Perhaps they're not total neophytes, total rookies. Now, again, it depends on the job, no doubt about it. Consistent in prayer and Bible study, handling temptation. For example, if you've got a person who's not speaking to somebody else, whether they come to this church or not, they don't want to talk to that person, I want nothing to do with that person. Well, you know, that's a lack of understanding of one of the spiritual disciplines, which is reconciled relationships and good reputation with those inside and outside the church. And in some ways in New York, it almost doesn't, it hardly, you can have a bad reputation, but I have to say it's a big difference here as opposed to other places where there's so much mobility that, you know, nobody knows anybody. Nevertheless, sometimes it can be an issue. That's maturity of character. The second thing you're looking for is aptness of gifts and skills. Again, there are so many different options we're talking about here that, I mean, from being on the diaconate to being an elder to being a small group leader to being an usher captain to, you know, there's so many different options. You have to say, does this person seem like they might have the skills? this is very important. If a person is going to be, that's one of the reasons why we do this thing on, you know, the first Monday, the leaders at seven. If a person is going to be a leader at any level at Redeemer, there has to be some idea about what makes Redeemer distinct. Some idea of what the revision is, how gospel-driven it is, how positive it is about the city, how being committed to the fact that this is a church not just for ourselves, not just to make us happy, but to reach out to the whole city and so forth. So if you see a person of maturity character, maybe with the gifts and skills that would fit the job that you're thinking about, and committed to the Redeemer vision, give them a shot. Okay? That's all it takes, but it's really important. And then lastly, now, give them a shot. This is the last thing I'll say, and then we'll take questions. How do you give people a shot? And now this is a new one on me. This is something I just read in a couple of books in the last year or so, but I've been checking this out and also consulting my memory of many years of seeing this happen. I think this is absolutely right. If you want a person who's got potential leadership skills to develop into a real leader, you have to bring to bear three things on them. Three things have to be brought to bear. If only two of them, it won't work. They need a challenging situation, lots of input and evaluation of how they're doing, and lots of love and encouragement and support fussing over them. They need a challenging situation, number one. That means you've got to put them in a situation that stretches them. Not too much, not too little. Developing leaders need to be put into practical situations where the job is being done, where they can at least observe it, and where they're perhaps participating or doing some of it. Their responsibilities should be neither too hard nor too easy. That's the crucial. It's got to be challenging. The task should stretch them and show them that they need to grow, what they need to grow in, or that they need to grow. It should excite them and humble them but not discourage them, and that's not that easy to do. On the other hand, again, with small group leading, it's simple. You co-lead with them or something like that, and one time you say, you lead the group tonight. But in a whole lot of other areas, it's not as easy. Or even to move people up, you just have to find a challenging situation, number one. Number two, then you have to give them input and evaluation. Input without being in a challenging situation is abstract and sterile. But doing the work without lots and lots of input will discourage the person, or maybe even confirm them in bad habits because you don't catch them doing it wrong. There has to be lots of input. And, boy, I'll tell you, what came home to me, no offense to anybody here, but I remember when I was in the mid-'80s when I was teaching courses, you know, on preaching and on, you know, teaching courses at seminary, there was a period of time in which the accreditors allowed you, if you were teaching a course on preaching or counseling or something like that, they allowed you to put MDiv students and DMIN students in the same course. Now, an MDiv student was a person training for the ministry and who may have had some ministry experience but basically had not been in the pastoral ministry yet. An MDiv student, Master of Divinity. We were allowed to put into the same course, into the same room, DMIN students, which is a doctor of ministry, and a doctor of ministry was a person who had been in the ministry full-time for at least five years, in many cases many years more. And I'll tell you why the accreditors made us stop, but it was for various reasons that you might say the educational needs of the two groups were too different and you could meet both their needs in the same class and it makes sense. But when I did teach it, it was incredibly illuminating. I'd be saying the very same thing, and the MDiv students would ask questions that were radically different than the questions that the DMIN students asked. And honestly, again, with all due respect, I had been in the ministry for a lot of years and the DMIN students were asking the right questions. They were saying, well, how does that work and how does that, I mean, they were immediately integrating it. How does this actually help in the way you deal with people? And the MDiv students were always going off on tangents. They were always fighting sorts of, you know, kind of theological battles. You mean this person's right and not this person, Dr. Keller? Is that it? In other words, they immediately wanted to put people in categories where the DMIN students were trying to figure out how does this actually affect the way in which people are living out their lives? And it was very clear that the DMIN students were in challenging situations and they were hearing what I was teaching as input. And as a result, they were growing like crazy, whereas the MDiv students were actually not in a challenging situation in many cases, or at least what I was saying wasn't directly applicable to their challenging situations. And as a result, it was for them, I have to say, the experience was abstract and sterile. Thank you. there has to be input and evaluation, and lastly, there's got to be lots and lots of tender, loving care. Lots of encouragement, lots of love, lots of support, lots of coming alongside saying you're really doing a great job, or, well, it didn't go very well, but here's what was good about that. There's got to be lots of that. Otherwise, the person just sinks. That's what leaders do. That's what potential leaders look like. And that's how potential leaders can become real leaders. And if you're always thinking about doing that along with everything else you're doing, it's going to make this a great church. It's already a great church. We'll make it a greater church. Questions. You give the questions, and I give the responses. Which is not necessarily an answer. I might just say, oh. Okay. Who wants to talk? We have about 15 minutes. Over here. Thank you. Nice form. I believe there's a place in the scriptures that says that not many should aspire to be teachers and that teachers will be held to a higher level of accountability. Do you feel that that warning applies to Bible study leaders? And if so, how does that impact the way that we encourage people to become leaders or small group leaders? Well, you don't let the potential leaders see that passage until after they've signed up. And then you say, now listen here. Okay. Yes. I mean, it really, there's another passage. You're thinking about James chapter 3 where it says teachers will be held to a higher standard. And don't let many of you be teachers because, you know, God's going to judge you by that. But, you know, there's other places where it says that, you know, the more God gives you, the more responsible you are for it. And it's too late in a way. You know, for example, if you were raised by a good family and you had loving parents, even if they weren't Christians, and you're actually a fairly whole and relatively well-adjusted person, you look around at people who had awful family lives and have all kinds of problems, and so they're in and out of depression, there are all kinds of problems, you're already more responsible. God holds you more responsible for every blessing he's ever given you. So I would say I have a sermon on that. I haven't really preached in a long time. I probably, I don't know. It's not an easy sermon to hear. But the answer is yes, and so you do have to let people know that when you're asking them in the leadership that there is a responsibility. But see, if they have the gifts, if they've got the maturity, they have the gifts, if they've got the ability to do leader roles, they'll be held, I think, responsible whether they take it up or not. See, that's what you can say if somebody asks. If you say, no, no, no, I don't want the responsibility, well, God won't be very pleased with that. You know, he's given you the gifts. Use them. On the other hand, if you take it up, then you do have to see that you are being held responsible. I mean, in the context of all the stuff we say about grace, you should be able to handle it. All the stuff we say about grace. But, yes, the fact is, it's not just Bible teachers, but small group leaders and almost any kind of leadership in the church. God holds you responsible for what he's given you. Somebody else? Okay. Hi. How do you go about, like, soliciting input and evaluation? Okay, now, wait a minute. Say. How do you go about soliciting input and evaluation? Now, solicit, oh, you mean for you? Yeah, like from. If you're trying to get mentored, you mean? Yeah, from, like, your group leaders or. That's actually a great question. I mean, obviously, it's a little hard to answer because you're asking it. No, you know, I'm not faulting you in the abstract. Depends on what you're doing. I would say at Redeemer, if you're doing something that is part of Redeemer's ministry in any way, you should be able to ask for evaluation. You just have to go up. You know, there might be a volunteer who's overseeing you, and there might be a staff person over the volunteer, or maybe the staff person's over you. Look up and say, I need more input and evaluation than I'm getting. Look, I mean, I'm not trying to dump on my staff. My staff has got to give it to them, but I have not been very good at it over the years either. I started out my lecture as a confessing that I'm a leader of workers, but I'm not a very good leader of leaders. And in order to make the person, quote-unquote, above you, let's just say you're a student. you or another volunteer above you, in order to make the people above you better leaders of leaders, in some cases you might say, hey, I need more mentoring than I'm getting. And I'm a big guy. So inside the church, at least, there should always be somebody, you know, kind of up the line that you can go to. Now, they may say, oh, I'm snowed right now. I can't do one more thing. And so you might say, fine, when can you do it? But I think that's what should be done. But then be gentle, you know, with people because we are thin. In other words, as far as I know, the staff here isn't particularly leveraged. The volunteers have horrible New York City jobs that are way, way, way – we talked about this before – the hours that New York City jobs require of you is ridiculous. So if you are a volunteer at Redeemer, you don't have much – you don't have much margin. And if you're a staff person, you don't have a great deal of help. You're doing an awful lot. There's such opportunities. So on the one hand, push gently in a nonjudgmental way and say, I'm in a challenging situation, but I'm not getting the input. I really want it. You know, do it lovingly without being a Pharisee about it. Don't be judgmental about it, but do it. Don't just feel sorry for yourself and keep your mouth shut. Okay, somebody else? Make sure that you – you wait until Justin is as far away from you as possible before you raise your hand. Yes, go ahead. As a fellowship group leader, when you're looking for potential future leaders, how much should potential for transformation within the leadership context? So, you know, if they not necessarily have the best of gospel disciplines or the best of spiritual disciplines, but you can see that they're trying and then that there's potential for them to be transformed as a leader while they're undergoing leadership, how much should that take, you know, be weighed? Some. That's an awfully – maybe that's a wishy-washy answer. It depends a bit on the job, but I have always believed that you can bring people along and even give them leadership jobs knowing that they still have a lot of growing to do. I don't know. People have different philosophies. Here's what I – for example, you can get ten things done for God, every one of them done just right, or you can get 50 things done for God, but six of them won't get right, won't be done right. They'll probably be done problematic or somebody – you know, it won't happen just right or somebody will complain or – okay, now you tell me. Would you rather do ten things for God, every one of them just right, or 50 things for God and say six of them don't really go well and there's some problems or some egg on your face? There's a kind of person who will say, I would much rather do 44 things for God, even though I'll get a little bit of flack and there'll be a couple of things that don't go well, than only ten things for God. Other people will say, no, no, no, what's really – you must never – nothing must go wrong. Nothing. See, now here you have temperament. And I'm not sure one of those temperaments is necessarily the right one. You know, in all the temperament tests and all that, there's a kind of person that feels like, I've got to do everything just right, I can't let anything go wrong, even if it means doing less for God, that's – God will be happier, and I will be happier, which is the real point, if there's nothing wrong. Now, see, if you start – if you say, I will only bring on a person into leadership if they're already just – they've got all those things slant down. I'm not going to bring anybody into leadership unless I really, really – they're already a total package. You won't get many leaders. You know, you'll get ten things done for God instead of forty-four. So I'm – now, I'm – I tend to be the person who says, let's do the forty-four and have some egg on the face. By the way, you'll also never get married, but that's another subject. Tim, while I pass this – Whoa! Yes. While I pass this over, what's your – Beware perfectionism in mate-seeking. But anyway, that's another subject. Well, you said, wait a minute, can we go on that subject a little bit more? That's another evening. Okay. What's your advice for leaders or people who want to step up as leaders, but you have to tell them they're not ready? Okay, that's a little – that's – yeah. Yeah, well, there's obviously two – asked. One is you haven't been noticed and one is you have been. And there's one way to find out, which it is, and that is to volunteer, to speak up and to, we have found over the years that the larger the church, the harder it is to recruit leaders because in a small church, I think I talked about this some other, did I not? In a small church, the person who, everybody knows everybody, so you know who's good and who's not. And there's almost no chance that you weren't noticed. If you haven't been asked to be a leader, you haven't been asked to be a leader because of some flaw in one of these areas that people know about. And therefore, in a smaller church, then if you're not being tapped, then it's probably not much, you're probably just going to rock the boat if, you know, if you say, no, I want to be a leader. Now, in that situation, somebody pastor has to sit down and say, let me tell you why we haven't, you know, and you could really change a person's life if very lovingly, and really, really, and I mean lovingly, say here's why people aren't letting you be a leader because of this. That happens in a small church. In a large church, the chances of you just not being tapped are really good because you just really weren't noticed, in which case you ought to do what you can. You ought to, you know, talk to staff people. You ought to talk. And now, if it turns out, see, in a church like Redeemer, a person has put me, you know, let me do something, you'll have to be, the testing, the testing period is much more important too. In a smaller church, everybody knows everybody. You know what people are good at, what they're bad at. If you're not being asked to be a leader, it's because your flaws are noticed. If you are being asked to be a leader, everybody knows what you're good at. But in a situation like this, you've got to speak up. You might not be noticed. And then you also have to be willing to be held a little bit at arm's length and put on probation. So there's a couple things. Ah, yeah, go ahead, Karen. Hi. One of the traps I think we fall into in leadership development is not necessarily looking for leaders until we're desperately in need of them rather than trying to identify where each person in our group stands and what's the next step that we can challenge them to, for lack of better words, or bring them along in. And so that's one thing. And then I'm also wondering, as you mentioned, we are busy, staff and volunteers. I'm wondering, are there proactive ways that we can partner together in strategies for leadership development, identifying leaders, developing them, not just for fellowship group leaders, but also for other positions like deacons and elders in our church where we continually need leaders? Sure, now you say, by the way, either my aging ears or else I just don't hear as well as you do out front. But you're saying, should we be doing some kind of middle? I'm wondering if there's proactive strategies for finding leaders on all levels, from fellowship group leader all the way up to deacons and elders. Yes. Finding and developing. Right. A cattle call, which is how almost all churches say, we need people to come do this. Studies have shown that in small churches and large churches, they're almost meaningless. And yet, with a church as big as Redeemer, if you do a cattle call and say, we need people to volunteer to do this. By the way, we had a really pretty good response, did we not, on the 5 o'clock service. And that was a cattle call. But it was, you know what, here's the problem. It was my cattle call. And I took like three to five minutes at every service. Remember that, some of you? And I never do that. In fact, we couldn't possibly do it that way because I'm the one person everybody thinks they know. Everybody thinks they know me. So in a small church, if somebody comes to you and asks you to do something and you know that person, you're much more likely to say yes because you feel a little pressure and you feel also even a little flattered. It's easy to say no to someone who's recruiting you who's a stranger. It's hard to say no to somebody who's recruiting you who's a friend. I'm the only person that can do that cattle call and I can't possibly do it all the time. So the answer is, apart from those kinds of extreme situations, Karen's right. We ought to be more proactive. Now, there's ways of doing that and probably every one of your departments ought to ask about that. Now, you know, it means, for example, inviting people in who you're at. For example, a person might just say, we'd like you to get together one evening. ministry because some of you might be interested in it and we may come to you as individuals later on and talk to you about it, but we just want to introduce you to it. That's being proactive. You know, I suppose, I mean, I suppose the deacons and deaconesses could get together and everybody would come up with two names and twice a year they'd just invite people and say, you know, look, in the future we might come to you and ask you to stand election, but what we're going to do is we're going to introduce the whole ministry to you. And so they have 50 people that they've invited during the year and they've talked to and they've just schmoozed them. They've just loved them. They've just told them about the ministry and they say there's no obligation if you come to this meeting. And we may come back to you afterwards and talk to you. And then you have to make a decision, but there's no decision, no ask after the meeting, that sort of thing. All the ministries might want to be proactive like that, creating their own little pools of people out of which they can draw people. That is probably important in a big church like ours. I can do, pardon me, last question. I've heard different answers to this question as of late, and I just wanted to see where we're at with it. As far as fellowship group leaders being members or working towards membership, where are we with that, number one? Number two, if that's not a qualification, how do we deal with the consequences of discipline and needing to? It is a qualification. Is that right, small group leaders? Leaders, small group leaders are to be members or, you know, we're not so legalistic if a person says, well, I'm going to be received, you know, I'm in the process, I'm going to be received, you know. We're not legalistic, but they either are members or they have to be, yeah, they're ready to become members for that very reason. There's really no, and you know, if you think about church discipline, admonishment, ultimately that's just spiritual anyway. And yet, it's important. So that's the answer to that. Okay. David is going to come back. If we, there was the slide that was for the Holy Week services, could we throw that back up just as a reminder? There is no.
