TITLE: The First Sermon
SCRIPTURE: Acts 2:12-39
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Acts: The Gospel in the City
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-first-sermon/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture comes from the book of Acts, chapter 2, verses 12 through 39. Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, what does this mean? Some, however, made fun of them and said, they have had too much wine. Then Peter stood up with the eleven, raised his voice, and addressed the crowd. Fellow Jews and all of you who live in Jerusalem, let me explain this to you. Listen carefully to what I say. These men are not drunk, as you suppose. It's only nine in the morning. No, this is what was spoken by the prophet Joel. In the last days, God says, I will pour out my spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams. Even on my servants, both men and women, I will pour out my spirit in those days, and they will prophesy. I will show wonders in the heaven above, and signs on the earth below, blood and fire and billows of smoke. The sun will be turned to darkness and the moon to blood before the coming of the great and glorious day of the Lord. And everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved. Men of Israel, listen to this. Jesus of Nazareth was a man accredited by God to you by miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did among you through him, as you yourselves know. This man was handed over to you by God's set purpose and foreknowledge, and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross. But God raised him from the dead, freeing him from the agony of death, because it was impossible for death to keep its hold on him. David said about him, I saw the Lord always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken. Therefore, my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices. My body also will live in hope, because you will not abandon me to the grave, nor will you let your holy ones see decay. You have made known to me the paths of life. You will fill me with joy in your presence. Brothers, I can tell you confidently that the patriarch David died and was buried, and his tomb is here to this day. But he was a prophet and knew that God had promised him an oath, on oath, that he would place one of his descendants on his throne. Seeing what was ahead, he spoke of the resurrection of the Christ, that he was not abandoned to the grave, nor did his body see decay. God has raised this Jesus to life, and we are all witnesses of the fact. Exalted to the right hand of God, he has received from the Father the promised Holy Spirit, and has poured out what you now see and hear. For David did not ascend to heaven, and yet he said, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet. Therefore, let all Israel be assured of this. God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ. When the people heard this, they were cut to the heart and said to Peter and the other apostles, Brothers, what shall we do? Peter replied, Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. The promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off, for all whom the Lord our God will call. The word of the Lord. Before I get into the text, the sermon, at the beginning of December every year, as some of you know, I do a little bit of a personal exhortation to people to remember Redeemer in their year-end giving. So that's what I'm doing right now. As many of you know, Center City Churches in particular get about, oh, 30% of all of their annual income in November and December, and therefore it is absolutely crucial that everybody be very deliberate and very conscious, that you think about what you intend to give to Redeemer in 2012, and you do it. However, this year, I'd like to point out a couple things that I'd like you to keep in mind. There's a trend. The last few years, there's been a trend that I would like you to partner with me to reverse. In the last few years, during the time in which Redeemer has gone from 3,900 people coming to church, 19% of which were members, to now 5,200 people coming to church, 40% of which are members, during that time, there's fewer people giving to Redeemer at all in a year. Did you know that? In other words, as our membership has grown 30% or 40%, as our attendance has grown 20% or 30%, during that time, the number of people who give us anything at all has gone down. percent more people come, but only 8 percent increase in growth. So the trend continues. Now, there are three reasons for this trend, and let's call them the good, the bad, and the ugly. Okay? There's a good reason, a bad reason, and the ugly. The good reason is that there's a lot more going on in the city than there was 23 years ago. There's more churches, there's more ministries, there's more non-profits getting started, there's more stuff that needs your giving. And that's good, because you should give to them. And that's a good reason why, one of the reasons why not as many people are giving to Redeemer. But then there's a bad reason, or I should say there's bad reasoning, and here's what I mean by that. But there's a tendency for people to come to a large church and say, oh, you don't really need my giving. I'll go over here, the smaller and really good ministry or initiative needs my giving more than you do. You're a very big church, you don't need my giving. Now, that's bad reasoning. Smaller ministries need a smaller number of givers, and medium-sized ministries need a medium number of givers, and bigger ministries need a bigger number of givers. So the point is that we all need the givers, and we need it every bit as much as a smaller ministry does. I mean, it's not a good thing that more people come, more people join, and fewer people actually give anything in a year. So it's not good reasoning. It's bad reasoning to say, well, you don't really need my money. Then there's the ugly. And here I'm not thinking about Redeemer exactly. From what I can tell, most New York City Christians do not come close to the biblical rule of thumb for proportionate giving, which is about 10%, a tithe. The Bible calls believers to give about 10% of their income away to various causes in a year. That's just a rule of thumb. And you know, if you've been around at all, you know I have never, ever, as the pastor Redeemer ever said to people, you need to give all of your tithes to Redeemer. I've never said that, but I know this, that if many or most New York City Christians got even close to a tithe, there'd be more money than Redeemer and the non-profits and all the ministries, there'd be more money than we would know what to do with. But there isn't, because we aren't. And so that's the good, and there's the bad, and the ugly. And on the other hand, let me say one more thing. This is probably the most exciting year I've experienced at Redeemer since the early years. In this year, in the last 12 months, we've gone from five to eight services. We've opened a new, our first new ministry center on the west side. We've opened a downtown congregation with over 1,000 people coming. And a couple weeks ago, we noticed, for example, there were 6,000 people at the services of Redeemer on a Sunday, and a year before, there'd been 5,000, lots of new people coming. But even more importantly, there's new leaders, there's new pastors, there's new preachers, there's a new generation of lay leaders. And across the board, I'm hearing people say, there's better pastoral care, there's better connection to the neighborhood, there's better community, there's better discipleship, and all that stuff. And that means that there's a future for Redeemer, and it's incredibly exciting. But that approach, we call it the collegiate model, that approach that everybody says, man, that's the way to go, is more expensive. If all 6,000 people or so were coming together at Hunter College every Sunday, and I was preaching to all of y'all, all in, you know, four services, you wouldn't need the rent here, you wouldn't need, you know, the expense of this 83rd Street, you wouldn't need extra leaders. It would be far, far less expensive. But it would be deadly, because then Redeemer would have no future. And everybody knows this is the right way to go, and yet it's more expensive. And therefore, and I wrote this down, here's my summary point, I wrote this down to make sure I get it just right. The number of people giving the Redeemer is down, yet just as the need to fund the exciting model laying the groundwork for the future is up. So, if you come here, if you get nurture from here, if you get nourishment from here, if you come here with any regularity, to some degree you should support it financially. In other words, if you trust us spiritually, you should support us financially. And here's what I suggest you do. Be honest about the percentage of money, if your income you give away in a year. Then, make a commitment to get aggressively toward 10%. You can't do it overnight, but over the next two or three years. Then decide what sacrifices you're going to make to do that. And then do it. Thank you for putting up with this announcement. Thank you for bearing with my exhortation. Now, the passage. This is the first, what you heard read, was the first Christian. by Peter. I wanted you to hear the whole thing, and you did. But we only have time to look at maybe the last four verses to try to get an idea of what we can learn from this first sermon. I want to look at verses 36, 37, 38, 39, and here's what I want you to see. In a sense, when you get to the end of the sermon, you have a little compendium on how to become a Christian. What does it mean to be a Christian? How do you become a Christian? There it is. And there's four things. Mind, grace, heart, life. And there you have it. In verse 36, we learn about mind and about grace. In verse 37, about heart. And about 38 and 39, we learn about life. What does it mean to become a Christian? First of all, mind. Verse 36 says this. Therefore, this is the summary. This is the bottom line. This is the thesis statement. This is the conclusion of this first sermon, first Christian sermon in history. Therefore, let all Israel be assured of this. God has made this Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Christ. Now, this is a remarkable thesis statement. First of all, keep this in mind. Peter is talking to people who were Jewish. They're Jews who had come from all over the world to Jerusalem back during the time of the high holy days. There's Passover, there's Pentecost, there's tabernacles. So Jerusalem would swell double, triple its size during this period of time. People came from all over. So these are people who believe the Old Testament, we call it, the Hebrew Scriptures. They believed it was authoritative. And what Peter does in this long, we don't have the time to look into it, in this sermon is he takes people who assume the authority of this Hebrew Scriptures. And what he says is, look at what David says in Psalm 16. He couldn't just be referring to himself. Look at what David says in Psalm 110. When he's king, he's talking about the Lord, that's Lord God, speaking to my Lord. Well, who in the world could God, to David's Lord be when he was king? What human being? Who could he be talking about? And what he's actually doing here is making a remarkable, strong, brilliant case that the Hebrew Scriptures prove, that's why he says, let all Israel be assured of this, that God has made just Jesus, whom you crucified, both Lord and Messiah, Christ. Now, he not only argues from the Scripture, but he also says he was raised from the dead, and see verse 32, and we are all witnesses of this fact. What is Peter doing? He's appealing to the mind. He's, first of all, and it's a brilliant way, in fact, this is the way everybody persuades, if you realize it, he doesn't just browbeat them on the outside and say, you're all wrong. He comes into their belief system. He comes into their understanding of the Old Testament, and on the basis of their own premises, he says, therefore, you must believe in Jesus. If you believe this, that's right. You believe this, that's right. If you believe this, why don't you believe this? On the basis of his own premise, it's brilliant. But then he also refers not only, by the way, to the Bible, but to empirical evidence, historical evidence. We've seen him. We're witnesses. We've seen him rise from the dead. So the first point is that Christianity does not, in any way, do an end run around the mind. To become a Christian does mean your mind must be changed. In fact, the word repent, the Greek word for repent, metanoia, means to change the mind. I have talked to many people in New York over the years who have gotten into various sorts of forms of spirituality and religions, and whenever I say, you know, what is it, you know, tell me about it, and they say, well, I feel like I'm connected to something massive, something beautiful, something spiritual, something bigger than myself. I say, what is it? I don't know. Well, how does it work? Well, I can't explain. It's not, I don't understand. That's not Christianity. Because Christianity does appeal to the mind. It makes you think. It tells you to think. It doesn't say, oh, you know, you don't think about it. It's not reasonable. It's not rational. You just have to feel it. You just, you just know it. You don't think, that's not what Peter's doing. Christianity comes to the mind. It doesn't start with the feelings, actually. It doesn't say, well, here's what you need to be happy. He says, something has happened in history, and you need to deal with it. Your own premises should show you that he is who he says he was. And therefore, first of all, Christianity does appeal to the mind. And any other kind of version of Christianity that doesn't isn't real Christianity. The second thing, though, we learn from this first statement, therefore, let all Israel know that God has made this Jesus, whom you have crucified, Lord and Christ. The second thing we learn here is Christianity is about grace, about salvation, not by what you do, but by what Jesus has done. that Peter has said and one of the most striking things about this sermon is Peter is going to the Old Testament and he's looking at the prophecy of Joel and he's looking at the Psalm of David and he's looking at all these Old Testament texts and every one of them, he says, points to Jesus. Every one points to Jesus. And when you, and we're going to see this, what's great about this sermon or this text is there's going to be many other sermons and speeches in the book of Acts so I don't have to feel tonight like I've got to tell you everything because these themes are going to come up over and over. But one of the things you're going to see is that Christian preachers in the early church always read the Old Testament Christocentrically, which means when they looked at the Bible, they saw everything in the Bible, absolutely everything pointing to Jesus. According to the New Testament preachers and authors, Jesus is the point of every part of the Bible. Jesus is the climax of every theme of the Bible. Jesus Christ is the true and better version of every figure in the Bible. You know when Paul calls Jesus the better Adam? The first Adam blew the test, failed the test in the Garden of Eden. And as a result, we all, in Adam, we all die. But Jesus is the true and better Adam because he passed the test in the Garden of Gethsemane. And when we believe in him, we're made alive. That's what Paul says. Or look at Peter. Peter says, Jesus is the true and better David. David, think about that. He takes these things that David is saying and says, that's really talking about Jesus. David's pointing to the ultimate king, the ultimate David. Think about David for a minute. Remember when he killed Goliath? Brought down the giant, risking his life. And even though nobody else, none of the other Israelites, risked their life, when he killed Goliath, his victory was basically given to the whole of the nation. But Jesus is the true and better David. Because he didn't just kill a giant man. He slew the giants of sin and death themselves. And he didn't do it just at the risk of his life. He did it at the cost of his life. And yet his incredible victory, though we did nothing to even raise a hand, is imputed to us. So Peter says, Jesus is the true and better David. And Paul says, he's the true and better Adam. Jesus himself says, he's the greater Jonah. What happened to Jonah? Remember, God was angry, storm everywhere. Jonah was thrown into the way. He was thrown in to the ocean of God's wrath so that the sailors could have peace and be saved. And Jesus says, I'm actually going to do that. Not cosmically, I'm going to do that. I'm going to take on the divine justice. Paul says, Jesus is the rock of Moses. What's that? Go back to the Old Testament. The rock of Moses is struck in the wilderness and out comes water in the desert so they don't die. Jesus is the rock of Moses. The real rock of Moses. Struck with the rod of God's justice. Taking the punishment we deserve so we can have water. The water of life. Remember, John the Baptist says, Jesus is the real Lamb of God. Behold the Lamb of God. The Lamb of God. The Passover Lamb? Yes, the Passover Lamb was without blemish. Innocent, helpless, spotless. But because it was slain, the angel of death didn't slay. Jesus is the ultimate Lamb, the ultimate innocent, the ultimate without blemish sacrifice. And because of that, the angel of death won't be able to touch us either. And the book of Hebrews says, Jesus is the true and better priest and the ultimate sacrifice. And that makes him the ultimate bread. Bread of life. The ultimate light of the world. The lampstand. Why? Why over and over and over again will the Christian preachers read the Old Testament with all this stuff and say it always points to Jesus. And here's the reason why. The Bible has lots of things in it about what we should do. Lots of good advice about how you should live. But you can miss the forest for the trees. You can read all those things about what we should do and say, okay, the Bible's basically about me. It's about what I have to do in order to be saved, in order to get God to accept me, in order to get God to answer my prayers. No. Nobody could possibly do everything that the Bible says you ought to do. Nobody could be righteous enough for a holy God. But Jesus Christ came and he lived the life you should have lived and then died the death you should have died. You know, took the punishment we deserve so that now the Bible is not basically about you. It's about him. It's not basically about what you must do to be saved. It's about what he has done in order to save you. In other words, the Christian preachers always read the Bible. It's about to be saved. It's about to be saved. Thank you. done, but by what he has done. And once you get the idea of grace, once you understand that, and you don't just read the Bible as a bunch of things that I've got to do if I'm going to get God to take me to heaven, until you do that, you're not a Christian, and when you do that, you're on your way. Okay, mind, grace, now heart. Wait, before I get to heart, let me just say, I hope, everybody, that you will learn to do what Peter does here, what every Christian preacher in the New Testament does. Every time they pick up the Bible, no matter what part of the Bible, they see Jesus in it, because they know they're saved by grace. You know, let me just throw something in. At the end of the book of Judges, there's a terrible, terrible account of a really nasty guy who has more than one wife, and he's got a concubine. The concubine, of course, was like a second-class wife. And at one point, he's going, he's traveling, and he goes to a pretty rough town, and the guys, there's some men there who look like they might want to rob him, or they might want to assault him. And so what he does is he says, here, take her, and gives them his secondary wife, and they abuse her, and they beat her, and they rape her, and she dies. And when you read, and then, of course, by the way, it touches off a war, by the way, and everybody's getting killed. And so you read the end of the book of Judges, and you say, oh, yeah, this is what, give me the New Testament, you know. I want to hear about Jesus. Well, and how could you find Jesus in that? Well, in a way, let me tell you something. Even there, it's like you can see Jesus in this very dark pool. You know why? Because when you see a bad husband, when you see a really, really, really bad husband, a husband that makes his wife die for him, doesn't that remind you of the true bridegroom, our true husband, who not only didn't make his bride die for him, but actually he died for her. He gave his life for us. I'm sorry, every nook and cranny in the Bible will tell you about Jesus if you really learn to read it with the spectacles, you might say, of the gospel and understand what it's really about. It's all about him. Okay, now thirdly, though, it's not enough. You will not be a Christian only if your mind is changed, and if you grasp with an understanding the gospel that you're saved by grace, you have to be cut to the heart. Verse 34, And when the people heard this, they were cut to the heart, and they said to Peter and the other apostles, Brothers, what shall we do? Cut to the heart. Now that term means two things. First of all, in general, it shows that you can't just decide to become a Christian. You can't take Christianity up like a self-improvement program. You can't just decide, I think this would be good for me. I think I need some inspiration. I need a little more. It's not like a hobby. It's not like an avocation. It's not a program. You can't take it up. Christianity takes you up. When you're becoming a Christian, you sense that you've come under a power. Something has come down onto you. It takes you up. It sweeps you up. You're not really somebody who's just saying, Well, I'm going to do this, I'm going to do that, I'm going to do that. There's a power that comes. But this term, cut to the heart, literally means to be stabbed or pierced. What's it talking about? Well, you know, earlier on, he actually says, I want you to know that you put him to death. With wicked men, with wicked hands, you put him to death. It was a little earlier, and they're cut to the heart. Now, we have to remember something. Probably most of the people who were actually there, this was seven or eight weeks after the actual crucifixion, and this was a churning cauldron of people in and out this time of year, people from all over the world that came for a couple weeks, then they left for this or that festival. It's unlikely that most of the people who were standing there had literally called for Jesus' crucifixion, and yet they were cut to the heart. And this, I think, is the essence of how you become a Christian. It's when your sin becomes personal and not an abstraction. See, when Peter, in Luke 22, we're told about the place where Peter denies Christ three times. You know, when Jesus was arrested and he was on trial for his life, Peter and the other disciples hung around, but when people came up to Peter and said, hey, aren't you with that guy that's been arrested? Peter says, no, no, I don't know him. He was trying to save his skin. He was self-absorbed. He was afraid. Now, during that time, as he was lying, three times he lied, no, I have nothing to do. Surely he felt guilty. Of course he felt guilty. He was breaking the Ten Commandments. He was saying, no, I don't know him. He was saying, no, I don't know him. He was saying, no, I don't know him. He was saying, no, I don't know him. Thank you. Now, during that time, as he was lying, three times he lied, no, I have nothing to do, surely he felt guilty, of course he felt guilty, he was breaking the Ten Commandments. He was lying, he knew he was doing wrong, he would have been ashamed, he would have felt guilty, he would have been down, but it wasn't until, Luke 22 tells us, at one point, somehow Jesus, when he was on trial, being led from room to room or something, he turns and he looks right at Peter, and Peter was cut to the heart, and it says, he went out and wept bitterly, and it began a process by which he really repented and changed, and here's the difference, it's one thing to know you've broken the rules, that still gives you a kind of guilt, it's another thing to know you've broken his heart, that you've broken the heart of the one to whom you owe everything, when sin is personal, if you see God as this big kind of lawgiver, and I've broken his rules, and he's going to get me, and maybe he's going to punish me, oh, you hate that, you feel bad, you're ashamed, you're unhappy, it doesn't change your life, it's sort of beating on you from the outside, it's pushing you in your, you know, it's bringing pressure on your will to comply, this is different, when you realize that you haven't just broken the law, but you've broken his heart, the one who's given you everything, when you see the Bible as not just a set of rules, but a narrative, that God had made you for himself, he made you for a love relationship, you turned from him, that's, I have turned from him, we all turned from him, but he didn't let us go, he comes into the world, he loses his glory, he goes to the cross, at infinite cost to himself, he takes the punishment for our sin, and now, when you realize what kept him on the cross, was it the nails, no, he could have got that, he called the angels, it was his love for you and me, and our sin, that bounded to the cross, he couldn't possibly not suffer and die and still get us, and when it becomes personal, when you realize I caused that, when you realize I have done that, when you realize I've broken his heart, when your sin becomes personal, it doesn't just beat down on the will, it comes on inside and begins to melt your heart and you begin to change, and that leads to this last part, that you give your life, what should we do in verse 38, 39? Peter tells you four things, one is repent and get forgiveness, there's a new freedom. Secondly, be baptized and get a new community, come into the church, a new family, brothers and sisters. Thirdly, get a new power, the gift of the Holy Spirit coming into your life, making those renovations. See, now that your heart's actually been melted, rather than just feeling guilty from the outside, you're feeling melted on the inside and you want to change, you get a freedom that you didn't have before, you try to change, you try to change, you try to change, but now that Jesus, now you see what you've done, you see what Jesus has done for you, and it melts your heart, and it cuts you to the heart, and you repent, and you get the new freedom, and you get the new family, and you get the new power, and then lastly, he even says, and the promise is for you and your children and for all who are far off. You know what he's talking about there? He's speaking to Jews, and he's saying, look, when you become Christians, you're going to realize something, those Gentiles, the people you called far off, this promise is not just for you, it's for all people, and the people you were taught all your life were unclean dogs, are going to become your brothers and sisters, because the gospel of grace is going to change you, it's going to humble you, it's going to deal with your prejudices, it's going to make you more open to the world. Your whole life will be renovated. So, if your mind is changed, and you grasp the fact that salvation is by grace, not by works, you're cut to the heart, you see the personal nature of your sin, and what you've done to God, and you turn and you give him your life, you've become a Christian. You know, I was reading recently a story I'd known about for a while. In the 18th century, George Whitefield was an Anglican priest, 18th century Britain, and he was just so captured with the gospel that he wanted to tell it to people, and he was frustrated, because not that many people came to church. And his job was to preach at church, and he wanted to preach to people, and they weren't there. So one day, he came up with the most radical thing that had happened in centuries in Britain. He said, why don't I just go outside and preach? Which just wasn't done. But he lived in Bristol, England, and he knew that on the outskirts of Bristol, in a place called Kingswood, there were coal mines. Those coal mines were terrible places, and the colliers, that's an old British word for coal miner, worked in the coal mines. Now, you can imagine 18th century coal mining. These people died at the age of 40. I mean, their lifespan was nowhere. They had black lung and everything, and they lived miserable lives, and they were considered almost pariahs, you know, dirty. So don't you know, if there is a common problem being able to modify what you 인 were, particularly fun in the world, and every way I've got things the time to load and People died at the age of 40. I mean, their lifespan was nowhere. They had black lung and everything, and they lived miserable lives. And they were considered almost pariahs, you know, dirty and poor and, you know, how amazed they were when one night they came up out of the mines at the end of the day, and there was George Whitefield. There was an Anglican priest in full clerical garb, you know, with probably this powdered wig on. And he was standing on a podium, and he said, come, I want to preach to you. They were astounded that someone like that, an Oxford graduate and all that, would even come and have anything to do with them. So they gathered around, hundreds of them, and he preached. And he preached this gospel. He preached a sermon just like this. And there were witnesses there that day, because it was really quite a history-making moment. It was through outdoor preaching that the gospel really swept Britain in a way. It's called the Great Awakening, changed the culture. But there are witnesses to that event said that what was so interesting was when the colliers were listening, and don't forget their faces were black with coal dust, suddenly little white splotches started to appear on their cheeks. And the eyewitnesses realized it was their tears creating little white gutters on their cheeks. They were cut to the heart. Now, we all have different temperaments, don't we? I don't cry as much as some people I know by marriage. But the fact of the matter is, whether it's on the cheek or only in the heart, whether the gutters are only on the cheek or only on the heart, that's how it happens. Let's pray. Our Father, make us Christians indeed. Make the downtown congregation a place where people hear this gospel and they are cut to the heart and they get that freedom. Instead of just the guilt and the shame that just makes us continually feel bad about ourselves, it frees us and brings us into a new realm of love and grace. We want this to be a place where people hear that gospel and where we ourselves take that gospel deeper and deeper into our lives so we experience the new power, the new community, the new freedom. And help us do that right now as we partake of the supper together. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
