TITLE: The Birth of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Luke 2:1-7
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Christmas 2012
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-birth-of-jesus-4/

============================================================

The scripture reading is taken from Luke chapter 2. In those days, Caesar Augustus issued a decree that a census should be taken in the entire Roman world. This was the first census that took place while Quirinius was governor of Syria. And everyone went to his own town to register. So Joseph also went up from the town of Nazareth in Galilee to Judea, to Bethlehem, the town of David, because he belonged to the house and line of David. He went there to register with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him, and was expecting a child. While they were there, the time came for the baby to be born, and she gave birth to her firstborn, a son. She wrapped him in cloths and placed him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the end. The word of the Lord. Thanks be to God. Now for the next two weeks, here we're going to be looking at this chapter 2 of the Gospel of Luke, Luke, the most famous of all the, probably of all the scripture, of all the Christmas texts there are. The most famous of all. And, of course, it gets you right into the heart of what Christmas is about. And next week, maybe I should say the most famous verses in the most famous chapter, we'll get to. And there it says that while the shepherds were watching their flocks at nighttime, the glory of the Lord shone around them. Christmas is about light in the darkness. Now, the world is a very dark place. And most of the time, we don't walk around saying, the world's a dark place, the world's a dark place. We don't look at it frontally all the time. We can't. But then you have 9-11. Then you have the incident event, tragic events in Connecticut this week. And then the fact of the world's darkness just presses down on you almost intolerably. Now, of course, when you have a terrible tragedy like we had, right away we say we have to do something. There are things we could do about it to prevent it happening again. And that's right. And that's the job of many people, to change public policy, to take measures so that that doesn't happen again. But what we must keep in mind, a broader principle about evil and suffering and the darkness that actually is very beautifully put in a very famous line in Tolkien's, one of Tolkien's novels. He says this, Always after a defeat and a respite, the shadow, capital S, takes another shape and grows again. Always after a defeat and a respite, evil takes another shape and grows again. Christmas is about God's plan to do something not only about the most recent particular shape of the darkness. Christmas is God's plan to do something about sin and evil and suffering and death and deal with it for good. Christmas is about dealing with the darkness. And to understand that plan, we start taking a look at this passage this week and next week. This week in these first seven verses of the chapter, we're going to learn about the fact of Christmas and about, that's verses one to three, and we're also going to learn about the pattern of Christmas, which is in verses four to seven. When we look at both of these things, the fact and the pattern of Christmas, I think we'll have a better idea about what this plan is that God has to deal with the darkness. So first of all, let's look at the fact of Christmas. When most New Yorkers hear these words read, and many, many New Yorkers at Christmas do hear these words read, they say in Luke 2, they say, ah, lovely legend. It's a legend, of course, but it's a wonderful legend because it symbolizes things that we should be doing. It symbolizes, for example, having hope. We should always have hope. But Luke, when he wrote these things, was not intending to give us a lovely legend filled with symbolic language. You know why? Look at how it starts. Luke does not start this account saying this. He doesn't say, once upon a time. Nor does he say, long ago in a galaxy far, far away, which is a way to signal that this is a story. When you see the movie and you see a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away, you know we're being told about it. A wonderful story that's going to inspire us, but it never really happened. That's not what Luke is saying. Luke starts his story. You know the year that Caesar Augustus had the first great big census of the whole Roman world? That's the year that what I'm about to tell you happened. See, what he's actually doing here is he's telling us this. very beginning of Luke chapter 1, just, you know, the very beginning of his book, he's writing to readers and he says, this is an eyewitness account. What I'm giving you is an eyewitness account. So in the beginning of chapter 1 of Luke and the beginning of chapter 2 of Luke, he's saying most important thing for you to know is that the baby born in a manger, Jesus Christ, Son of God, becoming a human being and being born in a manger, that really happened. It really happened. Now, why? Why would he press us on that and say it really happened? What's so important about it? Why couldn't it just be a story? Here's why. Let's go back to that statement by Tolkien just for a minute. Always after a defeat and a respite, evil takes another shape and grows again. Now, you know, inside the boundaries of history itself, that's exactly right. Because think about this. You say, well, now, can't things get better? Surely things can get better. Aren't things better today than they used to be? Isn't life not as dark as it used to be? Things surely have improved. And of course, yes, in many, many ways. Just to start with, let's talk about technology and science. I want you to know, I wouldn't want to go back even ten years ago. There's been so much medical knowledge. There's been so much advancement in the understanding of medicine, for example. And even in the last ten years, I wouldn't want to go back ten years ago. Technology has brought us all kinds of things. It's the communications revolution. There's plenty of good things. But, let's for a minute stop and think about the technology revolution. Why is it that we are really afraid? And by the way, we are seriously afraid. Thoughtful people, people who know, are seriously afraid. That at some point, hackers are going to bring down a big part of the grid and wipe out trillions and trillions of dollars of wealth that will just go away like that and plunge us into a worldwide depression. Why are we afraid of that? Really afraid. Why are we afraid of nuclear winter? Why are we afraid that in spite of the fact that you don't have, you know, the United States and Russia, the two superpowers against each other, when I was growing up, people building fallout shelters and things like that, why are we actually still quite afraid? Because now it's actually, in some ways, even more impossible to control who is able to detonate nuclear weapons and where. Why are we afraid? I'll tell you why we're afraid. Because the source, the ultimate source of the darkness of this world is in here. It's in us. It's in our hearts. And all that better technology does is it creates new shapes to the darkness and sometimes bigger shapes. That's all. It just reshapes the darkness. It comes back. Why? Because it's from here. And better technology does not change that. The heart. Martin Luther, of course, put it perfectly when he said, human nature is incurvitus se, which is his way, a Latin word that means curved in on itself. We are so radically self-centered and self-absorbed that we don't know how self-centered we are. We won't even admit how self-centered we are. And yet, it's the darkness of the human heart that is actually the source of the whole spectrum of evil out there. And I mean all the way from the headlines of violence to the fears of a dystopian future down to the reason why some of you right now are in painful marriages. In other words, it's the heart that's the source of all these things. And better technology does not change the heart. And now you see why. Luke is saying, this isn't just a legend. See, what do we really need? We don't need stories that inspire us to try a little harder. Because every time we do something about the darkness, every time, it takes another shape and grows again. Because in here, we do not need legends about the glory of God appearing. We need the glory of God to appear. We really need the glory of God to break in from outside and intervene. And therefore, Luke says, this is a fact. This stuff happened. And by the way, may I say, if you're sitting there saying, well, okay, so he claims that this is a historical account, but how do you know it's accurate? Don't have much time to talk about that in this meeting. And yet, it's an extremely important point and question. You might want to pick up an Oxford Press book. Oxford University Press put out a little book, not only a year ago, I think, called Jesus, a Very Short Introduction by Richard Bauckham. Jesus, a Very Short Introduction by Richard Bauckham. Very cheap paperback, but a very scholarly work. And in that book, Richard Bauckham will show you that there's a tremendous amount of really strong scholarship showing the evidence that the New Testament Gospels are not legends, but they're actually eyewitnesses. of very, very good arguments for that. And so Luke is saying Christmas is a fact. But secondly, Christmas is a pattern. There's a pattern here. And maybe let me show you how these two points are linked together. You say, okay, so you're saying that the Son of God came into the world to help us deal with our darkness. Fine. What's He going to do? He came to do what? How does He help us deal with the darkness? And now we have to look at the pattern. And the pattern is in verses 4 to 7, and it comes down especially to perhaps the most famous part of this passage. She wrapped Him in cloths and placed Him in a manger because there was no room for them in the inn. Now, one of the things that comes across in the book of Luke, I mean in Luke chapter 2, all the way to the end, is Luke drives home the poverty of the family into which Jesus was born. When Jesus is circumcised at the temple, the family had to give an offering. If you were rich, you gave a bigger offering. If you were middle class, you gave a middle kind of offering. They gave the poor offering. They gave an offering of two doves or two pigeons, which was the offering of the poorest of the poor. And here, when Joseph gets to Bethlehem, he doesn't have the money or the clout or the connection to even get a room, to even get a roof and four walls and a door to keep out the night for his wife to even have a baby. So she has the baby in a stable, and she puts Jesus in a feed trough, not a crib. And it is really wrong to sentimentalize this. I mean, just having all the smiling cows and things around the manger, you know, with wonderful indirect lighting and everybody looking so cherubic, it's wrong to do that. Because the whole point of this is this is brutal. The nativity is brutality. There's no room. He's poor. He's, you know, they don't have a place to stay. He's in a feed trough. He's rejected. This is the pattern. In the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of the beginning of Jesus' life, you see it in seed form. This is how he's going to save us. This is what he came into the world to do. He's rejected. He's rejected by the world. He doesn't come as a general. He doesn't come as a philosopher, a professor. He doesn't come into a palace. He comes into a stable. William Billings, the great early American composer, has a great Christmas hymn. And there's one line that goes like this. Seek not in courts or palaces, nor royal curtains draw, but search the stable. See your God extended on the straw. Look in the stable, and there you see God stretched out on the straw. Now, why did he come weak if he's going to deal with our darkness? Why did he come weak? See, on a week like this, or whenever people talk about suffering and evil, what they say is, if there's a God, why doesn't he stop it? And if God came to earth, if Jesus Christ as God come to earth into this darkness, why in the world didn't he come to stop it? Why didn't he do something about it? Why did he come in weakness? Why did he come subject to the darkness? Why didn't he come as a king or as a general? Why didn't he come on a horse? Why didn't he come with a scepter and a spear to destroy all evil? And here's the answer. We've already actually kind of talked about it. If Jesus Christ, the first time, had come to destroy all the sources of evil, there wouldn't have been any of us left. And if you think that's unfair or an exaggeration, you don't know your own heart. If Jesus Christ came the first time to destroy all the sources of evil in the world, none of us would be left. And if you don't believe that, if you say, well, that's an exaggeration, you don't know your own heart yet, but you will. And therefore, Jesus Christ, the first time, came to be rejected, not to be accepted, to be destroyed and killed, not to be a crowned. He came not to bring judgment. He came to bear judgment. Why? He came to take the rejection that we deserve for our self-centeredness, for our wrongdoing, for our sin, so that someday he can return and he can end evil without ending us. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Thank you. a fact. Now you know why Luke is insisting on it. Look, Buddha and Muhammad. Buddha says, if you really seek enlightenment, you can get it. And Muhammad says, if you really seek submission, you can get it. Now you know, Islam, the word Islam means submission. Now Buddha and Muhammad do not agree on how to find salvation, because Buddha sees salvation as enlightenment, and Muhammad sees salvation as submission to the will of God, as obedience. And yet in spite of that, they agree on one thing, and that is that you can find salvation. You can seek it, and you can procure it, and you can acquire it, and you can do it. But that's not what Christianity says. Christianity says, the darkness in your heart is too great, you'll never fix it. And therefore, Jesus Christ had to come not to call the obedient ones into war against the disobedient ones, huh? Not to say, those of you who are good, come with me, flock to my banner, and we'll deal with the bad people. No, the darkness is in all of us. And therefore, what Jesus Christ does is he says, you can't save yourself. I didn't come to show you how you can get saved. I've come to save you. I've come to do what you should have done, but you can't. I've come to take the penalty for your sins. Which means that the incarnation, the miracle of the incarnation and his birth, the miracle of the death and the resurrection of Jesus Christ where he breaks the bounds of death, death, these things are not just miracles that illustrate principles of how to live. You know, there's a lot of miracles in the stories around Muhammad, a lot of miracles in the stories around Buddha, but they're not that crucial. They actually have nothing to do with the way of salvation. Whether Muhammad moved the mountain or not doesn't matter, in a sense, because this is what you've got to do. But for you and me, the miracles of Jesus' life save us. They're not just illustrations of how we ought to live. They actually save us. The ideal has become real. He broke in and God has become human. Weak, mortal, killable, vulnerable. And when he dies and he rises, we are saved. Jesus says, look, you could never, never climb up the ladder to what you should be. I am the ideal who has become real. Believe in me and I'll take you where you need to go. Very, very different. And so here in the very beginning, we see the pattern. The beginning of the beginning, the pattern. Here, he's just put into a rough wooden feed trough. But later, he'll be nailed to a wooden cross. Here, he's really just rejected by an innkeeper. Later, the whole population will yell, crucify him. Here, he's wrapped in old cloths. But then, he'll be stripped naked and his last possession, his garment will be sold and he'll be killed. Here, he's losing, as it were, he's rejected by the world. But on the cross, he's actually even rejected by his father. He gets what we deserve. And that's the reason why his life is summed up in that great passage, Isaiah 53, looking forward to his life when it says, he was despised and rejected, a man of suffering, familiar with pain. We held him in low esteem, but he took our pain and bore our suffering. We observed him punished by God, stricken by him, and afflicted. He was pierced for our transgressions. He was crushed for our iniquities. The punishment that brought us peace was upon him. And by his wounds, we are healed. So, Jesus Christ was rejected, so you and I could be accepted. Jesus Christ, there was no room for him, so you and I could dwell in the house of the Lord forever. Now, what does that mean? Well, here in conclusion, let me just say this. It means there's hope. Believe in him, and there is hope. There is real light of the darkness, though I have to admit it's at the end of a tunnel. There's light in the darkness, but it's the end of a tunnel, but we will get there. And so, there's hope. But you might say, well, what about now? How does Christmas help me right now? You're being very piggy here. I just gave you hope for the future, hope for ultimate future. You want something for now? Well, okay, I will. The fact is, the Christmas, the pattern of Christmas, let me give you three, well, let me give you two specific and one general way in which the pattern of Christmas actually can affect the way you live immediately. First of all, it means you should not be surprised if you're a Christian. question yourself if you're not getting rejection. See, Jesus was rejected, and we just said he had to be rejected in order to save us, but why was he rejected? Why was he rejected? Years ago, I read an interesting review. Vincent Canby used to write movie reviews for New York Times, and he wrote a review of a movie, not probably one that you may even remember, called Casualties of War. It's actually a story about soldiers, and there is a massacre, there are atrocities done, and one of the soldiers decides that he's going to blow the whistle on everybody else. And he's told that if he tells the truth, he'll lose his career, he may lose his life, you know, his life will be in jeopardy. He may have to go into hiding. Every single thing he's ever wanted will be stripped away from him if he tells the truth. And yet he does tell the truth. And as a result, everybody melts down and freaks out. And Vincent Canby actually was trying to come to grips with this a little bit, and he says something very interesting. I never forgot, and I wrote it down. And he says, the problem with people like this is this. He says, the problem is that they're too good, basically. And then he says, such selfless moral conviction, such purity of spirit is frightening to us. And he goes on to say, the reason it's frightening is it shows us up. It reveals our compromises. We hate it. It shows us the darkness inside. Now, Jesus Christ had the greatest integrity of anybody who ever lived. He had the greatest selfless moral conviction. He had the greatest purity of spirit, and they killed him. But here's the question. You know, there's a number of places in the Bible where Jesus says, if the world hated me and you're my followers, the world will hate you. So my question is, are you getting rejection? And if not, are you walking in integrity? You know, I know a friend of mine who was a policeman years ago who told me a policeman in a big city police department somewhere in this country. And it was every cop, he said, in his department. Got money from the pimps. Every single cop just got money from the pimps just so that they just let the prostitutes do their thing and didn't bother them. And he didn't want to take it. And he was told, you better take it, or next time you need backup, it's going to be slow. And he didn't take it. He didn't take it. He was eventually pushed out of his job, out of his whole career. And I know of, I do know of people who have pretty much lost their financial services career, have taken a huge hit when they refused to do something that, though it was legal, was disingenuous. I mean, let me ask you a question. Are you getting any rejection? You see, purity of spirit and integrity, Christ-likeness, will bring rejection. If you're getting it, realize you're walking with Jesus. Don't let it get you down. If you're not getting it at all, how come? Here's a second application of the pattern. The most beautiful thing in the whole world was in an old, ugly feed trough. I mean, you know, in New York, you know, it's very important how you look. It's very important how you look. But when you take a look at the most beautiful thing in the world, looking as ordinary as Jesus did, and maybe not even just ordinary, ugly, you begin to realize there's beauty outside, the coating. There's beauty on the inside. And the pattern of Christmas tells you, care about real beauty. Don't look at wealth. Don't look at looks. Look at character. Look at love. Look at real beauty. Value real beauty in yourself. Value real beauty in your friends. Value real beauty in your prospective mate rather than beauty. And that way you're following the pattern of Christmas. But here's the general point. You know what Christmas means? The way up is down. The way to really get influence is to just serve people without thought to how much influence you get. That's how you get influence. The way to really get the love you need is to love selflessly without worrying about how much love you're getting. That's the way to get the love you need. See? Aim at heaven, you get earth thrown in. Aim at earth, you get neither. Aim at righteousness and obedience and you'll get happiness. Aim at happiness and you'll have neither. The way up is down. The way to find an identity is just to serve other people and not worry about who you are and you'll find out who you are. of Christmas. How shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for the wonder of Christmas. We thank you for the consolation of Christmas. We thank you for the light in the darkness, even if it is light at the end of a tunnel. We thank you, Lord, that you have given us a pattern that really works. When we don't seek power, when we don't seek beauty, when we don't seek status, when we seek to serve, we find all the influence, all the love, all the identity, all the satisfaction we could ever possibly find, because that's your nature. That's the pattern. That's the ultimate spiritual reality. Thank you for showing us that at Christmas, and we pray that you would give us more and more an understanding of this and give us that hope that enables us to face the darkness of these times, and we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
