TITLE: The Lifestyle of Justice
SCRIPTURE: James 1:27-2:1-7
TOPICS: Mercy & Justice
SERIES: James: A Faith that Comes Down to Earth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-lifestyle-of-justice/

============================================================

The passage on which the teaching is based is written in your bulletins. It's right where you ought to be. If you've been singing with everybody else, if you've just been listening, you might be behind. It's in the place right here where it's a scripture reading. And I'm reading from James chapter 1, verse 27, to chapter 2, verse 7. It's James 1, 27, to chapter 2, verse 7. Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this, to look after orphans and widows in their distress, to keep oneself from being polluted by the world. My brothers, as believers in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, don't show favoritism. Suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes, and a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in. If you show attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, here's a good seat for you, but say to the poor man, you stand there, or sit on the floor by my feet, have you not discriminated against yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? Listen, my dear brothers. Has not God chosen those who are poor in the eyes of the world to be rich in faith and to inherit the kingdom he promised those who love him? But you have insulted the poor. Is not the rich who are exploiting you? Are they not the ones who are dragging you into court? Are they not the ones who are slandering the noble name of him to whom you belong? This is God's word. Now, we're looking every week consecutively, we're going through the book of James, and this is a book in the New Testament, and it was written by one of the great leaders, one of the greatest leaders of the early church. James was the leader of the very first Christian congregation, the very first one, the very first church. It was the church in Jerusalem where Christianity started. It was a Jewish Christian church. James was the physical brother of Jesus. He was the son of Mary. He had been raised with Jesus. He had bathed with Jesus. He had eaten with Jesus. And though he went through a time in which he denied that Jesus was who he claimed to be, he believed and he became the great leader of this earliest church. And this is a tremendously practical book, because the whole book of James is written to Christians, and the whole idea is how to live a very practical, how to live a lifestyle of justice, compassion, and integrity. How do you actually live a life like that? How do you actually live a good and noble life? How do you live a life of compassion and integrity and justice? Now, last week, we saw, and I don't know that I rang the change on this enough, though it's how we ended, we saw him lay down a principle, a principle for changing your life, a principle to how to change your life, how to be the person you want to be, how to live the life you want to live. The more I've been thinking about it this week, the more astonished I am by it. And if you remember, it basically went like this. Now, we didn't print it. It's just, it's a little further up in the passage, but I have to repeat it because the passage shows how he uses it, and in fact, the entire rest of the book does as well. And in James chapter 1, verse 26 and 25, he likens the Bible to a mirror. He likens the Bible to a mirror, remember? And he says a disobedient person is someone who looks into the mirror, into the Bible, into the Word of God, and then when you look into a mirror, what do you see? Yourself. I mean, that's what a mirror shows you. When you look into a mirror, it shows yourself, and he says, a man who disobeys the Word of God is like, and let me quote here, is like a person who, after looking at himself, goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like. But the man who looks intently into the perfect law that gives freedom and continues to do this, not forgetting, but doing, he will be blessed. Now, this is, here's why this is such an incredible principle. Why does James call the Bible a mirror? Hmm? Because when you go to the Bible, before it tells you what to do, it shows you who you are. Before it tells you what to do, it shows you who you are. In fact, if you go to it, first of all, to try to find out what to do, it's not going to help you at all. Oh, the Bible's got a tremendous number of things to do. Thank you. live with integrity, and it shows you how. It says, live with compassion, and it shows you how. It says, live with justice, and it shows you how. And we're going to look at some of these as we go on in the book of James. But James is so smart, he says, don't look in the rule book. And don't look at the rules and then walk away and try to do them. He says, oh, no. Living a great life like this is not a matter of stoicism. It's not a matter of willpower. It's not a matter of just doing it. Just do it. Just say no. Just say yes. Just do it. No. The Bible's a mirror. Before it tells you what to do, it shows you who you are. It shows you your condition. And therefore, showing you who you are. See, he says, if you want to live this life, you've got to look in the mirror and not look away. Continually remember who you are. And as you remember who you are, then you'll be able to do it. In other words, a changed lifestyle flows out of radical transformation in your self-understanding. A radical new self-understanding brings a radical new lifestyle. See? A radical new understanding leads to the lifestyle. And he says, if you're having trouble, notice this is what's so interesting. He says, if you say, I look at the Bible and the Bible says I should forgive. So I try to forgive and I can't. I look at the Bible and the Bible says, don't be afraid. You know, be a courageous person. And I walk away and I try to be courageous and I can't. What must I do? I have to try harder. That's what we always say. I have to try harder. You know, after a while, ministers pick up people who've been doing this for 20 years, trying harder and harder and harder. And they're just, you know, masses of smoking wreckage after a certain time. Or else, or else they're absolutely, they want nothing to do with religion. And it's your fault. That's not what the Bible ever says you're supposed to do with it. Nowhere. You see, try harder. Oh no. James is saying that if you can't be courageous, if you can't be forgiving, if you can't be honest, if you can't be self-controlled, all these things, if you can't be kind to people, you've forgotten who you are. Shows you who you are before what you do. In other words, put it another way. This is really something you have to press on and push on. In Christianity, in true religion, being comes before doing. Doing flows out of being, not the other way around. The normal way we do things is we say, I want to be a Christian. I want to live a Christian life. What does that mean? I'm going to try. And so people think that doing Christian stuff makes you a Christian. Doing leads to being. That's not what it says here. It's really the other way around. When I ask people, are you a Christian? And they say, well, I hope so. I'm trying. These are people who think that doing leads to being. If I do enough Christian things, that makes me a Christian. No. Here's what's so amazing. When you look into the Bible, the Bible will tell you the gospel. It'll tell it to you in the Old Testament as well as the New Testament, but in somewhat different ways. But basically, it's going to tell you the same thing. It's going to tell you this about yourself. You are radically fallen, but in Jesus Christ, you are infinitely exalted. Radically fallen, infinitely exalted. In other words, the Bible will tell you, you are so sinful, you are so weak, you are so weak, that nothing less than the Son of God, his death could save you. Nothing less than that. He came to die. That's what the meaning of the Old Testament sacrifices are. Somebody has to die. Somebody has to pay for what you've done. So on the one hand, the Bible says you're radically fallen. You can't become a Christian by doing. See? You can't become a Christian by just trying. You're radically fallen. But then it also says because, see, you're so radically fallen that there's nothing less than the Son of God, his death could save you. But because the Son of God has come to die for you, because he's come to do everything you should have done, because he's fulfilled the requirements before God, now you're infinitely exalted. You're virtually, as Paul says in Ephesians, you're seated at the right hand of God. That means virtually, legally, and I know you're seated right here, I know. Some of you on my right, some of you on my left. But if you're Christians, you're not really at my right hand or my left hand. If you're Christians, you're accepted by him. You're welcomed by him. You're adopted by him. When you look into the Bible, it will tell you, okay? Christian friends, you want to live a Christian life? You look in the Bible and it'll give you a radical new self-understanding. You're infinite, you're radically fallen. You're infinitely exalted. If you cannot then live the lifestyle the Bible says, it's because you've forgotten what has told you about yourself. You've forgotten how sinful you are. You've forgotten how great you are. You've forgotten how weak you are. You've forgotten how strong you are all at once. Isn't that? Now, what's so interesting is, he then, and you know, if you don't understand that, and I certainly have, and I would say probably never have, until I've been through the, I'm sorry, this is on tape, isn't it? But some other place where I've preached through the book of James, somebody's going to say, I can't believe you admitted this, but I've preached through the book of James before, and I didn't understand this. And I don't think you can understand the book of James if you don't understand this. Sorry. I was just, I was just a young minister, I didn't know that, I tried my best. Anyway, what, what it's telling you is, here's the secret. Then it goes, in verse 27, and James lays out, really, the whole rest of the book. Look, the whole rest of the book, he says, Religion that God our Father accepts as pure and faultless is this, to look after orphans and widows in their distress, and to keep oneself from being polluted by the world. Now, what that is saying is, look, you know how the liberals talk about social morality, and the conservatives about personal morality? You know, the liberals, they tend to say, so many on the left, you might say, say, well, you know what, the important thing is how you spend your money and deal with your power, but in your personal life, who cares what you do sexually, who cares what you do, you know, fulfill yourself. And the conservatives say, the important thing is that you keep a pure and chaste life, but with your money, who cares what you do, it's yours to spend. You see, the one side will say, you know, social morality, social morality, personal morality, it all depends on you, you know, you have a right to do what you want. The other side will say, personal morality, personal morality, social morality, who's to say? I mean, after all, you earn the money, you can do what you want with it. But James comes and says, oh, no, no, a life of integrity, a life of compassion, a life of justice. You are not your own, you're bought with a price. And Jesus says, every part of your life is mine. And I want you to know the freedom that comes from looking into the law, seeing who you are, and living in accordance with that. And then what he does is, in chapter one, excuse me, chapter two, he goes ahead and shows what it means to live a socially moral life. And then in chapter three, four, and five, he goes and talks about being polluted by the world, leading a personally moral life as well. The thing you won't see is that even though James will tell you what to do, always nestled in, after telling you or while he tells you what to do, he always says, because of who you are. He never just tells you what to do without giving you the power to do it. And the power to do it comes from knowing who you are. The power to do it, the reason to do it, the basis to do it. What you do, because of who you are. Now let's just begin. Chapter two, and we'll, this week and next week, and then we run into Christmas, and so we'll be taking a bit of a hiatus. But chapter two, all the way down to 14 and following, talks about our attitude toward the poor and the powerless. And so we can just begin to get into it this week, and we will continue to go into it next week. But let me read you a case. Let me read you a sin, an area where he says, don't do this, but do this. So he tells you what to do, but then he tells you because of who you are. Now, by the way, ushers, are you, you know the ushers? Do you realize this is the one place in the Bible where it tells you how to live your life, how to usher? As far as I know, it's the only verse on ushering in the Bible. And you need to be, you really need to listen to this. And since about half of you usher at some time or another, let's read it. He says, my brothers, as believers in our Lord Jesus Christ, don't show favoritism. Suppose a man comes into your meeting wearing a gold ring and fine clothes. And a poor man in shabby clothes also comes in. Now, if you usher, see, I mean, that's basically what it's saying. If you, if the ushers show special attention to the man wearing fine clothes and say, here's a good seat for you, but say to the poor man, you stand over there or sit on the floor. See, this is ushering. Have you not discriminated amongst yourselves and become judges with evil thoughts? Now, what is he saying? First of all, let's see what, let's see what he says to do. He says, two people are coming into church. And one of them, it's funny when you read this in Greek, it's interesting because there's one man comes into your meeting golden fingered. That's what literally it says, gold fingered. And it's not talking about the James Bond movie, but gold fingered means that this man is making sure that he shows his importance by what he wears. Here's a man of importance. Here's a man of weightiness. Here's a man of power. Here's a man who has a lot of influence. And he makes sure that that influence is displayed. See, his importance is displayed, how? Through the gold on his fingers and the clothes of splendor. Now, there's another man that comes in, and he is a man with less importance, with less influence, with less power. And because he has less importance. therefore, they come in, and they are of different places in the importance scale, and they can be instantly seen. I mean, it's revealed. There's ways it's revealed. What, he says, happens if you discriminate. Don't show favoritism. He says this is a terrible thing. Now what's interesting here, by the way, is literally, it's again, it says, my brothers, as believers in our Lord Jesus Christ, don't show favoritism. And actually, in the Greek, it says favoritisms. It's plural. And I guess they didn't translate it that way, because it sounds a little odd, and it would be kind of difficult to pick up at first. But here's what it means. Even though, James says, I'm giving you one case, here's a place, here's a church, in which the people with more money scorn the people with less. Here's a place where the people with more money are given by virtue of their more money, a lot more clout than other people. But he says, I'm not just dealing with that favoritism, I'm dealing with favoritisms. They're all wrong. And, you know, that gets a little more, you know, we have to be careful here, because that comes a little closer. You might say, a lot of people, a lot of people, you know, I think the last time I looked at this, demographics said 89% of all Americans think they're middle class, you know, whether they are or not. Maybe that doesn't come home as much as, what about a majority, here's a church in which a majority race is given clout of a minority race. Or, here's a church in which the cool, the attractive, the connected clearly scorn the unattractive, the uncool, the unconnected. James says, this is wrong. This is prejudice. This is discrimination. Watch out. Now, one of the reasons we don't have to stay on this very long at all is because this is one of the few sins that the Bible talks about, that New York City, in general, also agrees is a bad thing. In other words, it's one of the things that people in New York, at every level, we're always worried about and upset about this. Favoritism, discrimination, prejudice, you see, partiality. But I'll tell you something. Yeah, we know just how much misery and trouble that this particular sin has created around the world and still creates around the world today. And there is no place, as far as I know, in the whole world that has worked harder at trying to eliminate the New York City through law and regulations. In other words, New York City, there is more effort to wipe out discrimination and prejudice in New York than almost any other place. Institutionally, I'm saying. Institutionally, there's almost, there's no place like New York. And yet, they can't get rid of it. Because they're just, they're just working on the doing. But James says, no, no, no. What you do flows from who you are. And he doesn't just say, now, stop it. He says, why and how. Now, you know, you'd miss it. If you didn't remember the principle, you'd miss it. And you might say, oh, yeah, he's, you'd look and say, well, what's he saying? All right, let me show you what he's saying. In verse one, this is what it says, again, literally. I'm, literally, you have to remember that James was written in Greek. And you sit down and you look at the Greek. And though there's different translations, they're all relatively accurate. If you're really trying to come to understand the, the, the text as accurately as possible, you need to look at what, how it was originally written. And this is what it originally said. Not with partiality of any sort must you hold the faith of Jesus Christ, Christ who is the glory. Now, you realize what he's saying here? It's so easy to read past this. And if you don't realize how James operates and say, my brothers, as believers in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ, don't show favoritism. So you think all the emphasis is on do, all the emphasis is on do, don't do it. But look, is this an accident? Could he have just said our loving Lord Jesus Christ or our, our wonderful Lord Jesus Christ or our, our Lord Jesus Christ? No, he says our glorious Lord Jesus Christ. In fact, he goes a little further. As I said, literally, and it wouldn't come through very well in an English translation, but literally he says, you must not hold the faith with favoritism, the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the glory. Now, this is an astonishing thing. First of all, I want you to see how astonishing it is. Let me break this down. And then I want you to see why he uses the word glory here. First, what it means, you know, what the word glory means and what he's saying about Jesus, but then how that applies, how that applies to the situation. Okay. First of all, this is astonishing because, you know, James was an extremely devout Jew. just my idea. James was the leader of the Jewish Christians in Jerusalem, and he was enormously respected. Josephus, the famous historian who was not a Christian, he wrote about James, and James was finally killed in 62 AD. I think the first week here we talked a little bit about that. But he was enormously respected. Every single day in the temple, he was on his knees praying. He was a man of tremendous integrity. He obeyed the law scrupulously. And when he was killed, Josephus actually said in his histories that many people were afraid that killing such a godly man might have actually brought the wrath of God down on the city. Maybe, says Josephus, that's the reason why it was sacked in 70 AD. It's pretty interesting. That just goes to show what? I'm not agreeing with Josephus about that. All I'm trying to say is he was a Jew. He was a devout Jew, and he believed the Bible. And for him to say this is amazing. What do you mean? What is the glory? Not glory. He says the glory. Okay, first, you know what the word glory means? The word glory in the Bible, especially in the Hebrew Old Testament, the word glory is the Hebrew word kavod, kavod, which means heaviness or weight. When the rich man comes in and he displays his glory, the word glory means basically how important you are, how much you matter, how much of a difference you can make. You see? Clout. And the rich man is showing forth his glory, and the poor man is showing forth his lack of glory. But how did God show forth his glory? You see, if there is a God, and if there is a creator, then his glory would be ultimate because he'd be the most important. He'd be far more important than the richest man in the world. Far more important because he lasts, because he's perfect, because he's got ultimate glory. We're told that when God appeared, he always appeared, not through rings on his fingers. That's not how he revealed his glory, not through splendid clothing, but through the Shekinah cloud. Yeah. What was the Shekinah? It was the cloud. It appeared over the tabernacle. It appeared over the tent of meeting where Moses was. It appears a number of places in the Old Testament. I'll tell you what it was. It was a cloud, translucent cloud, illuminated from within by a blazing fire. So that even during the day, it looked like this incredibly white, bright cloud, but at night, it was a pillar of fire. And what was it? It was simply God's way of showing people, I'm right here, don't bump into me. I mean, here I am, see? I'm over here, and showing forth his glory. Now, the glory of God was both dangerous and desirable because we see it with Moses. Moses, in the very, we looked at this in August, but Moses in Exodus chapter 33 comes up to God and says, show me your glory. And God says, I can't, it will kill you. And that tells us both the danger and the desirability. You say, why was it dangerous? Well, pretty simple. Let me give you a quick example of this. My wife and I, when we got married, which is a very long time ago, we bought a rocking chair, which has really been deteriorating over the years. And last week, I sat in it and I leaned back on it, and my glory was too much for it. And you see, when something of great weight, great glory comes into connection with something of a considerably less weight and glory, the thing of greater glory shatters the thing of lesser glory. Now, I'm pretty sure it's gotten less and less glorious over the years because I'm sure I haven't gotten more and more glorious. I mean, I'm not sure if that's how it is. And yet, you see, in the Old Testament, there's a place where the elders are invited up, and they see the glory cloud of God. It's in Exodus 24. And it says, God did not raise his hand against them, but they ate and drank. There it is. What is it? The glory of God is dangerous because we know that he is ultimate. We are penultimate, that he is permanent, that we're temporary, that he is substantial, and we're hollow. And so that means when we get glory of God, it's dangerous. God says, it'll kill you. You're sinners, and I'm perfect. You're weak, and I'm strong. But they wanted it. And you know why they wanted it? Because if you know your own heart, you know that that's what you want more than anything else is glory. Oh, yeah. Do you know what hell really is? It's not pitchforks and fire. It's the thing that we're all most afraid of. We're told that that that's the place. I don't know you. Nobody knows you. You know what it means? It means to be finally and utterly ignored. The thing that we're most afraid of is not to matter. Not to have any weight at all. Not to make any dent. Not to count. Not to make any difference at all. Nothing at all. That when you're gone, they forget. You don't matter. You're inconsequential. There is nothing that you hate more than that. Nothing. And therefore, Moses comes to God. Whenever anybody has actually gotten a glimpse of the glory of God or knows something about it, they hunger after it. They want it. They want to be part of it. It's very interesting. Because, you know, the more I read this guy, Ernest Becker, who was a sociologist who died in the 70s, Pulitzer Prize winner, and some of his books are fascinating. He was not a Christian. Not only that, he wasn't a believer in any God. Here's what he decided. He says, you know the reason why we have so much suffering and evil and strife in the world? Because human beings will not. They cannot, it seems, accept the fact that they're temporary. Accept the fact that when they die, you know, and after several generations die, and after the universe dies, nothing we do is going to count. We can't stand that. And so he says we're accruing wealth, and we're accruing power, and we're stepping on each other, desperately trying to convince ourselves that we exist, that we're permanent, that we're not hollow. He's right. The one thing he can't understand is, one thing he can't understand at all, is why would hollow people even want to last forever? Animals don't seem to. To want to last forever, to yearn for eternity? The Bible tells us that you were meant, that there was an original glory that was given to us when we were first created, because when we lived with God, we lived in the glory. But we lost it. But here is James saying something that's astonishing. How could any Jew possibly say, you must not show partiality if you believe in Jesus Christ, our Jesus Christ, who is the glory? How could Jesus Christ be the glory? Here's what James is saying. First of all, he's saying, Jesus Christ is the way you can see God. How do you see the glory of the rich man? His golden fingers, see? His splendid clothes. How did you see the glory of God in the Old Testament? Well, you saw it, the blazing fire. I mean, it was impressive, right? You know, it was impressive. But now you see, and only here, do you ultimately, can you really see the glory of God? Jesus is the clothing of God. Jesus is the rings on his finger. In other words, Jesus is the cloud. Jesus is the Shekinah. Jesus is the glory. What does that mean? Do you want to know about the wisdom of God? Don't just think about God's great wisdom. Read the Gospels. Look at him, being wise. You want to know about the love of God? You want to know about the holiness of God? You want to see the glory of God? Look at him. That'll crack your heart. That'll melt you down. That'll fill you with longing. He is, Hebrews says, he is the express image of God's glory. In the transfiguration, what happened? Down came the cloud of glory. Jesus was the cloud of glory. He and he alone will show you, and I'll tell you something, he must have been quite a man. Do you know why? The man who is saying, this is the glory cloud, was somebody who was raised with Jesus, somebody who ate with, bathed with Jesus, somebody who knew him intimately. Just imagine what kind of man he must have been. For someone who lives with you, to come away saying, this is a perfect moral person. What a testimony to the fact that Jesus Christ was the glory. But not just that. Jesus Christ doesn't show us God's glory. Jesus Christ, and this is how I have to end, he brings us God's glory. How did he bring us God's glory? His answer is very simple. Though he was rich with God's glory, we're told in 2 Corinthians 8, he became poor, that we, by his poverty, would become rich. What does that mean? Jesus Christ died. He cleansed our temple. If our body is our whole, our heart, he cleansed our temple. He parsons our sin. He pays for it. And because he pays for it, now, in can come the glory. Now this is it. Here is ultimate glory. The ultimate glory, in the history of the universe, was when someone who had glory, gave up his glory, to give glory to somebody else. Jesus Christ had the glory, gave up his glory, why it says 2 Corinthians 4, it says God has made his light shine into our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge, that means the experience, of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. There has never been greater glory than this, never been greater value, never greater substance, never greater superlativeness, greater greatness than this, that someone who had the glory gave it up so that we could get it. That's why he says in John 17, Lord Jesus, he says, Father, give me the glory that I had with you before the world began. Why does he have to get it back? Because he lost it. Why did he lose it? So that we can have the glory, so that we can have his presence, so that we can have his life, so that we can last forever. Is a mountain more glorious than a mosquito? Yes, it lasts. It's much more valuable. Is a mountain more glorious than you? It depends on what you believe. Do you believe that this life is all there is? Do you believe who knows if there is a God? Do you believe that nature is all there is, that everything has a natural cause? I don't believe in miracles. I don't believe in the supernatural. The mountain is a lot more glorious than you. The mountain is a pile of chemicals, and you're a pile of chemicals. It's a much bigger pile of chemicals. It's a much longer lasting pile of chemicals. It's a much longer, it's a much more valuable pile of chemicals. And in the end, though, neither is glorious, because in the end, no difference. The mountain will make no difference. You will make no difference. But what if Jesus is the Son of God? What if he came to earth? He gave up his glory so that we could have it. Don't you realize that a mountain is nothing compared to your glory? You last. You will count. See? That's the reason that place in Psalm 103 where it says, you see the grass withers, everything perishes, but the steadfast love of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon those who fear him. The stars, their glory is nothing compared to you. The mountains, their glory is nothing compared to you. Now, says James, how does that affect you? Look in the mirror. Look in the mirror. Look what you caused, and yet look what you've got. And if you do, he says, you're never going to usher like that. He says, you know real glory. You will never be dazzled by the world's glory. You've seen the real glory cloud. You're not going to be like, wow, look at that. You won't care. And not only that, you'll be happy to sit down with the people of quote unquote lower position than you. You'll be happy to talk to people that are not as cool as you. You will be happy to talk to people who are from the wrong side of the cultural tracks. You will be so happy. You know why? Because it'll give you just the tiniest, tiniest, little, teeniest way of becoming like Jesus. There's been, there is no greater glory than to give up the glory you've got to give it to somebody else. You must not, we have to be, listen, we cannot have a church. We mustn't be a church in which people said, look at her. I know what he is, what she is, what they are. What are they doing in here? Those things are gone. A brother or sister in Christ, they're clothed with glory. And therefore you set yourself up as a judge with an evil thought. And you know what the word evil thought means? It really means false thinking, bad reasoning. You've forgotten who you are and therefore you're not living like you should do. If you want to do this, if you want to live a life like this, if you want to be far more unprejudiced than the most liberal New Yorkers, if you want to have a community that shows even New York City how to respect people of different races, different cultures, and different classes, if you want to be a place that's welcoming to everyone, see who you are. The Bible, before it tells you what to do, shows you who you are. Do you see? It's frightening and wonderful. Let's pray. Give us, O Father, the ability to see in the mirror how radically fallen, how infinitely exalted we are until we live like your son lived, who though he was rich became poor so that through his poverty we might become rich. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
