TITLE: The Sin Beneath the Sins
SCRIPTURE: John 1:9-14
TOPICS: Doctrine Sin Salvation
SERIES: The Apostles’ Creed; Getting a Vocabulary for Faith
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-sin-beneath-the-sins/

============================================================

In your bulletins, you have a passage of scripture that's printed out for you. It's on the next page, and I'm going to read it. It's John chapter 1, verses 9 to 14. The true light that gives light to every man was coming into the world. He was in the world, and though the world was made through him, the world did not recognize him. He came to that which was his own, but his own did not receive him. Yet to all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God. Children born not of natural descent, nor of human decision, nor of a husband's will, but born of God. The word became flesh and made his dwelling among us. We have seen his glory, the glory of the one and only, who came from the Father, full of grace and truth. Now, what we're doing in this series of messages is we're building basic vocabulary. You really can't move about in a field without knowing the words, the terms. The other day, I watched a video of Saving Private Ryan, and it's very authentic. And as a result, you know, they're just common soldiers, you know, working stiffs. But all the terminology, there are all kinds of terms that I, I don't know what that means. There's various sorts of equipment and maneuvers, and I didn't know what it meant. It was, there's many times I get lost. I didn't know what they were talking about. And there's no field of inquiry, there's no field of learning where you don't have terminology and vocabulary. And so, when it comes to the area of faith and spirituality, you have to know what terms mean. Each week, we're taking a basic term, taking it from the Apostles' Creed, actually, and going to the book of John and asking, what does this word mean? Now, today, I want to talk about a word that actually, in the Creed, comes near the end. But it's a good idea to bring it up here, because if you're coming every week, or if you're coming in a series, it'll be easier to understand what the words about Jesus and his ministry mean, if you understand this word. And that is from the place at the end of the Apostles' Creed, where it talks about forgiveness of sins. So, the word we're looking at tonight is sin. Now, sin is a problematic word. I guess if there were four basic vocabulary words that you would say comprise the essence of the Christian faith, it would be God, sin, salvation, maybe faith. In fact, I've heard people, you know, give a basic, essential overview of the, a nutshell of the Christian message by using those terms, God, sin, salvation, faith. But of those four words, think about it, the only one that really seems to become problematic for people is sin. And here's why it's problematic. There's sort of an intellectual and a practical reason it's problematic. It actually has most contemporary modern people sort of stuck between two pinchers, you might say. On the one hand, there's pretty good consensus now, in a way there wasn't a hundred years ago, that we really can't do in our society without the concept of sin. Human sin, human evil. At the very beginning of the, of the 1900, you know, when the last time we were turning at the, the last time we were at the end of the century, 1899 to 1900, I wonder what great computer problem they had, I don't know. But there was kind of consensus growing that we were going to be able to get rid of the idea of sin. For example, Clarence Darrow, you know, Clarence Darrow, he's sort of favorite, he's sort of famous as the, the, he was the prosecutor in the Scopes trial. But in 1902, he gave a very, very famous speech in 1902 to, at Cook County Jail in Chicago. And this is what he said. This sounds wild today, but it was almost, it was sort of mainstream intellectual thinking at the time. He says, there is no such thing as a crime. Not as the word is generally understood. He says, there's not a single person in any jail who's there because they deserve it. Anyone who does a crime, anyone who's in jail, is there because they cannot avoid it on account of circumstances beyond their control for which they are in no way responsible. Now, that's kind of out there. And almost no public intellectual would say such a thing today. Back then, what he was saying was, look, we are modern people. We realize that if people do bad things, it's really not their fault. It's either got to do with their evolutionary biology, their, you know, their, their sort of, their genetic makeup, or else it has to do with, you know, bad social systems or poor education and so on. But, see, the Holocaust, the atrocities, the tremendous genocide of the 20th century has led the average intellectual today, and I'm not talking about Christians by any means, but I'm just saying because the average intellectual is not a Christian in the Western world. But there's great consensus now to say that we really can't completely get rid of this whole idea of sin. people who did it couldn't help themselves, that they weren't morally responsible, you trivialize the suffering of the people who were victims, and you trivialize the very notion of injustice. And so there's basically, on the one hand, a lot of people are saying, well, I'm going to give you, here's an intellectual right up the road here at Columbia University, a professor there, Andrew Delbanco, he wrote this a couple years ago, and I think it's very typical. He says, to endorse accident or circumstance as concepts adequate to explain human evil is to give up the possibility of meaning in human experience, because a circumstantial explanation can never be adequate to the reality of evil. Now, you say, what he's saying is, what I just said, he's saying, if you get rid of the idea of sin, and if you say, well, they can't help it, you take away moral responsibility, then there's no meaning in human existence, because you can't say that's just or unjust, you can never say you shouldn't do that. He said, if you get rid of the idea of sin, you trivialize suffering, you trivialize the very idea of injustice, you can't, we've got to have it. But, nevertheless, in spite of the fact that on the one hand, people realize that the idea of human sin and evil is necessary for us to have hope, to hope there's any meaning in history, hope that there can be ever any justice done. On the other hand, the average contemporary person gets very uncomfortable hearing Christians talk about sin or call people sinners. And I think it's very important to understand why. And I think Christians would do very well to be sympathetic to the problem that people have. You see, in other words, even though I think the average intelligent secular thinker today agrees that there's got to be such a thing as sin, they are very loath to ever use the term. Because what they see religious people and church people have done over the years when they called people sinners. In general, what they have seen is that when religious people call other folks sinners, they do it to, or as they do it, they dehumanize. See, at the very worst, when you call somebody else a sinner, you may be saying, we are the good people, you are the bad people. And because you're sinners and we are not, therefore, we have the right, because of what we've just done, we called you sinners, so that gives us the right to abuse, exclude, or even destroy you. You're sinners. Or at the very best, at the very best, what you're saying, is you're sinners, therefore, you're pathetic. You're pathetic, weak, sick people. We are good, you are a sinner, and therefore, you need to come to us and we'll tell you what to do. See, either way, you've dehumanized. You've brought them below you. They're either evil or they're pathetic, and you're not treating them with dignity, respect, or equality. And this is the reason, this is the problem that the average contemporary thinker has. On the one hand, we've got to have a concept of sin, got to have a concept of sin, that does not, I mean, we have to have a concept of sin so we don't trivialize suffering and injustice, but we have to have a concept of sin that doesn't dehumanize people. Where do we get that? The Bible. Because I propose to you that the Bible's understanding of sin and what the Bible means when it uses the word sin is not, it's counterintuitive to human categories. It's off human mental maps. It means something very different than what the average person means when they say, you're a sinner. It means something pretty, much more radical. And it is a view of sin that gives us what we need. It doesn't dehumanize, but at the same time, it guards, it guards the idea of justice. Now, what do we, what is it? Well, the Bible here, this passage tells us three things about sin that I think would give you a pretty good take on the Christian understanding, the Christian doctrine of sin, what the Christian idea of sin is as opposed to what many others mean by it. And it shows us here three things, the universality of sin, the essence of sin, and the healing of it. This universality of it, the essence of it, and the healing of it. First, the universality. Look at verse 10 and 11. Two, is that just repetition? In verse 10, it says, he came to the world and the world did not recognize him. Verse 11, he came to his own and his own did not receive him. I'm sure the first two or three hundred times I read that, it just seemed like repetition. He was just saying it for emphasis. He came to us and we rejected him. But no, look. world means the Gentiles. The world means all the different people of different religions. But who is his own? It's his own religious community. It's the people who believe the Bible. It's the people who believe the Ten Commandments. It's the people who are very good, who pray to the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. Now, what is John saying about these two groups of people? They all miss Jesus. They all equally miss Jesus. There is no difference. Here are the people with the true religion, his own. And here are the people with other religions or no religion, the world. And they all missed him. And this is something the Bible over and over and over and over says. As Paul puts it in Romans 3, 23, there is no difference. For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God. In other words, the moral and immoral people, religious people and people with false religions, heretical religions or no religion, are all absolutely, Paul says, there is no difference. They are at the very same moral and spiritual situation. They stand, their status morally and spiritually before God is the same. No difference. Not one's a little better than the other, but they all fall short. No difference. In a couple of chapters, John is going to give us a guy named Nicodemus. And Nicodemus is one of the most admirable people in the Bible. Have you ever noticed often in the Gospels you have, you've got broken people, you know, you've got tax collectors and prostitutes and, you know, broken people. And on the other hand, you have Pharisees. You've got these religious people, but they're narrow-minded and they're mean and they're rigorous and they're legalistic, but then you get Nicodemus. First of all, Nicodemus was, you might say, a winner in society. He was a leader. He was a public intellectual. He was educated. He was wealthy. Secondly, he was an incredibly moral person. He was a Bible scholar and he was scrupulous in his morality. But here's what's so neat about him. If you read chapter three sometime, you'll see that Nicodemus comes and he's trying to open a dialogue with Jesus. Now, all the other religious leaders did not want to do that. The other religious leaders were, they were threatened by Jesus because they were afraid of losing their power. They were threatened by Jesus because they didn't like his new ideas. So here's a guy, get this, here's a guy who is tremendously successful and able and wonderfully decent and good and moral, but not narrow-minded, open-minded, not fanatical. I mean, he is the very, very, very best possible person. What does Jesus say to him? He says, you must be born again. Now, here's the trouble with reading the Bible. When you hear the word must be born again, what do you, you immediately, you don't listen to it the way Nicodemus did. What do you think of? You think of televangelists. You think of Billy Graham. You think of people walking aisles. You think of maybe the Christian right wing. I don't know what you think of, but I want you to know Nicodemus did not think of Billy Graham. Nicodemus did not think of Southern Baptists. He did not think of any of those things. He had never heard that term before. And because he'd never heard that term before, he knew what it meant in a way that we don't. When Jesus says you must be born again, what he's saying is you've got to start over. However, you have absolutely nothing to recommend yourself to God. There's not a thing that you've done. You've got to start at ground zero. You have nothing that recommends you to him. Nothing that merits, nothing that merits the favor of God at all in your life. Now, how could he do that? It's because Jesus says, John is saying, Paul is saying, every writer in the Bible is saying, whatever your definition of sin, which we're going to get to in a minute, the next point, the one thing you have to realize, your definition of sin should be this, if it's like God's, and that is everybody's a sinner. There is no difference. The first plank in the gospel is you cannot do what virtually everybody else does. You cannot divide the world into two groups, good and bad. You can't divide the world like that. You mustn't. All have sinned. Now, let me push you a little bit for a minute. If you're here and you're not sure if you're a Christian or not, or you know you're not a Christian, here's what I'd like you to get out of this first point. When Jesus calls you a sinner and calls you into salvation, please, don't read, listen, don't read that through a grid. I don't know, I don't care what other ministers have told you. I don't care what other people have said to you. But when Jesus says, does he mean you're bad and I want you to be good? You're disobedient and I want you to clean up your life? No, why not? Because Nicodemus was good. Is he saying, you're undisciplined, I want you to start getting real religious? No, because Nicodemus was religious. Is he saying, well, you're bigoted and narrow-minded, but I want you to live a life of openness and tolerance and love and make the world a better place? No, because Nicodemus was already doing that. When Jesus Christ calls you a sinner and calls you into salvation, he cannot be saying any of those things. He can't be saying, you're bad, I want you to become good. You're immoral, I want you to become moral. You're irreligious, I want you to start going to church. He can't mean that. He means something far more revolutionary. That's why he has to use the term born again, born of God. That's why John uses it right here. John says, look at verse 10, verse 11. The world, the church, in a sense. The so-called good people, the so-called bad people, they're all the same. No difference, therefore you have to be born again. In other words, the very same thing that happens here in verses 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 is exactly what Jesus spells out later on to Nicodemus in John 3. Whatever he means when he says, you're a sinner, I want you to be saved. He cannot just simply mean, you're bad and I want you to become nice and good and clean cut. And, you know, no, can't mean that. Whatever, you've got to be very careful not to read what Jesus says through the grid of what you think, what you've heard the church say, or what you've heard other people say, or what you think. Now, to Christians, let me say one thing to you about this. Do you really believe, do you really know there is no difference? Do you really believe the doctrine of, the Christian doctrine of the universality of sin? Do you really believe that there is no difference? You say, of course, I've always heard that. I know that all have sinned. Do you know it? See, tell me something I don't know. I am. Look at Paul for a minute. Let this sink in. When Paul said there is no difference, Romans 1, the Gentiles and the pagans. Romans 2, the religious people. There is no difference. Think about this. Here's a man who was the most scrupulous, the most moral, the most true to his principles. Before he became a Christian, did he look at the Gentiles and say there's no difference between him and them and me? No. Before he became a Christian, did he look at the thieves and the prostitutes in the street and did he say there's no difference? Not on your life. But the minute he became a Christian, he said no difference, which means the Christian doctrine of sin did not lead Paul to dehumanize people. It led Paul to rehumanize people. People that he had dehumanized before he got the Christian doctrine of sin. People that he had thought of himself, thought of beneath him. People he stereotyped. People he felt superior to. People he had one dimensional kind of cardboard cut out views of. When he became a Christian and he got the Christian doctrine of sin, it rehumanized people. He looked at people who in the past he would have never said this. He said there's no difference. You and I are in the same place spiritually. Now, what does that mean? First of all, it means that if you come across a person who, in the name of Christianity, when they talk about sinners, clearly shows they feel superior to these great unwashed. That's a person with Paul's pre-Christian, pre-conversion view of sin. If you've got a view of sin that makes you feel better than other people, you have a pre-Christian, a non-Christian, a non-biblical view of sin. To the degree you have really taken on what the Bible says about sin, to that degree you look at people who you traditionally have looked down on and it rehumanizes them. Come on. You know, remember that Brooklyn Art Museum, that flap, you know, at Giuliani and the art? One thing that was very clear is the artist just despised middle class, suburbanites, and suburban middle class despised the artists. I was reading a review of Flawless. It's a new movie. And the, you know, the super macho homophobic people despise gays, and the gays despise bigots. White people very often look at black people and say, there's no problem. You know, what are you complaining about? And black people look at white people and say, how in the world do you not see your arrogance and your continued racist attitudes? It is inevitable. It is overwhelming unless God intervenes for you to feel superior to somebody. You're something. You're black or you're white. Or you're gay or straight. Or you're an artist or you're middle class suburban soccer mom. Or you're something. And that's, you are going to naturally dehumanize people unless the Christian doctrine... that. Has that happened to you? And Christians, you, those of you who really hope that the world will believe the gospel, let me ask you something. How will the world ever believe this incredibly counterintuitive definition of sin unless it sees it embodied? It will never, the world will never stand still to hear the Christian doctrine of sin articulated unless they see it embodied. If they hear Christians say, oh, we believe we're all sinners. I'm a sinner. You're a sinner. But if they see Christians acting in a way that shows that they feel very superior to all kinds of people, then they're not going to hear the first plank of the gospel. And the first plank of the gospel is you cannot divide the world into good and bad people. You can't. There is no difference. And that is a, that's a radically humbling and a radically humanizing doctrine. Ideas have consequences. If it's really in the center of your life, you'll see there's no difference. Now somebody says, well, now wait a minute, what kind of definition of sin could possibly make a great moral person like Paul look at a person in the gutter, let's just say a literally backstabbing thief of the streets. You know, he looks out there and he sees a person in the streets who's literally going out and slitting throats and taking people's money. And Paul looks at him and says, no difference. And you say, how could that be? Let me give it to you. Okay, can I tell you? The second thing we learn here is the definition of sin, the definition of sin is not so much a broken rule, but a switched relationship. The definition of sin is not a broken rule, it's a switched relationship. Look at verse 10 and 11. It's all about sin, but you don't see anything about a rule being broken. It doesn't say anything about a transcendent moral absolute being broken. What does it say? It says, they rejected what? They didn't say they broke that. They violated that. They rejected him. They did not recognize him. They did not receive him. Now, I know this may seem a little obvious at first, but just press, stick with me for a couple minutes here. In other words, when the Bible defines sin, it does not say the definition of sin is breaking a rule. No, I'll tell you why. Why? You've got to recognize, Paul certainly did, you're never going to have this radically humanizing understanding of sin unless you realize that what God defines sin in a way that you can be, so that you can be just riven with sin, you can be deep in sin and obey every rule practically there is. Be completely obedient and moral and good and coming to church and reading your Bible and doing everything right and still be absolutely deep in sin because Paul was. Well, you say, what? Well, I just gave it to you because the essence of sin is not so much a broken rule but a switched relationship. Go back to Genesis 3, for example. In Genesis 3, we have kind of like the original biblical exposition of sin. It's Adam and Eve in the garden. And what do we learn now? We say, what we learn is that sin is breaking a rule because God laid down a rule and the rule was don't eat that tree and Ab and Eve broke the rule, so that's sin. No. No. Look carefully. What was the rule? Did God say, I got one rule for you, one law for you? By the way, isn't that great? Only one. Can you imagine? One rule. I mean, this is the religion of our dreams. One rule. Did he say to Adam and Eve, do not lie? That's it. Just don't lie. No. Did he say, don't kill? Did he say, don't commit adultery? Well, he couldn't say that because there's only two of them. So, that was out anyway. But, you see, if he says, don't lie, don't kill, if he says, don't break the golden rule, he would have been referring to one of the things that I guess almost everybody would call a transcendent moral absolute. Now, a transcendent moral absolute is something that everybody, whether you believe in God or you don't believe in God, whether you're a Christian or a Muslim or a Jew or a Buddhist, there are certain things that everybody sort of instinctively agrees are just wrong. Murder is just wrong. Stealing is just wrong. Lying is just wrong. These are called transcendent moral absolutes. And if God had chosen one of them as that one rule in the garden, then he would have been saying the essence of sin, the essence of sin is to break a rule. And then, of course, if that's true, then Paul can't possibly look at the person in the street who's every day killing people and stealing and lying and for... He couldn't possibly say that. That's because he got a new definition, that he got this new humanizing understanding of sin. And so, what is it? Go back, alright. God didn't say, don't lie, don't steal, don't kill. He said, don't eat the tree. Well, now, that's not one of the rules. That's not a Ten Commandment. That's not a moral absolute. What is that? Was it because it was poison? No. Of course, it wasn't poison. They ate it and it wasn't poison. Well, what does the rule mean? Here's what the rule means. What God was saying is, do something simply because I'm God and you're not. Do something simply to honor my godness. Do something simply out of a desire to honor me. Do something just because of the beauty and the glory of who I am. Period. Not because it's moral. Not because it benefits you. Just because of who I am. And when Adam and Eve said, should we disobey? They already had. The minute you begin to ask, should I disobey or not? You have, by this definition. They hadn't done anything when they started asking that question. They were just wondering it. They hadn't behaviorally sinned, but their hearts already left the station. Because as soon as you ask the question, should I disobey or not? A, you're assuming that you have the right to decide that. B, or you wouldn't even be pondering it. B, you're assuming you have the ability, the wisdom to decide that. But C, it shows that you've already made the switch. What's the switch? You've substituted God in you. You've put yourself on the throne, and you've made God the servant. You've made you the Lord, you the creator. We get that because in verse 10, it says the world was created by him, but they wouldn't recognize him as what? As the creator. And verse 11, it says he came to his own. Now, what does his own mean? It means we're owned. He came to those who he owned, and they wouldn't acknowledge him as owner. Here's the essence of sin. The essence of sin is to substitute God in you. You get on the throne, and God becomes the servant. And what you say is, I'm going to be controlling God. I'm going to get out from under his clammy hands. Now, there's two ways to do that. See, the essence of sin is not a broken rule. It's a switched relationship. There's two ways to get control of God. One is to say, the way that we all know about, and everybody acknowledges. One is to say, I don't believe in God. That's one way. Another way is to say, I'm not going to listen. I'm going to do what I want. I'm going to break the rules. I'm going to go do what I want to do. Okay. But, the other way to try to be on the throne of your life and get control is by obeying God completely. Now, how do you know when you are sinfully obeying God and following all the rules? See, when you start to get mad because your life isn't going the way you want. When you say, I've been living a good life, and I've been doing this, and I've been doing that, and God owes me to be married to the person of my dreams. It hasn't happened. God owes me my career to go this way. God owes this. In other words, and you start to get angry. That's a sign that though you're obedient, behaviorally, you're radically sinful underneath. Because you're obeying just to get control of God. God, you're not breaking any rules, but you've switched the relationship. See, that's the reason why Paul realized there's no difference between me and that person in the street. We're both trying to throw God off the throne. We're both in cosmic rebellion. That's the reason why he could actually say in Ephesians chapter 2, verse 12 and 13, he says, Gentiles, you were far from God, and Jews, you were near to God, because you had the Bible and all that, and he was one of them. And he says, but Christ had to come and preach peace to those who were far and those who were near, which is Paul's way of saying he comes to not only the people far from God, but even the people near, the religious people, and say, you are fighting God. God, you need to throw down your arms and ask for peace and mercy. See, Paul realized that he was doing it in his obedience, just like many other people are doing it in their disobedience. So one sign that you've switched the relationship, even though you're not breaking the rules, is you're constantly angry about how your life's going, because you feel like God owes you. You're looking at people who are living licentious lives, and they're having lots of money, and their children love them, and you don't have any children, or your children don't love you, and you're being good, and you're getting mad. What does that show? See, it shows the Christian understanding of sin is not so much a broken rule as a switched relationship. Let me give you one other sign, and then we'll move on to the last point here. riddled through with sin externally, is that you feel superior to other people. You look down your nose at other folks. You're using your obedience to lord it over people. In other words, you're being your own savior, and you're being your own lord. That's the essence of sin. You can do that by breaking the rules, or you can do that by keeping the rules. And until you understand that, you don't understand the Christian doctrine of sin, until you understand the Christian doctrine of sin, you'll be stuck, because you won't have the liberation that comes from knowing there is no difference. Now lastly, how does this heal? Now, we've got to be brief, but only because I'm trying to look at this passage not so much in terms of salvation, but in terms of sin. Because if I wanted to say, what does this tell us about salvation? Boy, we've got a lot. What we see here is, if you receive God, look at, first of all, it says in verse 12, to all who received him, to those who believed in his name, he gave right to become children of God. Now this is the first step to healing sin. What does it mean to say, those who believed in his name, that is, this is how to become a Christian. And that is almost the opposite of what most people think it means to become a Christian. Because in ancient Semitic and Greek, well, in ancient times, to believe in somebody's name, the name represented who you were. And therefore, to believe in his name means, I put my trust in who he is and what he did. Most people think to become a Christian is, I believe in his teaching. I follow his teaching. I see the Sermon on the Mount. I see all of his teaching. I'm going to try my very best to live up. But no, that's not what it means to become a Christian. To become a Christian means to completely trust in the name of Christ and what he did for you. And when you do, when you say, Lord, Father, God, please accept me, not because of what I am going to do or what on the basis of what I can do or on the basis of what I can do or what I have done, but on the basis of what Jesus has done. When you say that, two things happen to you. Objectively, you're given rights to become children of God. That means you're adopted. That means you're accepted. You know, it's so nice to see that because to be adopted means not just that your sins are pardoned, but that you're brought into a permanent relationship of love and acceptance. But that's objectively. Subjectively, it says you're born again. Again, that means God puts his own spiritual DNA in you and you actually begin to become a new person. But it's really verse 14 because some of you say, well, I know that. In fact, I've experienced that. I've believed in his name. I've received that. And yet, some of you say, I am experiencing much of the things you say I shouldn't be. I do have anger. I do have pride and superiority. I do see in many ways that though I'm obeying the rules, sin is having its way in my heart. I'm a Christian, but I really see some of the things that you're saying here tonight are the core essences of sin. These things still have me. The pride, the fear, the anger. These things still have me even though I'm, you know, obeying most of the rules. How do I deal with that? And the answer is verse 14. The word became flesh and made his dwelling among us and we have seen his glory. Glory of the one and only from the Father, full of grace and truth. In the old King James, it says, the word became flesh and we beheld his glory. And that's a better translation. Why? Because the word here, the Greek word here means to gaze. Now, what is it telling us? It's saying the word, this divine thing, if we had the whole chapter here, we'd have it. The word is what created the world. Jesus is the word and Jesus created the world. This great divine thing became flesh, became weak. When I see Jesus Christ dying on the cross for me, why? So that God could be a God both of grace and truth. On the cross, God showed he was a God of truth in a way nowhere else you could see it. God was saying, when Jesus died for our sins on the cross, what he was saying is, my truth and justice is so important that it will be honored even if it costs my son. But at the same moment, he is saying, I am also a God of grace and I love you and I will save you and I will do this even if it costs my own son. And therefore, only on the cross can you really see the glory of God. You know, Moses said, let me see your glory. And God said, no. And yet, John has the audacity to say, when you see the strong become weak, when you see the divine become human, when you see the word become flesh, when you see God come down on the cross and be torn to pieces for you, there and only there. as much grace as truth, as much truth as grace, because only in the cross does his grace and truth come together. Only there can you see that he can be both the just and justifier of those who believe. And when you see him doing that, when you see him doing that for you, if you gaze on the glory of it, if you pour over it, if you're amazed at it, if it fills your eyesight, that is going to change you. Why? Because on the one hand, when you see that he's a God of truth, what does that do? It gets rid of your pride. It says to you, God, I'm so sinful that I had to do this. Therefore, I will really surrender to you. I will really let you be on the throne of my life. But on the other hand, we see he's a God of grace. And when you're amazed at that, you say, he would do this for me. Therefore, I know he loves me. And that gets rid of fear. And the only way that you're ever going to really, really, really get off the throne of your life, so many of you think that you've given yourself to God. A lot of you said, I walked an aisle. I prayed a sinner's prayer. You know, I know I've surrendered to God. No, no, no. In many, many cases, what you've decided to do is to clean up and to follow the rules so that God has to bless you. In other words, you've stayed on the throne of your life. Sin is still rampaging through your life. That's the reason why you're not an attractive person. That's the reason why you're not a humble person. That's the reason why you're not that loving of a person. You're very rigid. You're very obedient. You're very moral. You're very good. And nobody likes you. Nobody's attracted to you. Nobody's, nobody, nobody, why? Because even though you're obeying the rules, you've switched your relationship. And the only way you're going to really see sin begin to recede in your life and to change over and you really become a person of humility and courage and love and goodness and holiness is if you gaze at, if you behold the glory of the strong becoming weak for you and dying on the cross. If that has grabbed you and if that has come into the very center of your life to the degree that it has, you'll be free from sin. Isn't it amazing? The doctrine of the depravity of the human race. Do you believe that? First of all, it gives you hope. Because without the doctrine of sin, there's no moral responsibility. Secondly, if you believe that, there's humility. It rehumanizes everybody. You realize we're all in the same boat. Can't look down at anybody. And thirdly, it brings joy. If I told you God loves you and you didn't know you were a sinner, you'd say, okay, sure, I heard that. But if you know you're a sinner and Jesus comes and says, God loves you so much that I'm come to die for you, then you're filled with joy because he loves me in spite of all that. And therefore, if you believe in the human, the Christian doctrine of sin, you'll be filled with hope, filled with humility, and filled with joy. Filled with hope, filled with humility and love for everyone, and filled with joy. Are you? Did you say, gee, I thought the Christian doctrine of sin was sort of depressing. You don't understand the Christian doctrine of sin. You don't know what the word means. Go and find out what it means. Let's pray. We give ourselves to you, Lord. Some of us tonight have to say, Lord, I receive you. I believe on your name. Make me a child of God. Not because of what I have done, because of what you have done. Lord, if there's somebody here who's going to do that tonight, I pray that you would help them with your Holy Spirit. Many of the rest of us have got to admit that though we have cleaned up our life, we've still got a switched relationship. And until we gaze on the beauty of who Jesus is and what he has done, we're going to still be obedient and filled with grumpiness and unhappiness and superiority and prejudice and backbiting and gossip and slander. Transform us with the gospel. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
