TITLE: The Freedom of Contentment  – 2 (10th)
SCRIPTURE: Philippians 4:4-23
TOPICS: The Ten Commandments
SERIES: Ten Commandments 1994
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-freedom-of-contentment-2-10th/

============================================================

The passage on which we're basing our teaching tonight is found in your bulletin. It's Philippians 4, but I think that, with maybe one exception, we can confine the teaching to just four verses, and I'm therefore going to read Philippians 4, just verses 10 to 13. So turn to that. It's on the second page of the reading. Philippians 4, just verses 10 to 13. We're looking at the Tenth Commandment today, this morning and this evening, and we come to the issue of contentment, and Paul says, I rejoice greatly in the Lord that at last you have renewed your concern for me. Indeed, you have been concerned, but have had no opportunity to show it. I am not saying this because I am in need, for I have learned to be content whatever the circumstances. I know what it is to be in need, and I know what it is to have plenty. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation, whether well-fed or hungry or hungry, whether living in plenty or in want. I can do everything through him who gives me strength. I have learned the secret of being content in any and every situation. Paul makes quite a claim. He says, I have discovered the secret of deep equilibrium in the face of anything, even torture, even death. Now, you know, it has amazed me since coming to New York to see how much money people will spend on quite a range of processes, most of which call themselves therapy. You've got Engrams and Dianetics and L. Ron Hubbard and all kinds of crazy things over here. And then, of course, on the other hand, you've got reputable and sound and solid forms of counseling and therapy, but people in New York spend a tremendous amount of time, energy, and their income putting themselves through all these various processes. Why? What are they doing? Some of them are real advised. Some of them are, you know, really sound and good ideas. What are they doing? They're after, we're after that which Paul has found. And what are we, we're struggling for that deep equilibrium. We're struggling for that poise. We're struggling to be able to face what? Our bills, our dates, or our dateless calendars. We're struggling, oh, because we can hardly face it. Our boss, our work, our mothers, our fathers, huh? Paul, on the contrary, we can't even find the equilibrium to face that. And Paul's facing torture, execution, incarceration. And he is at complete peace. He is talking about something in another galaxy from that which we're even striving to get. And he says, I've learned the secret. I've found it. Now, not only is that an amazing statement, it would be an amazing offer. I mean, if Christianity only offered this, that would be astonishing. That it offers you the secret of contentment in any and every circumstance, Paul having gotten to the extremities of any and every circumstance, being beaten, being tortured, being incarcerated, and so forth. He says, I've found the secret. Now, if this was just an offer, that would be one thing. That would be an amazing thing. But the Bible, Christianity doesn't just offer it. Oh, no. Christianity commands it. You see, the tenth commandment is thou shalt not covet. And thou shalt not covet is simply the same thing as what Paul is talking about. Thou shalt not covet means you will love God enough. You shall love God enough. You must love God enough. God is saying, love me enough to be content in all circumstances. See, it's not just an offer. It's a command. And that is absolutely astonishing. And therefore, you see, in other words, when you think about this idea of it being a command, not just an offer, please do not say, oh, offer, it would be something that some people could find. But if it's a command, it's got to be available. It's got to be available to all of us. Anyone who receives the Christian faith, anyone who receives Christ as Savior, it wouldn't be commanded unless it was available for all of us. So, you see, it's not just an offer. An offer would be wonderful. It's a command. It doesn't just say, wouldn't it be great if some of you super-Christians could get into the position of not coveting? But instead, it says, thou shalt not covet. This is not just a pipe dream. History shows us that Christians have found it. And without going into it, it'd be so much fun to think about it. But just think of all the Christians that have discovered this. Think of all the famous ones. You know, there's plenty of… Most Christians who have discovered it and found it and lived it, of course, aren't famous. But the ones that are famous, you know, that when Latimer's getting burned at the stake, he turns to his friend and says, you know, be of good cheer, Master Ridley, and play the man. For today, by God's grace, we'll light a candle in England that will never be put out. You know, what kind of condition of heart does it take to be able to talk like that at a time like that? So, it's got to be possible. All right, what is it? That's what we're going to look at. But let me just start off by talking about this word coveting. It's not in the text, but I'm trying to show you whereas the Tenth Commandment puts it in a negative, Paul's putting in a positive, and this is how we're going to look at it from the positive side. But when the Bible says, thou shalt not covet, it's interesting that this word covet is an ancient word. We don't have a normal modern word to get it across. One of my kids today, one of my sons was saying, Dad, what does it mean to covet? And I said, well, it's to really, really, really want something. He says, you mean it's bad to want something? No. And you see, right away, I realized, you know, Eskimos have all these words for snow. You know why? Because they know all about snow. They're experts at snow. They got 11 words for snow or 12 words or something like that because they can see the distinctions. And those of us down here in the warmer climes don't know as much about snow. And as a result, we can't see the distinctions. This is one of the reasons why modern people have only got one word, want, need. Okay, those are fine words, want, need. But there's needs and there's needs. There's wants and there's wants. There's wanting and there's coveting. Wanting. Coveting's terrible. Wanting is not. Wanting is good. Coveting is terrible. That's a Christian distinction. Modern people have no way, and we're going to see why, no way to make a distinction between those two things. They just run them together in their mind because in most people's minds, they are the same thing. Put it this way. Here's the difference between coveting and wanting. In wanting, you're the dog and the want is the tail. In coveting, the want is the dog and you're the tail. When the want becomes the dog and you become the tail, when it wags you, coveting is an inner grasping after things with the conviction, I have got to have this or I'm dead. Then you are because it has you by the neck. It has its finger on your jugular. It's in charge. That's the difference between a want and a covet. And the reason you're unhappy, the reason you get depressed, the reason you get worried, the reason you get, this is the thing underneath it all, the reason you get upset, the reason you're unhappy, the reason you're miserable, the reason you're depressed. As we're going to see, this is an oversimplification, but I think basically, I'll show you why it is. It's because we're coveting something. There's something that's taken us over. A want that's no longer a want. A want that's a slavery. A want which, of course, is an idol. Now, we'll get back to all that, but let's take a look. This passage tells us three things about contentment. Let's look at the passage, and they're not exactly parallel, but they're there. This passage, and I mean by that, these four verses, or really just three, verse 11, 12, 13. First of all, we're told that contentment's a secret. True contentment's a secret. Then secondly, we're told that false contentment is revealed by plenty or want. The way you can tell whether you got true or false contentment is how do you put up with plenty and want. So first, true contentment is a secret. Secondly, false contentment is exposed by plenty and want. And thirdly, true contentment is learned. It's not discovered. Okay? I have learned the secret. I didn't discover the secret. It didn't happen. It didn't fall. I learned it. Okay, let's see. one, in a way, it's the simplest, but it's a good thing to keep in mind. When Paul says, I have learned the secret, why does he call it a secret? Why is contentment a secret? A secret just simply means something that's not obvious. Something that's not obvious. It's not obvious to the average person. It's not obvious to, quote, common sense. And yet, he calls it a secret also to tell us it's something we all want, okay? Secrets are something we want to know, and yet they're not obvious. And this is definitely a yearning that all people understand. There is a desire for contentment, but it eludes us. That's what he means by saying it's a secret. It eludes us. It eludes all human beings. It is a tremendous passion and desire. Now, you know, a lot of the great ones talk about it. I'll just read you a couple quotes to give you a sense of how pervasive this longing is, why people for centuries, it's a universal desire to know this secret. Mark Twain, for example, says, you don't know just what it is you really want, but it fairly makes your heart ache you want it so. So, you don't really know what you want, but you're always aching about it. Wallace Stevens put it another way, in a better way, I think. Wallace Stevens, the poet, said, even in contentment, I feel the need of some imperishable bliss. Even in contentment, I feel the need of some imperishable bliss. You know what he's saying? Now, in the context, he says this. He says, whenever I'm enjoying a perishable bliss, whenever I'm content, and I realized it's going to go, it's going to be over. Whenever, whatever it is making you content, the only way you can stay content with it is for you at the moment, is for you to tell yourself this is going to go on forever. But he says, as soon as I realize, this will be over. It's like a dagger in my heart, he says. And I begin to realize that perishable blisses only arouse in me a desire for something that these perishable things can't fulfill. They arouse it. They cannot fulfill it. The reason that I get joy out of them is because they remind me of it, but they're not it. And the things I most enjoy in life most remind me of it, but they're still not it. Even in contentment, I feel the need for an imperishable bliss. Now, of course, and Goethe talked about it. He called it Sehnsucht, meaning blissful longing. And, of course, C.S. Lewis puts it in his classic phrase. He says this in The Problem of Pain. He says, when you stand before a landscape which seems to embody what you've been looking for all of your life, in your hobbies it's the secret attraction often on the verge of breaking through through the scent of cut wood in the workshop or the clap-clap of water against a boatside, you've never had it. But if it would ever become manifest, you would say, here at last is the thing I was made for. It's the thing we desired before we met our wives or made our friends or chose our work. While we are, this is. If we lose this, we lose all. Now, what's Goethe and Mark Twain and C.S. Lewis and Wallace Stevens? What are they all talking about? Pretty simple and yet extremely important. We want contentment and we are always, it's always eluding us. We find certain things seem to bring us contentment. But now this is very important, very important to understand. Most of our problems, most of our distresses and our upsets surround those things in our life that we love the most. You know why? Because the things we love the most simply arouse our desire for that hard to define, impossible to define something. They arouse the desire the most which they then can't fulfill. And you will never have a decent marriage, you will never have a decent career, you will never have a decent friendship until you realize that great friendships and true loves and wonderful careers are tremendously dangerous. Because they arouse the desire for this thing that Twain talked about, this thing that Lewis talked about. They make you happy because they arouse your desire for this thing without being it. And as a result, it's easiest to be angry, as we're going to see in a second, with the things we love most because they will not, they do not come through. They can't. But you see, it's the things that most give us joy, the things we most want, the things that most give us bliss, that we get the most furious with. Because they arouse the unfulfilled longing the most. Why? It's a sin. is a secret. The thing we really want is not what we see, but it's down underneath. It's behind. It's out there. Why can't we be content? Because that which we really are after is secret. It's hidden. It's invisible. And it takes us years to figure that out. That's the first thing. It's hidden. It's elusive. It's there underneath it all. It's Him. That's what Paul's saying. It's Him. You want God. You want service to God. You want knowledge of God. Underneath all the love, you want God's love. Underneath all the work, you want God's service. Underneath all the acclaim, you want God's approval. It's a secret. It takes a long time to figure that out. It takes an awful lot of broken hearts to figure that out. It's a secret. Number two. Now, the second thing is, what Paul is saying is, where do you get your bubble burst? You know, we start out in life saying, it's not a secret. I know it will bring me contentment. See, most of us say, I know what will bring me contentment. The right school. The right job. The right career. The right look. You know, the right something. In other words, almost always in the beginning, people don't know that contentment's a secret. It's a sign of immaturity. For you to say, I know what it is. I got it. I know what it is. I'm after. I'm on my way. You see? Climb every mountain. Ford every stream. Follow every rainbow till you find your dream. And we generally say, I got my dream. I know what my dream is. Now, a lot of people are upset because they take a little more time to find their dream, but they figure out there's a dream and then they go for it. And they say, that will be the contentment. They don't realize it's a secret. Paul says, something always, there are a couple of conditions that expose the falseness of that. There are a couple of conditions that will explode the myth that contentment comes from earthly things. And he says, those conditions are twofold, plenty and want. He says, the way you can tell that you've got the real secret of contentment is if it can handle plenty and want. Henrik Ibsen said, if you take away, let's see, oh wait, okay, Henrik Ibsen said, when you take away the life lie of anyone, they lose all their happiness. If you take away the life's lie of everyone. Now, that sounds awfully cynical, doesn't it? He says, everybody's got a life's lie. Everybody thinks that it will bring them contentment. They don't realize that contentment's a secret. And if you lose that life's lie, you lose all your happiness. Well, Paul is saying that the way you can find out that your life dream is a lie that it will not bring you the contentment you expect is plenty and want. Since a lot of us, by the way, never get either, we stay immature for a lot longer. I was talking with one of my sons the other day and we were listening to something on the radio, a group that I didn't know much about, but he told me it was Nirvana. And of course, one of the main characters of Nirvana recently committed suicide, even though he was famous, he was popular, he was acclaimed, he was rich. So I said to my son, I said, why do you think he killed himself? Now, you know, when your father's a preacher, you're always afraid you're going to get blindsided by a sermon. So he says, okay, probably you're going to tell me he didn't have God. I said, no. I said, I'm sure that it's more complicated than that because I said, there's all sorts of people that don't have God that aren't killing themselves. So why do you think he killed himself? And I really wasn't sure myself. And we talked for a little while. You can only go so long on a subject like that with a kid, but an interesting insight emerged. And we suddenly began to realize that there's two situations in which people seem to kill themselves or at least get that despairing in which they think about killing themselves. You know, we have our life's lie. We have our dream. We followed our rainbow. We're fording every stream. We say, ah, contentment's not a secret. I know what my contentment is. I'm following my dream. The kinds of people who get plunged into despair, enough to even think of suicide, are people either who have discovered that they'll never get to their dream. Something has come up, some obstacle. They realize they'll never get there. Or, the people who get all the way there. They're the people, you see, they're the people who lose their life's lie. They're the people who... Thank you. or want that expose that you're building your life on a lie that will never come through. Now, see, plenty is every bit as much of an expose of false contentment, of dreams, of things that really won't come through for you. Like Wallace Stevens said, like, you know, like Lewis said, we set our heart on things and we are sure that if we get this, then we'll be all right. It's plenty that reveals that even more than one. You know, that classic place in the Village Voice, that column that Cynthia Heimel wrote some years ago, she says, when God wants to play a really rotten practical joke on you, remember this? He grants your deepest wish and then giggles merrily as you suddenly realize you want to kill yourself. You know, she's not a Christian, obviously, but boy, that's Romans 1 to a T. When God wants to play a really rotten practical joke, but it's not a practical joke, it's plenty. So that you can have the life's lie taken away, so that you can see. See, he grants you your deepest wish and then he giggles merrily as you realize you want to kill yourself. She goes on. She's thinking about certain people that she knew when they were, you know, hat check girls at Macy's and then they became famous and she's thinking about them and she says, she says, when people become famous, they thought that giant thing that they were striving for, that fame thing was going to make everything okay, that was going to make their lives bearable, that was going to provide them with personal fulfillment and happiness. It happened and nothing changed. They were still them. The disillusionment turned them howling and insufferable. Here's what I think. Most of us don't get to plenty or want. We've got our dreams, don't we? We say, ah, yes, I know what it's going to take to make me happy. But most of us never get to the place where our dreams are utterly dashed, nor do very few of us ever get to the place where we realize them. We get fame, we get acclaim, we've made it, power, money. And as a result, most of us stay in the illusion for a lot longer. Because if you get a little bit of your dream, but not enough of it, you'll never see that it can't possibly satisfy you. So you see those of us who are kind of in the middle, kind of on our way, always saying, well, maybe I will make it. Well, if I can just make a few adjustments. Well, I've had a little bit of a taste. We're the ones that stay in the veil of illusion for a long time. In fact, from what I can tell, the people who have thought Christianity ridiculous, who are most likely to show up seeking, are people who have either had their dreams dashed and they begin to realize what an illusion they are, or people who have had their dreams completely fulfilled and have come up empty. I have learned the secret, you see, of a bound, in the old King James, it's put, Paul says, I have learned the secret of a abounding or abasing. I know how to abound, I know how to be abased. In other words, I know how to be down, I know how to be up. And it's the down and the up that really reveals the illusion. Most of the rest of us stay for a pretty long time in the veil of illusion. Now, what happens, before moving on, we have to ask ourselves, what happens when we finally grow up? Now, here's what I mean by grow up. When you finally reach true spiritual and emotional adulthood is when you finally realize you are never going to be happy. You think, well, if I can just get this, if I can just make this adjustment, if I could just to get here, then I'll be fulfilled. If I can get these things, you, you know, my, one of my sons brought home his yearbook and underneath all of the kids' pictures, the seniors could put a little verse or a little saying under each picture, you know, as a kind of aphorism or proverb, and one of them put down, you're only young once, but you can be immature forever. And you see, when you're physically and chronologically young, it makes sense that you don't realize that contentment's a secret, that it's hidden, that it is not found in the things which you can see. And it's all right, I expect that. But you see, a lot of us just stay immature. And for a long time, we don't realize that we're never going to be happy, that we need an imperishable bliss, that there's something wrong. Now, if you are blessed with plenty or want early on, you might come to your senses. But if you finally get out of emotional adolescence and realize you're never going to be happy, then what do you do? Well, there's only four things to do. Now, plenty and want may have hit you, and now there's four things to do, or maybe it's going to take a long time. Sometimes it takes years. It slowly dawns on you, but eventually, most everybody grows up and says, I'm never going to be happy. what they are. You can see some of them in C.S. Lewis's chapter on hope and mere Christianity. You can see all four of them in a little brochure that I wrote, a pamphlet that we hand out around the church called, How Do You Know God? There's only four things that you can do. When you realize that you're unhappy and the things that you thought were going to make you happy aren't making you happy. Number one, you can blame the things. Number two, you can blame yourself. Number three, you can blame the universe. Or number four, I'll get to that. Number one, you can blame the things. Now, what that means is you can say, the reason I'm unhappy is I need a better spouse. I need a better career. I need a better figure. I need a nose job. I got it. It's just, I can make it. I know I was wrong about these things. My first dream was wrong. I got to get a new dream. Now, what this does to people, especially in New York, I see, is it makes you absolutely driven, anxious, and totally afraid to commit to anything. You show up. You hardly even sit in the seat. You make sure that you distribute your, you know, your gravity on your feet as well as on your rump because you might want to leave as soon as you feel like this is a bad use of my time. In other words, you're like Daniel Boone. You're ready to move on the minute. Your little piece of ground that you think is going to give you nirvana shows that it's not. So, you discard people. You discard. You change all the time. You're always changing your life. You're always changing your career. You're always changing your look. You're always changing because you're blaming the things. It makes for a pretty unstable life. And secondly, you can blame yourself. Now, lots of people do this, and this is what happens. You realize you're not happy, and you look around, and you believe, now, the press releases of the people around you. People in New York do not want you to know how unhappy they are. They don't want you to know how empty they are, especially the ones that seem to be making it. They have no idea. They do not want you to know that their own emptiness. So, you decide, the reason I'm unhappy is there's something wrong with me. I'm disturbed. Now, okay, in other words, I'm not happy. So, you know, one thing you can do is blame the things, and you just walk all over people until you find your dream. They don't talk about that. You know, climb every person, ford every person, until you find your dream, and that's what happens. The second thing you can do is blame yourself. You can get down on yourself. You can say, I'm inadequate. I'm disturbed. There's something wrong with me on the inside. Now, you know, what's really dangerous about this, very, very dangerous, is that very often, if you decide there's something wrong with you, I've got psychological issues, and you decide you're going to deal with them, there almost always are psychological issues, but they can be red herrings. Now, listen real carefully. When you decide, I'm unhappy because there's something wrong with me, I have trouble committing, I have trouble relating, I have trouble facing this and that, generally, if you start to dig, you will find real issues, things that you should deal with. There's nothing wrong with doing that, but the reason I'm saying they're red herrings is it could be that the reason you're unhappy is really deeper than psychological. Now, it has to do with meaning. Ernst Becker puts it this way in one of his books. He says, now, and I'll have to, I'm going to make sure, nobody misunderstands me, he says, all the psychoanalysis in the world does not allow a person to find out who he is, why he's on earth, why he has to die, and how he can make life for triumph. And it is when psychology pretends to do this, when it pretends to offer a full explanation of human unhappiness that it becomes a fraud and creates an impasse from which you cannot escape. Now, Ernst Becker is not a Christian. What is he saying? Here's what he's saying. Listen, he didn't say a psychologist can't tell you these things. He says psychology can't. Science can never talk about what ought to be. He says it could be underneath everything. The reason you're unhappy is you don't know why you're here. You don't know how to deal with guilt. You don't know how to, what you were built to do. You don't know why you have to die. See, that's what he said. And he says, as soon as the psychology tries to answer those questions, science can't answer those questions. Now, a psychologist can say, you shouldn't feel guilty about that, or you're not worthless. But as soon as he or she says that, that's not science. That is not psychology. That's religion. There is no way to prove that a person is worthwhile or worthless. There's no way to prove that this guilt is false or true, that this person didn't really violate any moral principles that this person did. That's religion. And what Ernst Becker is trying to say is, look, psychology can help out a great deal. you're blaming yourself, trying to find something wrong with you. And if you look enough, there will be things wrong with you. And trying to get other people around you to tell you you're really a worthwhile person, but the problem could be deeper. It could be a red herring to be looking for psychology. It could be a red herring to look for the ways in which you're disturbed. It could be that you don't know the secret of contentment, which has to do with meaning in life. It has to do with a clear conscience. It has to do with knowing that you're acceptable to the only eyes that count, and that you are loved by the only heart that counts. Do you see? And so it could be a tremendous dead end just to blame yourself, and not realize that this is a universal human condition, to be unhappy, to not be content. See? And the third thing you can do, see, you can blame things and, you know, use people. Or you can blame yourself and get real down on yourself. Or thirdly, you can blame the universe. Now, a lot of people in New York do that. And here's what I mean by blaming the universe. They say something like this. They say, why have I been so unhappy? I realize that I built my life on this or that, how I based everything, all my contentment on getting into this circle of people, or recognition by this person, or achievement in this way. Yes, that's it. I put my hope in these objects, and they could not bring me to contentment. So, no more. Never again. I will trust nothing. I will give myself to no one. I will destroy all my dreams. I'm not going to be disappointed again. In other words, because I didn't like the smell, I cut my nose off. Because I didn't like my heart getting broken, I made it hard as rock. You know, a lot of people in New York are this way. They've killed the part of their heart that's human. They said, I know, I'm built for creativity. I'm built for eternity. I'm built to soar. I'm built for complete love. And I can't find it on earth. And so, what do they decide? Since there's nothing but earth, I'm going to kill the part of me that aspires to anything noble, anything great, anything high. And they become cynics. They become hard. They blame the universe. Now, you can blame things. It makes you a real oppressor, manipulator. You can blame yourself, which makes you really sad. You can blame the universe, which makes you really hard. Or you can blame your relationship with God. You can say, there is a God that I was built for. There is a God who, if I knew, would satisfy these desires. I mean, even as a Christian, you have to say that. You have to say, the reason I'm not content is, I have the capacity for communion with God, for deep experience of His love, that I have not even begun to plumb, not even begun to scratch the surface of. No, you can blame things. You can blame yourself. You can blame the universe. Or you can blame your relationship with God. Which of those four things is obviously the most practical? Which of those four things is the most hopeful? Which of those four things will make you the least nuisance to yourself and society? It's the last one. It's a secret. It's hidden. It's not the things I see. You know, the way C.S. Lewis puts it, of course, in that tremendous chapter. He says, if it's true. He says, creatures are born with desires. They're not born with desires unless satisfaction for those desires exists. A baby feels hunger? There's such a thing as food. A duckling wants to swim? There's such a thing as water. We feel sexual desire? There's such a thing as sex. And if I find in myself desires that no experience in this world can satisfy, the only probable explanation is that I was made for another world. And the earthly pleasures that I see were not designed to fulfill but to arouse my desire for that place. All right. Now, lastly, we've seen that contentment's a secret. And secondly, we see that plenty and in want expose it. Expose false contentment. Expose the false dreams. Now, lastly, lastly, we learn this. True contentment is learned. I already referred to it, so it's not a big secret anymore. He doesn't discover the secret. He learns it. He's talking about a process. And here, let me just give you what I think are five things you've got to do to learn the secret. In other words, the secret, it's a secret because it's hidden. But it's not a secret that you just are told and you go, aha, the key. Instead, it's a process. And here are five things I think you've got to do. Now, the first one maybe is the most important in some ways. But at least I'll spend the most time on it. But I won't spend much time on any of them. Number one, you have to unmask the coveting for what it is. Let me just say this out. The Tenth Commandment is really just the first commandment put in psychological terms. other gods before me. And the Tenth Commandment says, You shall be completely content and not covet or grasp for anything. There shouldn't be anything you want so badly it makes you miserable if you can't have it. There's plenty of things you can want, but they should not make you that miserable if you don't have it. Now, you know what? That's just the First Commandment. The only things that you will so want that if you don't have, you're miserable, are things you put before God. If you have no other gods before God, you will not covet. If you covet, it's because you've got other things before God. It's the same commandment. Idols are things, psychologically, they're the things which give you your self-esteem and identity. Sociologically, the things that give you credibility with other people. Theologically, the things that make you feel acceptable in the sight of God. These are things you say, if I have them, and only if I have them will I make it. So, whenever you're unhappy, whenever you're discontented, whenever you're bitter, whenever you're miserable, ask yourself this question. What besides God has taken title to my heart's functional trust? What besides Jesus Christ has become my salvation, my identity, my joy, my main preoccupation, my loyalty, or my delight? That's the question. There's no more profound thing I can tell you about self-management than this. Whenever you get downcast, ask yourself, what besides Jesus Christ has taken title to my functional trust? What has become a greater preoccupation than what he's done for me? You have to see these things for what they are. These things you're after, they are after you. You think, if only I can get it, if only I can get it. It's got you. You're after it, you're after it, but it's after you. It's got you. It's got you by the neck. And, you know, unless we understand these things, we're never going to be able to overcome them. And I'll give you a great example. You have to unmask these things for what they are. They're your enemies. You have to see what you're coveting. You know, here's Jane and John Doe, and here's Jane and John Smith, and John Doe is having an affair with Jane Smith. So you confront them. And they say, yes, you know, we really hate the lying and the cheating and the breaking of promises, but we can't stop. Now, there's a couple ways to go about it. There's the moralizing approach is to shake your finger and say, do you realize this is a sin? This is wrong, and your sins will find you out, and there will be disaster coming, and they'll feel more guilty and keep doing it. They won't be able to stop. Now, you could take, instead of a moralizing approach, you can take a more psychologic, I call it a psychologizing approach, in which you say, well, if you've got these needs, and you've got to find, you know, your dream, you've got to climb every mountain, ford every stream, trample on all your children until you find your dream. And so you say, you've got to find your needs, you know, you're the most important thing. It doesn't matter about all your promises, all your covenant relationships, what anybody else thinks. You've got to find your dream. Both of, you know, you know what they're going to do? That'll make them feel a little less guilty. The moralizing makes them feel more guilty, but they keep doing it. The psychologizing makes them feel a little less guilty, but they're going to still feel guilty. Sure they are, because they know. They know what they're doing. The real problem is, go down deep, and you'll see that this is the way it works with an idol. An idol is when you create a delusional field around something that's good in itself, but that you create an emotional, cognitive, delusional field, you deify something in your mind. And generally, you press John Doe a little bit, and you say, why are you doing this? He'll say, she makes me feel like a real man. My wife doesn't. And you press Jane, and she makes me feel like a real, he makes me feel like a real woman, and my husband doesn't. That's a lie. They've defined their masculinity, their femininity in certain terms, and now they say this person can deliver the goods, make me finally feel like I'm somebody. No, they won't. Oh, at first they'll be great. Heroin's great at first, too. And idols, when you finally get an idol, it's a high. But it's not enough just to shake the finger and say, I know this is wrong. You've got to see what you've done. You've got to unmask the delusional field for what it is. You've got to see that this is not something that you're after. This is something that's got you under its thumb. You've got to see it for the enemy that it is, number one. Number two, you've got to preach the gospel to yourself, which simply means you've got to say, this is not the thing that gives me worth. This is not my righteousness. This is not my worthwhileness. It's what Jesus has done for me. It's what Jesus says about me. So you have to recognize that. You have to talk to yourself about it. have a discipline, what I call the icing discipline. Now the icing discipline is this. What is icing on a cake? It's wonderful. But if you live on icing, no meat, no fish, no carbohydrates, just eat icing all the time. You know, a bowl of icing for breakfast, a bowl of icing for lunch, a bowl of icing for dinner. Now I'm not a doctor, but I think some doctors could tell you how much of a mess you would be if you lived on icing. You see, the Christian approach is not against pleasure. The Christian approach is not against pleasure, but the Christian approach says, I will not worship these things, nor will I abstain from these things. I will enjoy these things. Wants are not coveting. And therefore, whenever you enjoy something, you say, this is nice, but it's only icing. And when you lose something, you learn to say, that was nice, but it was only icing. God's my protein. God's my staple. It's a discipline. Fourthly, you have got to learn communion with God. Now, a year ago, we spent some time on this. I can't get into it now. Now, communion with God is not just saying your prayers, but it's learning to meditate on God. It's learning to seek God. It's learning to experience His love in your heart. There is no way that you are going to learn. No way you're going to learn. To find your deep inner needs met, so as to be free from coveting and grasping and discontent, until you learn how to regularly, periodically, just feel awash in the love of Jesus Christ as you meet with Him personally. That's all I can tell you. It's a discipline. You say, how do I do that? I say my prayer and I don't get anything out of it. All I can tell you is, don't stop until you learn that prayer is a lot more than that and how it can be more than that for you. Just don't stop. Lastly, you've got to have a clear conscience. You've got to obey. You've got to obey. You've got to look at those things which you know are God's will for your life and you've got to say, I will not have any sense of His presence and I will not have any content if I have a bad conscience. See, all those things together have to be working. There has to be the obedience. There has to be communion with God. There has to be the ability to process good and bad things all the time by saying, this is icing. This is good. This is not the cake. You have to learn to preach the gospel to yourself and unmask the enemies that purport to be your friends, your dreams. Then you will find that you can do all things through Him who strengthens me. Do you think that Jesus Christ, who lost all of His delight in God so that you could have delight in God, He turned, God turned His back on Jesus. Jesus lost all of His joy in God on the cross so that you could experience all of His joy. Do you think that He will fail to fill you up if you seek Him along the lines of the way we're talking about now? Of course not. The one verse that we didn't preach on, but I didn't read, but it's printed, and my God, verse 19, will meet all your needs according to His glorious riches in Jesus Christ. Trust Him to do that. Lift your empty hands and He'll fill it. I have learned the secret. We all can learn the secret. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you teach us how to be like Paul. Teach us because we have to learn it, so you have to be our teacher. We, this evening, say to you that we're your students. We say to you, show me what you have to do. We make ourselves available to learn, for we do want it. There's nothing more wonderful than this. And we know that your Son lost all of His joy in you, that we could have all of His joy in you in our own hearts. So, Father, deliver that for which Jesus died. We're ready. We're willing. We open our hearts for it. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
