TITLE: The Marks of the Spirit
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 5:18-21
TOPICS: The Holy Spirit Repentance Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: The Holy Spirit (1991)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-marks-of-the-spirit/

============================================================

Ephesians 5, 18-21. We'll look again at this passage on what it means to be filled with the Spirit. And if you were one of the people who afterwards got after me, this sermon is for you. You see, let me read you the passage and I'll summarize it. And we're going to look tonight as specifically as possible at what I would consider the two keys are that you must, the two key processes, the two key methods that you have to make use of in order to experience what Paul here calls the fullness of the Spirit. I'm just going to read what we've been reading, verses 18-21. Do not get drunk with wine, which leads to debauchery. Instead, be filled with the Spirit. Speak to one another with psalms, hymns, spiritual songs. Sing and make music in your heart to the Lord. Always give thanks to God the Father for everything in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And submit to one another out of reverence for Christ. There's so much in here, and what we have looked at so far is the very beginning of this passage. And last week we said, remember, we said first of all, that the condition or experience of being Spirit-filled is to have the truth shining into your heart. It's one thing to know that God is loving in an intellectual way, to know that there's a God who died for you on the cross, to know that God is powerful. It's another thing for that truth to shine into your heart, for those truths to move from being concepts and to become so real to you that you start to ask yourself, what am I afraid of? What am I impatient with? What am I sad for if he is this, and I am his, and he is mine? What's the matter with me? See, when you start talking to yourself like that, it's because the truth is shining, and that is the condition, we have talked about this for several weeks now, of what it means to be filled with the Spirit. And I just challenge those of you, the way you can tell whether you're a Christian or not is Christians know what that experience is like. Right now you might just be saying, yes, show me more about what it is. I know what that's like, but I so often do not know that. God, I'm not in that condition, that means you're a Christian. You go in and out of this. But on the other hand, if you say, I thought I was a Christian, I mean, I believe what the Bible teaches, and I believe Jesus is the Son of God, and I try my best to live a good life, but I really don't know what you're talking about. I've never had that sort of experience. I really don't know what you mean. This is gobbledygook. That's a bad sign, friends, because the fullness of the Spirit is just that. It shows you that Christianity is an experience of the whole person, of the whole heart. It's not merely an ethical system. It's not merely a set of moral rules. It's not merely a creed of doctrines. It's not less than those things. Of course, Christianity is a set of doctrines to believe. You're never going to hear from me the silliness of saying, oh, Christianity, there's no doctrine in Christianity, it's just an experience. That's silly. It's not less than doctrine. Of course, it's doctrine. It's not less than ethics. Of course, it's ethics. But it's far more. It's a whole life experience. And if you don't know what we're talking about, if you don't know what it means to have the truth shine, if you don't know what it means to not just believe that Jesus died for you on the cross, but to realize one day that he died for me, and that changes everything, and it just shines into your light, into your heart. Like the Charles Wesley song, long my imprisoned spirit lay, fast bound in sin and nature's night. Thine eye diffused a quickening ray. I woke the dungeon flamed with light. My chains fell off. My heart was free. I rose, went forth, and followed thee. If you don't know what that's talking about, if your religion is completely an intellectual thing, you don't know real Christianity. Then we said last week that this experience of the fullness of the Spirit comes as we use the regular means of grace. That means, and the means of grace are as we study the Bible, as we pray, as we worship, as we take the sacraments, as we have fellowship with other Christians, as we simply seek to believe in Christ and obey Christ and repent of our sins. As we just go through the Christian disciplines, that the fullness of the Spirit comes to us. But we said that this fullness of the Spirit is subject to degrees, that it has different levels. And sometimes in the path of duty, in the path of simply walking in the Spirit, sometimes we have these experiences of tremendous power and tremendous anointing and a tremendous sense of the reality and the presence of God that fills us. do mighty things for him. We talked about that last week and we said one of the great mistakes people make is to think that that is something that immediately eradicates sin. It does not. Immediately gives you victory over sin. It does not. It's a mistake to think that this is something that you can maintain all the time. It is not. It's something you find in the path of duty. We talked all about that. No reason to go back into it. So we said the fullness of the spirit comes simply as the truth shines in your heart as you use the means of grace. Afterwards a few people just ambushed me and said, wait a minute, I'm using the means of grace I think, but I don't know what you, but I'm still not filled with the spirit. I know I'm not. Not on the basis of the things that you discussed than the way you described it. I'm not. I read my bible. I come to church. I get some things out of it. But what do you do when you're using the means of grace? What are you actually doing when you do that? How are you filled with the spirit? How are you filled with the spirit? That means another sermon. Being filled with the spirit is important to, in talking about how to be filled with the spirit, you have to remember the spirit is a person. I've probably mentioned this before, but you know, the trouble with the terminology is it's easy for us to think of the spirit as an it. The spirit's a he. If the spirit was a liquid, then being filled with the spirit would be a matter of getting more pints and quarts. If the spirit was simply a power surge, then getting more of the spirit would be a matter of getting higher amps or wattage. But the spirit's a person. And so the question about being filled with the spirit would be this. How do you get filled with a person? That's the question. Now, being married, I know what it's like, and those of you who are married or have been married know what it's like, to go through a time in your marriage in which you're having plenty of, you're doing all the right things, it seems like. You're working together, you're living together, you're talking, you know, you're not doing anything wrong, and yet you realize that you stagnated, your relationship is stagnated, and you think back and you realize there was a time in your relationship in which you were filled with one another. But you're not now. Gone through the motions, but you're not now. You used to be filled with each other. Now, what does it mean to be filled with somebody? And this doesn't have to just happen romantically. You can be filled with somebody when you first come in underneath a great teacher or first come in under a great leader, or you hit it off with some friend who's just like you. To be filled with somebody means you come in under their personal influence. It means you become so aware of their desires and of their needs and of their wishes and of their wants and of their passions and of their proclivities. And you are extremely motivated to be responsive to them. And let me put it one more way. What does it mean to be filled with somebody? It means to be so under their personal influence. It means to be so responsive to everything about them. Some people call this a crush, but it's more than that. It's being filled with somebody. A crush is just a relatively immature, idolatrous form of this. Okay? I don't want you to think of this as a crush because it's something that can be abiding. You can be filled with a person and stay filled with a person. That's what a good marriage is. Be filled with a person is to be so under the influence. Paul says, don't be drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit. You can be under the influence of wine or of the Spirit. Be so under the personal influence of somebody and so responsive to everything about them. And as a result, there's two things you're always doing. You're always trying to please them and you're always listening to their advice. I remember very, very clearly, and to me this is one of the oldest illustrations I've got of what it means to be filled with a person, is when my grandmother had to move in with us. And I was an older teenager and my brother and sister were younger teenagers. And suddenly, her presence in the house, she filled the house. And we were filled with her. What does that mean? Well, it meant, you know, that first of all, we had to find out what pleased her. And we had to rearrange the house so that we didn't grieve her in any way. Now, of course, she was grieved by clutter. She was grieved by noise after 8 o'clock. This was a difficult thing. But you see, one part of being under her personal influence is we had to find out what grieved her. We had to find out what grieved her and what pleased her. And we had to rearrange the conditions of the house so that she was... tell you about how you should live your life. And the other way in which we were filled with her was we were constantly listening to her advice on how to live your life. And you see, there was a couple things we could have done. Now, I know this is a pretty negative illustration of being filled with somebody, but the basic dynamic holds true. We could have turned our back on her and not given her the respect that she had due. It was to honor our parents and honor our grandparents. And what we could have done is we could have said, I know that she doesn't like clutter, and I know that she doesn't like loud music on after 8 o'clock, but tough darts. This is my house, too. Instead, we decided we were going to be under her personal influence. We were responsive to her. On the other hand, very often you sat there and said, yes, grandmother, yes, grandmother, it's not 1880, grandmother. Under your breath, you know, kind of a long way down. But you listened to her because that was the other way of showing her respect. Now, the point is that when you're in love with somebody, when you're really under the influence, when you're really filled with somebody, those two things always are happening. You find out what grieves that person, and you do everything you can to rearrange things so they're pleased. You find out what advice they have, and you take their opinion, and you take their advice and their counsel with extreme seriousness. All right? What does it mean to be filled with the Spirit? What it means to be filled with the Spirit is the same thing. Don't grieve the Spirit, and don't quench the Spirit. It's the same two things. Find out what it is that grieves the Spirit, and pleads the Spirit. Secondly, find out, don't quench, means listen to the Spirit. You know, the word quench means to throw water on somebody. Have you ever tried to talk to someone, and give them advice, and it's very quick, if they don't want to hear it, they throw water on you. They put you out. They put the fire out. And so the two things are the same. With the Spirit of God, if the Bible says, if you want to be filled with the Spirit, don't grieve and don't quench. Now, here's the secret. As we said before, you can talk about how to be filled with the Spirit in terms of form or content. The form is, use the means of grace. Bible study, prayer, fellowship, sacraments. But the content, to talk about it in terms of content, what are you doing when you're reading the Bible? What should you be doing when you come to church and you worship? What should you be doing when you're praying? Two things, always two things. These two things are the essence of the Christian life. They're a dynamic. They're like two strokes in the piston. They're what makes the engine go forward. You can't have one without the other. In fact, when I first started these evening services in late September 1989, the very first thing I did was talk about what I said were the two sides of Christian growth. It's almost like the left foot, right foot. They both have to be happening. If any of you were here, then you'll know. The first one I called identifying the idols of the heart and the second one was called finding your identity in Christ. Another way to put it is repent and live by faith. Another way to put it is don't grieve the Spirit, that's repentant life, and don't quench the Spirit. That means listen to what the Spirit says about Christ. Or you see it everywhere. Everywhere the Bible tells you what is the essence of what it means to live the Christian life. In Colossians 3, it says set your mind on things which are above. That's living by faith. That's not quenching. And then it says put to death that which is earthly within you. That's repentance. That's don't grieve. You go to Romans 8. The same two things. It says set your mind on the things of the Spirit and mortify, put to death the deeds of the sinful body, the sinful flesh. You see it in Hebrews 12. It says cast off every sin and every weight that clings so close. See, that's don't grieve. That's repent. Set your eyes on Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith. That's live by faith. The same two things. When John Stott, John Stott, the great Bible expositor, expounds Romans 5, 6, 7, and 8. Great little book. I don't even know if it's in print anymore. It's called Men Made New. That would probably change the name now. But anyway, in Romans 8, he talks about these two things that Paul says you have to do. Set your mind on things of the Spirit and put to death that which is earthly within you. And he says those are the two sides of the Christian life. Mortification, put to death, and aspiration, put your mind on things which are above. Those of you who have been around realize that these have always been the two things that have to be done that we're constantly bringing out because they're constantly there all through the Scriptures. and study the Word of God. If you want to be filled with the Spirit, don't grieve the Spirit, please the Spirit. Don't quench the Spirit, listen to the Spirit. Now let me just, just give me about a couple minutes on each of these to show you as specifically as possibly what that means and how this leads to the Spirit-filledness that Paul describes and that our hearts so earnestly yearn for. Now first of all, look, don't grieve the Spirit. That actually is a verse that we passed by weeks ago in Ephesians 4, verse 30. Right in the middle of all of Paul's discussion of Christian lifestyle, saying, therefore speak truthfully, don't speak falsehood. Listen, in your anger don't sin. Don't let the sun go down on your anger. He who's been stealing must steal no longer. Don't let any unwholesome word coming out of your mouth. And then verse 30, and do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. To grieve the Spirit, boy there is so much in here. To grieve the Spirit means to oppose his passions. John Owen, I quoted him last week. There's a place where this, there's a Puritan writer who says this, The heart of the Spirit is infinitely more tender toward us than the most affected parent is toward a child. When he, with cost and care, has sought our holiness, and he sees instead we're clinging to pleasures of the world, how grieved, how provoked he is. Parents know that there is a bonding that goes on between your heart and the child. Those of you who have never been parents, I hope you don't necessarily yearn for this. It's not necessarily something that's so wonderful. It's just there. It's not noble. It's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it's not, it just happens to you. I was talking not too long ago with a couple of people, friends who had a mentally disabled, retarded child, and said, how do you feel toward that child? What have you learned about your own heart from having this child? And they said, what we've learned is that your love for your child has almost nothing to do with what you get back. That your heart just binds, bonds to the child. If you spend any time, if you take care of the child at all. I mean, you know, that doesn't happen if you stay away, or if you're completely, you know, if in various ways you're disengaged. But if you're taking care of that child, if you're having dealings with that child, you're bonded. And there's this unconditional love. There is no, no danger of you giving up on that child, regardless of what that child gives back to you. And then because of that, because you sacrifice, because you give, because you lay yourself out without even any thought about whether or not this is going to work, or whether this is going to succeed, or whether you're going to get repayment back, you just do it. You start to express your desires for that child. And you start to say, you start to teach. You start to express desires. And you start to say, pick up after yourself. Share what you have. Don't lie. Don't take candy or follow strangers. Eat a balanced diet. Get enough sleep. You just start expressing those sorts of things. Why? Do you sit down one day as a parent and make a list and say, well, how can I keep this kid busy? You know, how can I make this kid's life miserable? How can I make this kid's life miserable? You know, I had a miserable childhood. I'm going to do it too. You don't do that. And when you start to say, when you start to say, don't lie, share what you have, share your toys, pick up after yourselves, don't talk to strangers, what you're just doing is you're saying, kid, if you don't abide by these principles, your life's not going to work. It's just not going to work. Now, the worst experience about being a parent is that it's inevitable that your children at times will turn to you and say, all these rules, you just don't want me to be happy. You just don't want me to be happy. That's why you won't let me stay out until three in the morning. I'm six years old now. What do you think I am, a child like my younger brother who's only three? You just, you know, in other words, you just want me to be miserable. And when your child says that, and when your child disobeys you, what's your response? First response is you're mad, of course. You're very mad. But every parent understands that underneath it, the anger is actually, is ultimately a superficial emotion. The real thing you feel, the real deep thing that you feel, is grief. Because when you lay yourself out, when you lay yourself out, the child's happiness and joy and prosperity and health and safety, when you put yourself totally out for that child, and then instead of the person just disobeying but saying, you want to make my life miserable. Friends, the grief that comes to a parent's heart, there's just nothing deeper. And you don't have to be a parent to know this, because some of you have been in similar situations. You put yourself totally out for someone, unconditionally, asking for nothing, freely giving. And not just to be rejected, that's one thing, but to have somebody turn around and say, you just want to make me unhappy, don't you? To accuse you of ill will. You get mad, yeah, but underneath there's grief. There is nothing, there is no deeper hurt than that. Now listen to me. Where does the Spirit of God speak? Where do you find the Spirit of God's passions? Where do you find the Spirit of God's desire for you? The Spirit of God, the Bible tells us, has come into your life freely by grace. Just like a parent comes into a child's life. A child doesn't ask for a parent. A child doesn't merit or deserve a parent. A parent comes in. In the same way the Spirit of God comes into your life, He comes from unimaginable splendor. The Bible tells us that when you believe in Jesus Christ as Savior, the moment that happens, He comes into your life. And He's moved in from a pretty nice neighborhood. And He comes into your life. And how would you like to move into a vermin-infested shack on the bank of the Ganges? Now you're getting the hang of it. He comes on in. You haven't deserved it at all. And He begins to teach you things. He shows you His passions in the Word of God. Now we know that because the Bible says that's what it is. It says in Ephesians 6.17, The sword of the Spirit is the Word of God. There's a place where Peter is preaching in the book of Acts. And he quotes the second psalm. And he says, As the Holy Spirit said by the mouth of David. And then he quotes Psalm 2. Isn't that an interesting, sort of a little bit of a tangent. I mean, obviously, Peter wasn't trying to teach about the doctrine of the Scripture there. But it's an incredibly revealing statement. The Apostle Peter says, As the Holy Spirit said by the mouth of David. What David said, what is in the Word of God, is the Spirit of God's passions for you. And so what is the Spirit of God saying to you in His Word? It's interesting. He says, Share what you have. Don't lie. He says, You know, It sounds a lot like a parent, doesn't it? He says, Use your sexuality properly. He says, Don't be selfish. He says, Give a lot of your money away. He tells you a lot of things. And when you say, If I obey the Word of God, I'll be unhappy. If I tell the truth here, if I practice celibacy here, if I use my money this way, if I open my mouth about the Lord and what He means to me, if I obey the Word of God, it'll be impractical. I'll be unhappy. It won't work. What you're doing at that point is you're saying to the Holy Spirit, If I listen to you, you're out to make my life miserable. There is no deeper grief than that. And the most remarkable and astonishing thing about this word, grieve, is the word grief only, only is used as someone who is experiencing a shattering loss. And if it's true that whenever, it's so clear from the Bible that to grieve the Holy Spirit simply means to sin, simply means to disobey the Ten Commandments, simply means to disobey the Word of God. If that means he's grieved, that means he feels he's losing you. You don't see the Spirit of God's attitude anywhere of saying when you disobey, the Spirit of God does not say, You impudent little punk. It says he's grieved. Now, you only get grieved when you're losing something. Have you ever taken hold of somebody who was addicted to something and said, I'm losing, I'm mad, yeah, I'm mad at what you're doing, but I'm losing you. You're less yourself every time I see you. And it shatters me. What kind of God is this? What kind of God is this? lives inside the hovel of our lives and works with slow learners. You know how maddening that is. And expresses his passion to you. Just like a parent and says, look, I've laid myself out for you and the only reason I'm telling you these things is not to make your life miserable. It's the only way your life is ever going to work. I'll do anything for you. I haven't done anything for you. I've sent my son into your life. I sent my son to die so I could come into your life. And when you say, uh-uh, you're just trying to make me unhappy. He's shattered. This is one of the most radical statements in the whole Bible. He is shattered by your sin. He feels he's losing you. He realizes that you are destroying your potential. You are trampling on the prevailing and abiding care of someone who cares for you so much that he is shattered with grief when he sees you failing to be a holy person because he knows that that holiness will be your happiness, will be your fulfillment, will be the realization of your potential. And he is shattered by that. He is so intimately and personally bound up, he has bound his heart up so much with us that he is shattered when you sin. And the hurt that you inflict on him, there is none deeper. And that's the reason why John Owen puts it this way, as we read, the heart of the Spirit is infinitely more tender toward us than the most affected parent toward a child. When he, with cost and care, has sought our holiness and sees instead we are clinging to the pleasures of this world, how grieved, how provoked he is. Now, what does all this mean? My dear friends, you have to use this. It's not good enough to sit here and go, oh, that's really interesting. I never thought of it that way. You have to use it. You must apply this teaching. The grief of the Spirit, a grieving God, you have to apply this teaching in two ways. Number one, recognize, this is more of an intellectual way, recognize the fact that Christianity is completely different than the other religions. If you look, we talked about this weeks ago, but I'll say it here in passing. A lot of you weren't here then. If you look carefully, you will see that most of the great ethical systems of the world say very similar things. You look at Confucius, look at Mohammed and Islam, look at Judaism, look at Christianity, look at Greek paganism, look at humanism, look at them, what do they do? Almost none of them say, go ahead, lie. Don't share. In fact, by the way, the other day I was having a discussion. There's a tremendous amount of unanimity. I know whenever anybody hears me preach on the Ten Commandments and I say, well, the Bible says you shouldn't have sex out of sight of marriage, people look at me saying, boy, you're really weird. I mean, nobody believes that anymore. So, you know, it's interesting. This is something not... Orthodox Christians and Catholic Christians and Protestant Christians, I felt that, and Judaism and Islam and Confucianism, virtually every religion and every ethical system that has ever been put together has always agreed on that. You know, it's one of the few things we agree on, so to look at me like I'm crazy isn't quite fair, I always say. Now, the point is that, well, then how are all these groups different, you say? How are they different? Because of the motivation. Because every other religion says, obey the rules because then you will know you're doing what's right. You know, Jerry Lewis, one day, one time on his telethon says, give to my telethon, you know, give to this cause and then you will know that you're a compassionate person. And that's what other religions do. They say, do this because it's practical. Do this because it's virtuous. Do it because it's right. Now, by the way, as a Christian minister, I can say, yes, obey the Ten Commandments because it's virtuous. Obey the Ten Commandments because it's practical. Obey the Ten Commandments because it's right. But those are all peripheral. Those are all superficial. Why? What is the ultimate reason that you obey the Word of God? Because God is personally intimate with us. He's bound up His life and His heart with us. And to disobey the Word of God is to bring tremendous grief into His heart. Who, of sheer grace, and without any obligation on His part, has so bound His life to our life by the filaments of the Spirit. That's the reason why Paul, right in the middle of all that stuff in Ephesians 4, when he says, don't lie and don't cheat and don't steal, and all of a sudden, right in the middle, he says, and do not grieve the Spirit of God. And we'll see you next time. I'll see you next time. this is right, this is virtuous, this is practical. But, how do you apply this so that you can be filled with the Spirit? In a way, it's very simple. So, what do you think of sin as? You see, when you sit down to pray, and you know you're being tempted to do something wrong, let's say you're struggling with a desire to get somebody back. Vendetta. Okay, you're struggling with temptation. Or, let's say, you sit down and you're not struggling with the temptation to sin, you're struggling with the guilt of having sin. What do you do? Now, if you come at it, and you forget about the grief of the Spirit, you will find, for example, if instead, you say, all right, let's just say you're being tempted. How am I going to deal with this temptation? Well, you look at the set of rules and you say, I better not do anything. I really better not do this because God doesn't want me to do it. He'll probably punish me. My friends won't like me. The guy will probably pay back. It'll just escalate. It'll just get worse. And it'll just get worse. So, I might as well not do it. That won't work very well. It won't work. And as a matter of fact, haven't you ever read Romans 7? Where Paul says, the more I tried not to do something, the more I wanted to do it. Have you ever noticed that you have a child on his way to go clean up his room? Just because he knows he really ought to. And if on the way his mother accidentally says, oh, by the way, your room's a mess. Go clean it up. The kid will turn right around and go walk the other way. I was going to do it, but not now that she told me. And you don't think that that's deep in the heart of every person? You just think that's funny about the kid? My dear friends, if you simply go and look at the list of prohibitions and say, I better not do that, that won't work. But if instead you fill your mind with the thought of the grief of the spirit, if instead you think of sin, what do you think of sin as? The breaking of a bunch of rules? Or do you think of sin as what it really is? A trampling on the love of someone who says, you will not be yourself unless you listen to me. And if you don't listen to me, it just shatters my heart. And I experience grief and loss. I tell you, friends, just to look at the prohibition means it'll make you actually, you make your temptation worse. Haven't you ever noticed when you really see someone just telling you just don't do that or you'll be in trouble, it almost makes you want to do it anyway. It's the prohibition that makes it worse. But it's the knowledge of the grief of the spirit that's going to give you the power to deal with temptation. It's the reason that some of you have never been able to overcome certain temptations. Never. If you understand it this way, you will be filled with the spirit. If you go and it's what Paul says, it calls in Romans 8, mortification. We talked about it a little bit at the end of last week, but you see I snuck it in under a different heading. It's the same thing. Mortification, putting to death the sin within you, is not just confessing it. To go and say, Lord, I did it again. Or please give me strength. This is a process by which you sit down and you think about the grief of the spirit until the sin is loosened and uprooted at the motivational level. Well, you say, how does that work? I'll tell you specifically how it works. Right now, I work 10 minutes a day on two particular kinds of sins that I'm trying to loosen up. I'm trying to deal with them. I spend 10 minutes a day doing this stuff that I'm talking about. Mortifying my sin. Uprooting it at the motivational level. Thinking about the grief of the spirit until the power of the sin starts to go away. Now, the two particular sins, one is it's cowardice. Being afraid to tell people the truth when I should. Being afraid that people will reject me or be unhappy with me if I tell them the truth. That's one. And the other one is a self-indulgent use of time. Wanting to be more disciplined with my use of time. So what do I do? I sit down and I don't say, boy, I better do this. I better, you know, I really need to tell the truth or eventually people will think I'm a coward. Does that help? Oh, yeah, it really helps. A lot. Lord, I'm tempted every day to be a coward and I don't want people to think I'm a coward. So you've just got to help me. You know, I did that for a long time. It doesn't work. But instead, I sit down and say, why are you grieved by my cowardice? First of all, I write down a list of all the reasons why the Spirit would be grieved. You see, the Spirit loves me and therefore, there's certain dangers and things the Spirit wants me to be free from. So I'll make a list of all the reasons why cowardice is something that the Spirit is really... do? Why doesn't Jesus want me to do it? Why is it bad for me? Why is it bad for the people around me? And I make a list of it. And I just listen, in a sense, look at what the Scripture says about cowardice, and I listen to what the Spirit says. He's saying, here's all the reasons why it's bad. Here's all the reasons why it's bad. And then secondly, I think of all the reasons why cowardice is an affront to Him personally. When I'm scared, when I bite my tongue when I really should say something, when I chicken out, how am I treating the Spirit? How am I thinking of Him unworthily? How am I turning my back on Him? How am I treating Him lightly? In other words, I think of all the reasons and why this sin grieves the Spirit. And then I thank Him for His love. Because here's, listen, friends, what if you've already done a sin and you go to God and you want to confess it? If all you do is you go to Him and you say, oh my, if, you know, I've done it again, how long will He put up with me? When will He cast me off? That's not going to help. But if instead you turn to the grief of the Spirit, listen, the very thing that makes you sorrow over your sin, His love for you, that's the very thing, His love for you, the very thing that causes you to sorrow over your sin is the very thing that assures you that He would never cast you off. The very thing that makes you really, truly sorrow over your own sin, the fact that He loves you like this. How can I repay Him for what He's done? How can I do this in His face? That's how you confess your sin. But instead of it making you feel like you need to get away from God, I've talked to a lot of people who said, I repented and all it did was make me feel worse and worse and like I really had nothing, God has cast me off. If that's what happens, when you repent, you have not thought about the grief of the Spirit. You haven't repented to a grieving God. Because the very thing that makes you repent, His love for you also assures you that He is with you forever. He will never forsake you. There is no way He would ever cast you off. That's the reason you want to change. When somebody says, oh, I'm afraid He's going to cast me off, that shows that you don't even have the right motivation for repenting. The motivation for repenting is, here's someone who has said, I will never leave or forsake you. How can you do this to somebody like that? And when you repent that way, when you think of the grief of the Spirit, it creates a grief in you, but it's a clean grief. It's the grief of when a parent hugs you and says, what you've done has hurt me very much, but you know, you know, you know, I never, ever, ever shut my heart to you. And the child says, yes, I know. Well, that's the reason why I feel so bad, because I know you're somebody like that. See, that's how you're supposed to be talking to the Spirit. If you have a kind of confession and repentance life that does not bring about deeper assurance of His love and a greater horror at your sin and a greater self-control because the sin becomes less and less attractive to you and has less and less power over you, then you simply have not yet learned how to repent in this way. How to repent by thinking of the grief of the Spirit. Grieve not the Spirit of God. That's one of the two keys to how to be filled with the Spirit. If every day you sit down and spend 10 or 15 minutes thinking like that, is another way I like that. You've heard me put it this way. I'm just trying to show you how many ways there are to put it. It's all the same. I've said, don't take your sin to the law. Take your sin to the cross. Don't take your sin to Mount Sinai. Take your sin to Christ dying. Don't say, oh, I have to repent because God will get me. Say, I have to repent because look what He's done for me. And if you look at it that way, you will find that you will change. Habits that you have been repenting of for years and have never changed will start to change. You'll be filled with the Spirit. The truth will begin to shine. Has it begun to shine a little bit while I'm talking? You know, what I'm trying to do is I'm trying to tell you the sorts of things that I have thought when the truth is shining into my heart. That's all. It's just stuff that you write down in your journal. When the truth gets radioactive and begins to shine, you write it down. Do you sense it? Do you feel it? You can do it too. Now, the other thing, and I, if you, somebody's sitting there saying, he just took 35 minutes on the first one. What is he going to do on the second one? The other thing is quench. And the answer is, I, I'm not going to do much more time at all. It's a hot night. I'll just outline it for you. And you've actually heard me preach on it before. What does it mean to quench the Spirit? Don't grieve the Spirit, but don't quench the Spirit. That's the other. it says, Do not despise prophesying. Don't quench the Spirit of God. Since the word quench means to put out, it means the Spirit of God, when the Spirit of God is teaching you, you've got to listen. Now, remember John 16? Paul, Jesus, pardon me, Jesus says, it's very late, fourth service, you know. Jesus says, John 16, that the job of the Spirit is to glorify me. Is to glorify me. To quench the Spirit means that you're not continually looking at the glory of Christ and seeing Him as your all in all. The Spirit of God's job is to show you that He is your wisdom, He is your righteousness, He is your sanctification, and He is your redemption. And that means, here's two little things about how to quench the Spirit and how you can apply it during every day in your quiet time. For example, you quench the Spirit whenever you have any, any impulse, any desire in your life to change, and then you don't follow through. The Bible says, no one seeks God. The Bible says, the natural mind is enmity with God, Romans 8. That means that if tonight, you have a desire to make a change, any change at all, that's the Spirit saying something to you. Don't give yourself too much credit. And if you don't follow through, if by next Sunday you realize, I never did that, you're quenching the Spirit. It's the Spirit's job to show you these things. That means tomorrow. That means follow through because, see, the way the Spirit works, quenching the Spirit means putting water on the Spirit. The way the Spirit works is, He gives you an insight that convicts you. You say, I'm going to change. I'm going to talk to that person. I'm going to make that move. I'm going to do that. I'm going to discipline myself. So, you know, you get convicted to do something. Then when you do it, that brings more light and more truth shining in your heart. And the more truth shines in your heart, then you go out and do new things. And the more you do it, the more the truth. And the more the truth, the more you do. And the more you do, the more the truth. But you quench the Spirit. You break the cycle. When you get illumination today on Sunday, you say, tomorrow I'm going to be different. Tomorrow I'm going to change this or that. And you don't. You've quenched the Spirit. You need to make a list of those things that the Spirit tells you and anything that, any, any impulse to amend your life in accordance with His will is from the Spirit. But lastly, as many of you know, if you sit here and think, I am a failure, I am a sinner, I have done very, very bad things, and I am not a lovable person, and God cannot accept or love me, that is the ultimate quenching of the Spirit. Because Jesus Christ said that the Spirit's job is to glorify me. And that means that you're saying that you're, glorify means wait, remember? And that means you're saying my sins are weightier than what He has done. Can I give you an example of this? John Newton, one of my heroes, many years ago, was writing a young pastor. And all this young pastor was doing, sounds like a lot of you, all he was ever doing was complaining about what a failure he was, complaining about what a, you know, how weak he was, and how sinful he was, and how God couldn't accept him. And listen, listen, listen, to what John Newton says. Basically, what John Newton is saying is, for every one look at your sin, take ten looks at your Savior. That is the job of the Spirit. And if you don't, if for every one look at your Savior, you take ten looks at your sin, you're quenching the Spirit of God. It means tomorrow morning, as you're considering how you grieve the Spirit, you also got to consider how you quench the Spirit. As you consider how you have failed Him, and sinned, at the same time, and in a commensurate way, you also need to say, and if I believe that God does not love me, if I fail to see that I am perfect in Him, I'm quenching the Spirit. John Newton writes this man, and he says, and I'll just close with his letter, but it's great. It's great counseling, friends. Those of you who are counselors, listen to this. He says, your understanding of the gospel is intellectually sound, but there's much legalistic in your experience of Christ. And that perplexes you. You're very capable of giving advice to others, but I wish you could apply more effectively what you preach. And I wish you could distinguish in your own case between a cause of humiliation and a reason of distress. You can't be too aware of your inward and inbred evils, which you complain of. But you may be, yes, in fact, you are. it hard to believe it compatible with divine purity that God could embrace or employ such a monster as yourself. You express not only a low opinion of yourself, which is right, but too low an opinion of the person, work, and promises of the Redeemer, which is certainly wrong. Did you hear that? He says, you can't complain too much about your sin. Oh, no. That's not your problem. Go ahead, complain about your sin. Take a look at it. Look the fool in the face. You are a monster. You have all these inward evils. See, that doesn't seem like the good counseling, does it? He says, that's not your problem. He says, keep looking at them. You're probably even worse than you think. He says, that's not your problem. That's not your problem at all. Your problem is, he says, you say you express not only a low opinion of yourself, which is perfectly right, but you also express too low an opinion of the person, work, and promises of the Redeemer, which is certainly wrong. See? If God cannot work with you, that means that your sins have more glory, more weight than the work of the Redeemer. It seems, too, that though the total depravity of human nature is a fundamental article of your creed, you do not actually, actually accept what you say. Or else, why are you so continually disappointed and surprised that in and of yourself you find nothing but evil? A man with two broken legs will hardly wonder that he's not able to run or to stand. If you know you're a sinner, why are you constantly surprised by it? And though you say you have nothing good of your own, you also believe you ought to have. And certainly you would if you were under the law, but the gospel is provided for the helpless and the worthless. Now listen. You have not, you cannot have anything in the sight of God, but what you derive from his righteousness and atonement of Jesus. Sometimes Satan wants to teach you humility, but though I wish to be humble, I desire not to learn in his school. His premises are true. We are vile, wretched creatures. But then he draws abominable conclusions from them, Satan does, and would teach you that therefore you ought to question the power or the willingness or the faithfulness of Christ. Indeed, your complaints about your sin, when we come to examine them closely, have as much self-will, self-righteousness, unbelief, pride, and impatience mingled with them that they are little better than the worst evils you can complain of. He is saying when you refuse to see that God loves you, when you quench the spirit, when you refuse to see that you are righteous in him, You may be rehearsed with थ bar with the spirit, you may be behaviour. You may have remembered that besides science fiction that you do that many times. You may be proszę.
