TITLE: The Disciple and the Bible
SCRIPTURE: John 13:18-24
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Jesus, Mission, and Glory: New Identity
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-disciple-and-the-bible/

============================================================

This is a reading from John chapter 13 verses 18 through 24. I am not referring to all of you. I know those I have chosen. But this is to fulfill this passage of scripture. He who shared my bread has turned against me. I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen, you will believe that I am who I am. Very truly, I tell you, whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me. And whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me. After he had said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, Very truly, I tell you, one of you is going to betray me. His disciples stared at one another at a loss to know which of them he meant. One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him. Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, Ask him which one he means. The word of the Lord. So, what we're doing is we're looking at John chapter 13 through 17, like all year. This is the last time Jesus has a chance to teach his disciples before he dies. It's essentially a training session. And you might say, well, training for what? Well, verse 20 is a pretty good example, a pretty good distillation of what he's training them for. I tell you, whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me, and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me. He is sending them out to represent him. He's sending them out to represent him. That's what it means to be a Christian, is to be sent into the world as ambassadors, as representatives of Jesus. And that's the reason why we are studying this passage, this long section of Scripture, because we are submitting ourselves to the same training regimen, so that we, if we're Christians, we can actually represent Christ in the world. We can be sent out to. Now, one of the great things about doing what we're doing, which is moving through these passages verse by verse, is you can slow down and meditate and get some great treasure out of just a couple of verses, and that's what we're going to do right now, because verse 18 is a turning point in chapter 13. Chapter 13, verses 1 to 17, was about the foot washing. Jesus starts his training of his disciples around this action of foot washing, and then he says, as I have washed your feet, so you should wash one other's feet. And we spent a number of weeks unpacking that. What does that mean about Jesus? What does that mean about us? We're not going to recount that. But when it gets to verse 18, all the way to the end of the chapter, suddenly things get very dark, because this entire section has to do with the fact that one of the 12 disciples that Jesus has been discipling and who is his friend and who has eaten bread with him and who he has given so much of himself to is going to betray him. That's Judas. Judas is going to betray him. He's going to betray him to death. And everything that happens in these passages, this last part, is Jesus actually not only reaching out to Judas, which we will see next week, but teaching us things about that. In other words, the first time he does the foot washing, he teaches around that. What did we learn from this? This time he's talking about the fact that one of his disciples is going to betray him. We learn a lot of things from that he teaches us, but we're only going to start with one today. Because it's, and I think it's usually overlooked. I have to say I've always overlooked it. Because you want to get down into the part of the passage where he's talking to Judas and reaching out to him. But notice before he even deals with Judas or talks to Judas, he talks to the disciples and he says, and we're going to only look at these first two verses. I am not referring to all of you. I know who I have chosen. Now, that's looking back at verse 17 and 16, where he has said, I want you all to wash one another's feet and then you'll be blessed. And then he says, but I know not all of you will. I know your hearts. And he can see into your hearts. And he says, I realize one of you has not given me your heart. One of you is going to betray me. So I have not chosen all of you. In other words, even though you're here, I mean, there's a certain sense in which Jesus is saying, of course, I've chosen you because here you are. You're all being trained. But I can see into your hearts and I have not chosen all of you. And it's his way of saying, I see one of you is going to betray me. But then he looks, and essentially he's talking to the other 11 when he says, but this is to fulfill this passage of scripture. He who shared my bread has turned against me. that when it does happen, you will believe that I am who I am. Now, we're going to learn a lot about what Jesus says about the scripture and what the scripture is and what it is in his life. Because he's actually saying, we're about to go into a dark time, my friends. Lots of terrible things are about to happen. I'm going to get betrayed. I'm going to get arrested. I'm going to be put to death. And during all of this, you are going to be completely confused. You're going to go into despair. You're going to think we've reached a dead end. You're going to think, God, what is God doing here? And you're going to feel like we're at a dead end. And it's going to be absolute terrible darkness. But if you knew the scripture like I knew the scripture, and if you read the scripture like I read the scripture, you would know there's a way through. Now, you don't right now, but I'm going to tell you this now so that afterwards you'll see that if you really had understood the scripture and what it was about, you would have been able to handle this a whole lot better. I'm handling it pretty well. I'm daunted. It's going to be very difficult. But because I understand and I'm using the scripture and the way I read the scripture, I'm going to be able to get through it. And I want you to be able to do that too. And actually, if you take a look carefully, there's three things Jesus is actually hinting at here in his own attitude towards scripture, which we can unpack by looking at the rest of what the gospels tell us about him. First of all, this is to fulfill the passage of scripture. For Jesus Christ, the Bible was his comprehensive authority. But then secondly, because he read it, he who has shared my bread has turned against me. That's a quote from Psalm 41. He read it as a life-changing story. And therefore, verse 19, it was his lifeline in adversity. He was able to get through things because of, in other words, because the scripture was his comprehensive authority and because it was his lifelong, and he read it as a life-changing story, it turned into his lifeline in adversity. Now, I'm going to unpack that right now. But here's a little theological background. For many years, I didn't really understand this, but in Acts chapter 10, verse 38, Paul says that Jesus Christ went around doing good because God anointed him with power and God was with him. And I remember up until I read that verse and meditated on it, I remember I began to think that I thought that really the reason why Jesus was able to do the great things he did was because he was God. So he had this divine power and he was drawing on his divine power. But Philippians chapter 2 says that when Jesus Christ became a human being, he laid aside his glory, which is to say, not that he wasn't God, but that he no longer relied on his, you might say, divine power and divine prerogatives. And because he came as a human being and he came to live the life we should have lived, he was our representative, therefore, essentially, he did what we should do. Everything he did, he did by relying on God. He didn't do it on his own power. Paul says God anointed him with power and he relied on God. Now, how did Jesus Christ do it? The reason that's important is Jesus Christ, as great as he was, didn't have, didn't use any resources that you and I don't have access to. Okay? You know, don't look at me and say, well, he's Jesus. Of course he would do that. He had the same resources you do. And one of those resources we're going to see right here is the scripture. Okay? I said there's three things you have to understand about Jesus' own attitudes towards scripture. Number one, it was his comprehensive authority. See where he says, this is to fulfill this passage of scripture. Do you know how often Jesus talks about that? One of the most memorable places is in Matthew chapter 26, verse 54, where they come to arrest him and Peter pulls out his sword. And Jesus says, put your sword away. Don't you know I could ask my father to send 12 legions of angels to rescue me? And then he says, but how would the scripture be fulfilled? At that, in other words, I have got to align with the scripture, Peter. Put your sword down. Or in Luke chapter 18, verse 31, they, why are we going to Jerusalem? They say to Jesus. It's dangerous up there. And Jesus says, I'm going up to Jerusalem to fulfill all that was written about the son of man in the scripture. Or in Matthew, Mark 14, when they come to arrest him, he says, every day I was in the temple courts. Why didn't you arrest me there? Ah, because the scripture had to be fulfilled. Now, at every spot in Jesus' life, he's aligning his life with scripture. I can't do that, Peter, because I have to fulfill scripture. That's not going to happen. So at every single point, he's aligning his life with scripture. to say, in the Sermon on the Mount, there's a famous place in the Sermon on the Mount, Matthew 5, 18, where Jesus says, not a jot or tittle of the word of God will pass away till it's all fulfilled. Now, the jot or tittle. A jot was the yod, which is the smallest of all Hebrew letters, and the tittle was part of a Greek letter, I mean a Hebrew letter. And so here's what Jesus is saying. Not just that every verse of the Bible is scripture is God's word, but every word is inspired by God. Every single word. In Matthew 19, just understand Jesus' view of this. Matthew 19, Jesus is talking about marriage. And he quotes Genesis 2, 24. A man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. And he says, God says. Jesus says. God says. A man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. But if you go back to Genesis 2, 24, you'll see it's an account of God. It's a narrative, by the way. It's an account of God creating Adam and Eve, bringing Eve to Adam. And they're having their first wedding day. It's lovely. And it's all about what God does and what he's doing. And it's the author of Genesis who says, therefore, a man shall leave his father and cleave to his wife. In Genesis 2, God isn't speaking. It's the author of Genesis. But Jesus Christ quotes the author of Genesis as if God said that. You know why? Because Jesus is showing us that whatever scripture says, God says. Jesus did not believe in a red letter edition of the Bible. He didn't like red letter editions. You know what I mean? In other words, red letter editions are here's the words of God, here's the words of Jesus. Jesus says every single thing that the Bible says, God says. And not just every verse or every idea, but every word. And he doesn't just believe it up here like I believe in the authority of the Bible, but he's aligning every single part of his life with it. And that's why when he says, this is to fulfill. What's about to happen to me is to fulfill scripture. This is the way he lived his life. Seeing everything in terms of scripture. Bringing everything into alignment with scripture. Now, let me just say something a little cutting. I constantly hear people say to me, well, I'm interested in Jesus and I like Jesus and I find Jesus interesting. I'd really like to know more about Jesus, but I can't accept everything the Bible says. So what you're saying is I like Jesus, but I want to reject the very foundation and mainspring of his entire life. That's nonsense. You can't have Jesus in your life if the Bible is not the center of your life, because that is to have Jesus in the center of your life. I mean, how in the world could you say, I would like Jesus' help, I would like Jesus in my life, but I don't want to make the Bible the absolute comprehensive authority of my life when that was the very center of his own. John Stott, in a little booklet years ago called The Authority of the Bible, wrote this. He said, the authority of the Bible and of Jesus Christ stand or fall together. If you don't see the Bible as your comprehensive authority, you don't have any Jesus, or at least you're rejecting the very thing that Jesus lived for. And if you want Jesus, you've got to have the authority of the Bible, so they stand and fall together. So first of all, you can see when he says this is to fulfill the passage of Scripture, that's pointing to the fact that Jesus, for Jesus, the Bible is his comprehensive authority. Secondly, then he quotes Psalm 41. And he says, yeah, the Scripture predicted that I was going to be betrayed. The whole thing that was going to happen, you're all going to be shocked, and everybody's going to be shocked, but I know because the Bible said it was going to happen. And he quotes Psalm 41. He who shared my bread has turned against me. Okay, you say, fine. Well, okay, I'll tell you what. Go back and actually read that passage. Go back to Psalm 41 and read it, and you're going to be a little perplexed. Because it's just a Psalm of David. It's just David. And David is writing about the fact that one of his best friends, a person who had eaten bread with him, has rejected him and has betrayed him. And he's going to be very upset, you know, and that sort of thing. But you look and you say, well, wait a minute. There's nothing in there about the Messiah. There's no prophecy here. This is just David having a really bad day. And Jesus is saying, see, the Bible, you know, the Scripture talked about that. Now, when you actually start to get behind all the places where Jesus says, see, this was about me, and this was about me, and this is about me, you go back into the Old Testament, and you read them, you're going to start to scratch your head. Because he's going to quote anything that David says and say, say, David, whatever happens to David is really about me. Whatever happens to Joseph is really about me. And it's not just Jesus that does that. All the rest of the world. up on Christmas pretty soon. We're going to get to a place where you might hear read the place where the little infant baby Jesus, Herod wants to kill him. So his father and his mother warned in a dream, go to Egypt to get away from Herod. And when Herod dies, they go back to Nazareth. And Matthew writes down that was predicted by the Old Testament. He says, because as the scripture said, then he quotes Hosea, out of Egypt, I've called my son. But if you actually go back to Hosea, you'll see it's just talking about the Exodus. It's just talking about Israel, which God calls my son. The nation of Israel is being brought out of Egypt. And Matthew looks back and says, oh, the Exodus is really about Jesus. Israel's about Jesus. David's about Jesus. Joseph's, it's all pointing to Jesus. And you go, what? And what Jesus is saying in this little, see this little hint, when he says everything in the Old Testament is all, everything in the Bible is pointing to me, is what he's saying. Here's what he's saying. He's saying there's two ways to read the Bible. You can read it all about, is it all about you, or you can read the Bible as if it's all about him. Let me tell you how radically different those ways are. The reason why we haven't just stopped and said, the Bible, it should be your comprehensive authority, okay? Let us pray. The reason why we're now talking about the fact that Jesus read it as a life-giving story, it wasn't just his authority, he read it as a life-giving story, is because you can read the Bible the way the Pharisees read the Bible. They saw a lot of trees. They saw no forest. They saw a lot of trees. They saw, you know, here's this rule and this rule and this rule and this rule, and that's true. There's lots and lots of laws in the Bible. And they read a lot of stories, the story of Abraham, the story of Job, and the story of Joseph, and the story of David, and everyone has a moral. So if you read the story of Abraham, the moral is, you have to have faith in the story of Joseph, and the moral is, you better, you know, he forgave his brothers who betrayed him, so you ought to forgive. And the moral of David is, you ought to have courage, and you go up against Goliath, and the moral of Job is, you should be faithful in suffering. And so the Pharisees, because they only saw the trees, and they saw it as a whole book filled with stories and rules, what did that make the Pharisees? The Pharisees believed in the authority of the Bible, right? The Pharisees tried to align every part of their life with the Bible, right? What did it make them? Pharisees. It wasn't enough just to accept the authority of the Bible. You have to see what it's about. And because they saw only pieces, but they saw the stories, but not the stories as all chapters in one single story. Or another way, every year at the beach, we always put out a jigsaw puzzle. Now, I hate jigsaw puzzles, actually. But other members of our family and friends do it. So the very first day at the beach, you lay at the jigsaw puzzle, you put all the pieces out like this, right? I look at that, and I say, great, knock yourself out. I'm going to the beach. And there's people who will spend hours, stay up late, fix it. But you see, you know why they have to put it together? You know, they just can't stand us letting it all be out there. It looks kind of pretty in a way, all the pieces. It looks like a kind of modern art. So it's all out there. But the reason why our friends don't want to leave it that way is they're not Pharisees. See, Pharisees just rejoice in all the pieces. But the point is, you want to see how they fit together to see what the puzzle is actually about. You know, it's a picture of somebody, or it's a picture of something. It's really not just a bunch of pieces. And Jesus says, you can just lay all the pieces out and just read it as a bunch of stories with morals, and you're going to be crushed because you're going to have the impression that the only way I'm going to ever get the favor of God is if I just do all these things. But what if all the rules are pointing to somebody? What if all the stories are actually pointing to somebody? What if when you put it all together, you see how it fits together? It's all pointing to Jesus. See, if you read the Bible as a bunch of rules, then it's all about you, what you have to do to get to God, and it'll crush you. But what if you say, wait a minute, why would Jesus be the true Israel? Because Israel was given the law of God at Mount Sinai and told if you obey, you will be blessed, and if you disobey, you'll be cursed and exiled and rejected. And they were. But Jesus Christ is the true Israel because he's the only one who ever lived the life we should have lived and loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind, loved his neighbor as himself. He's the only true Israel, and he earned the blessing, the only one who earned the blessing. But then at the end of his life, he was exiled. He was, he was, he was. get his blessing. If you only see Israel, you're just going to say, I'm going to have to live up and do better than Israel. You never will. You won't do it. But if you see Israel's pointing to Jesus, there's hope. Or David. Little David goes up there against Goliath, right? And what's the moral of that story? The bigger they are, the harder they fall. So if you just really just suck it up, you can handle anything? No. What if you read the Bible the way Jesus did? Jesus never read the Bible about David just as being about David. It's always pointing to him. David fought on behalf of his nation. His nation was about to be overrun by the Philistines. But because he destroyed, he risked his life. And he destroyed Goliath. His entire nation participated in his victory, though they didn't lift a finger. His victory was imputed to them. But see, Jesus Christ took on the greatest giant, sin and death. Not at the risk of his life, but at the cost of his life. And he destroyed it, going to the cross and being raised from the dead. And if you believe in him, you participate in his victory, though you haven't lifted a finger. You're saved by grace. By grace. See, Jesus Christ. Here's Joseph, and he's thrown into the dungeon. And he suffered all these things at the hand of his brothers. But then he comes out of the dungeon, and he comes up to the right hand of power, and he's at the right hand of the throne. And when he has a chance to destroy his brothers, instead he forgives them and redeems them. Okay? So you be like that. See, just all by itself, as an example, that whole story could crush you. Because are you really going to be able to handle betrayals like that? But what if you see Jesus as the true Joseph? The person who wasn't just put into dungeon, but went into death for you. And didn't just rise up to the throne of Egypt, but to the throne of heaven. And when he looked down at us, he said, Father, forgive them. We don't know what they're doing. And he earned forgiveness for us. You see, if Jesus is the true David, he's the true Israel, he's the true Joseph. He's the real rock of Moses, who was struck in the wilderness so we could have the water of salvation. He was the real lamb of God, who was slain so the angel of death would pass over us. He's the real temple, the real prophet, the true priest, the true king, the true sacrifice, the true bread. Then when you see, when all the pieces of the puzzle come together, and they all point to what Jesus Christ has done, now salvation is by grace. And the Bible is not just a bunch of rules, it's a honeycomb. And yes, should you obey the things the Bible says? Yes. But if you read it as all about you, and something you have to do to live up to God, it'll just crush you into compliance. But if you read it as salvation by grace through Jesus Christ, it'll melt your heart into wanting to obey those things. Every other culture, every other religion, every other philosophy, gives you an identity based on your performance. It's an achieved identity, so it's fragile. But only Christianity gives you a received identity, so it's stronger than heaven and earth. It's, I love you. You are my beloved child in whom I'm well pleased because of what Jesus Christ has done. Only when you read the Bible like that does the Bible become a life-changing story instead of just a millstone around your neck. And so, first of all, Jesus, it was his comprehensive authority. But that's not enough. That'd just make you a Pharisee. He also read it as a life-changing story all about him. And if you do both of those, then it can become your lifeline in adversity. Because the last thing he says here is, I'm telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen, you will believe I am who I am. Now, what he means is this, because I'm following the scripture. I understand the scripture. I'm reading the scripture. It's all being about me. So I accept it. I know it. I interpret it. And because of that, it's going to take me through some dark times. And you actually won't be able to understand until after it's over that if you hadn't understood the scripture, it would have prepared you. It's very interesting. He says, the best I can do for you, because right now, no matter what I tell you, you're not going to be able to get this. But the best I can do for you is to kind of give you a little time bomb. You know, just put this away. And after it's all over, and after you really begin to understand, when you start to realize the scripture opens up to you, you'll be able to say, from now on, I'm going to handle adversity the way Jesus Christ did with the scripture. That these dead ends, they're not really dead ends, if I hold on to scripture. See, for example, when Jesus, every time Jesus is assaulted by Satan in the wilderness, how does he handle it? He's going to handle it. the way. So many of you being assaulted by Satan, do you know your Deuteronomy? Every time he's assaulted in public, you know, attacked in public, he usually uses scripture. You know neither the scriptures nor the power of God. But at the end of his life, when he's been beaten, when he's had, he's got thorns on his head. So he's got blood in his eyes and he's already dying and he's carrying the cross through the streets. At one point, he sees some women weeping and he says, daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep for me. And then he quotes Hosea. He gets up to the cross. You know, when he says, father, into thy hands, I commit my spirit. Do you know that place? That's Psalm 31. When he says, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Hey, that's Psalm 22. Jesus Christ was able to handle suffering and adversity at every point because he was so absolutely immersed and saturated in scripture. It completely shaped the way he responded to everything. It completely shaped his mind, his will, and his emotions. When you stabbed Jesus Christ, which they did on the cross, when you speared Jesus Christ, almost literally out came scripture. He was processing everything through scripture, the words of scripture. And as the result, he was able to do it the way he did. I'm going to make you smile, but I will. Okay, look, I always, the best of the old Star Trek movies was the wrath of Khan. At the beginning of the movie, we see that Khan, this villain, has been reading Moby Dick. Also, Paradise Lost. When you go into his hole, he's been reading Moby Dick and Paradise Lost, which are revenge fantasies, by the way. You know, Captain Ahab trying to get the white whale. At the very end of his life, you know, he's just, the reason why, you know, the way the movie works is Khan is just in, wants great revenge against the people who have wronged him. At the very end, he's dying, you know, he's pretty much destroyed himself. But you know, his last words are, from hell's heart, I stab at thee. With, for hate's sake, I spit my last breath at thee, which is Ahab. Captain Ahab going down, you know, spearing the whale. Why? Because Khan, he had saturated his mind with these books, and that's what happens at the very end. And you know what? Jesus Christ doesn't die spitting at anybody. He's saying, Father, forgive them. They don't know what they do. Why? Because he was saturated with the scripture. You are who, what your heart is saturated with. When you're under stress, you don't say what you ought to say. You say whatever is basically in your heart. And what is in your heart? What do you spend most of your time, pardon me, yeah, what do you spend most of your time thinking about? Is it social media? Is it movies? Is it music? Or is it scripture? In the end, when you get to the extremities, Jesus Christ, the Son of God, could not face suffering and adversity and betrayal without the scripture. You think you can? Were you anywhere near as saturated as Jesus was? You know, one out of every 10 things he says is scripture in the Bible. It was always in his mind, always in his heart. He was always processing everything through it. And that's how God was with him. That's how he was anointed with power. Not the only way, but that's how he did it. And he says, look, you can't do it right now. I'm giving you this little time bomb. So afterwards, you'll see, if you understood scripture the way I did, you'd be able to handle these things. Follow the scripture. Look, one of my favorite, and it fits in perfectly here. One of my favorite stories is by George McDonald. He wrote a fairy tale years ago called The Princess and Kirti. And the princess is little Irene. And Irene is a princess. And she lives in a big house. And there's goblins in the nation, but they've never gotten into the house. Goblins out there, but never gotten into the house. And she has a fairy grandmother who lives kind of upstairs somewhere in a high room. She appears to Irene every so often. And she loves Irene. Irene loves her. And one day she says to Irene, I'm going to give you a ring. And the ring is going to have a thread attached to it. At the other end of the thread will be a little ball that I have. Now, you won't be able to see the thread. It's too fine to see. But you can feel it if you put your finger on it, your forefinger, and like that. And if you ever are in danger, take the ring off, put it under your bed pillow, and then put your finger on the thread and follow it, and it'll take you to me. But, she said, it might be a roundabout way. So one night in the dark, suddenly Irene hears the goblins have gotten into her house, and they're downstairs, and they're snarling, and they're coming up the stairs. So she takes her ring off, she puts it under her pillow, and she starts to follow the thread. She can feel it. She can't see it, but she starts to follow the thread. She thought the thread would start to take her upstairs to her grandmother. Instead, it takes her down the back. says, grandmother, what are you doing? So she tries to turn back, and she realizes, guess what? The thread doesn't work backwards. You stop being able to feel it. So she has to go forward. So she goes forward, goes right down into the cave, scared to death, and suddenly she comes up against basically a wall of stones. It's a dead end. A dead end. And the thread goes right into it. So she throws herself down. She says, grandmother, what are you doing? This doesn't make any sense. I can't understand. But finally, she says, I got nothing else to do. I guess the only way to follow the thread is to tear down the wall. So she starts pulling the rocks away, and behind the rocks, there is the other hero of the story. Kurti, a boy who's a friend, and he's been trapped, and he needed to be rescued. And he's going, how did you ever find me? And Irene says, well, I followed my thread. I thought the thread was going all wrong. Now I know why the thread took me here. He says, great, let's go. Let's run back up the passage. But the trouble is the thread keeps going down deeper into the cavern. And Kurti says, not that way. That's no way out. That's where I couldn't get out. Go this way. And Irene looks at him now, and now she knows. And she says, I know that. But this is the way my thread goes, and I must follow it. I know it does not make sense, but if I'd given up on it before when it looked foolish, I'd never have rescued you. I must follow my thread whatever I do. And this is what Jesus is calling you to do. I've talked to people who have said, I'll give you two examples. I've had people say to me, you know, I almost married somebody, and I realized if I was going to follow what the Bible said, I shouldn't marry that person. So I didn't, and I thought it was going to kill me. And I thought, God, I don't know. I threw myself down, and I said, why, God? You've brought me to a dead end. And why did you do this? But I followed the thread, and now I look back, I'm really glad I didn't marry that person. Or I've had people say, because I had an opportunity to make a lot of money, but the Bible basically said I can't say those things, or I can't do those things. And so I didn't do it. Actually, my career has had a terrible turn. I've really had a lot of financial struggles. When I look back, I now realize why God took me there. But at the time, I just threw myself down. I thought it was a dead end. Jesus says, you're going to get to the betrayal and the crucifixion, and you're going to think it's a dead end. But don't give up. Follow your thread. Hold on to the word of God. Trust in his promises. Make the word of God your comprehensive authority. Read it as a lifelong story so it doesn't crush you, and it will be your lifeline and adversity. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for giving us a hard but important lesson. We can't have your son in our lives without bringing into it his attitude toward your word, toward the scripture. We do want the same discipline. We'd still want the same stamina and fortitude and strength. We still want the same delight in the word of God that he had. Father, he must have loved your word because whenever you love something, a song you love, a book you love, you memorize it. He must have loved the scripture, and we want to love it like that. We want it to saturate our lives in the same way. Please help us to become people of the word as your son was the Lord of the word. Help us, oh Lord. In all these ways, we pray through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
