TITLE: The Power of God
SCRIPTURE: Ephesians 1:11-23
TOPICS: Trust and Assurance
SERIES: To Know the Living God; The Majesty of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-power-of-god/

============================================================

The scripture this morning is from Paul's letter to the Ephesians, chapter 1, verses 11 through 23. In him we were also chosen, having been predestined according to the plan of him who works out everything in conformity with the purpose of his will, in order that we, who were the first to hope in Christ, might be for the praise of his glory. And you also were included in Christ when you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation. Having believed, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God's possession to the praise of his glory. For this reason, ever since I heard about your faith in the Lord Jesus and your love for all the saints, I have not stopped giving thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers. I keep asking that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Father, may give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation so that you may know him better. I pray also that the eyes of your heart may be enlightened in order that you may know the hope to which he has called you, the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints and his incomparably great power for us who believe. That power is like the working of his mighty strength, which he exerted in Christ when he raised him from the dead and seated him at his right hand in the heavenly realms, far above all rule and authority, power and dominion, and every title that can be given, not only in this present age, but also in the one to come. And God placed all things under his feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church, which is his body, the fullness of him who fills everything in every way. This is the word of the Lord. Each week, we're taking a look at another one of the attributes of God according to the Bible. We're trying to get to know as much as possible who God really is because our thesis is that all of our problems ultimately are theological ones, that to some degree our problems always stem from either not knowing or seeing who God is or forgetting who he is at the moment. So if I'm actually crushed with it, with too much guilt, I'm not seeing or else I've lost my grip on his mercy. On the other hand, if I'm falling into temptation, if I'm doing, if I'm giving in, I'm doing things I shouldn't be doing, it's because I've lost my grip on or I've forgotten his holiness and maybe his, his omnipresence. And so every problem we've got, to some degree, stems from our loss of orientation to who God is. Now, today, we're looking at God's power. In verse 19, Paul says, in fact, in verse 18, he says, I'm praying that you may know, not just know about, but know a series of things. But the climactic petition is, verse 19, his incomparably great power for us who believe. And most commentators point out that Paul is being grammatically excessive when he says incomparably great power. The word incomparable is the word hyperbalone, Greek word hyperbalone. The word great is megathos. The word power is the Greek word for power, dunamis, dynamite. In other words, what Paul is saying is, I want you to know, I want you to experience, not just know about, but experience his hyper-mega dynamite. And the commentators all say he's over, he's overdoing it. He's trying to, he's trying to show that the infinity of God's power bursts the banks of any kind of descriptor. What is this power? Notice, I've already shown you, verse 18, 19 is the heart of this. Paul doesn't just want you to have an abstract idea that God is powerful. He wants you to know that his power is for us. So what I want to do is, first of all, dissect what the power is according to this passage. And we're going to look at how God's power has been for us in the past, how it is for us in the present, how it will be for us in the future. But then let's finally ask, how can we be sure it's for us? I want to look at his power for us in the past, the present, and the future. But then how we can grow in a life-shape. go through the past, present, and future. This is a very, very rich passage. This whole chapter is incredibly rich, and so we're just going to pick out certain parts. First of all, his power for us in the past is enabling us to even believe even your belief comes only by God's power. Now, this translation puts a period in verse 19. It says, his incomparably great power for us who believe, period, that power is like the working of his mighty strength which he exerted in Christ when he raised him from the dead. In the Greek, there isn't a period there. It's all one sentence, and so the thoughts are pulled together a little bit more tightly. And this is literally what it says. And his incomparably great power for us who believe according to the working of his mighty strength which he also exerted in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Now, do you see what that means when you see that link? His incomparably great power for us who believe according to the working of his mighty strength which he exerted when he raised Jesus from the dead. This is saying, first of all, if you believe, if you believe in Jesus Christ today, it's only because of his power, the working of his mighty power. And the power it took to get you to believe is the power that's used to raise a man from the dead. You believe, you only believe by God's power. And what it took you, what kind of power it took to believe was the kind of power that raises somebody from the dead. That's how much power it takes to get someone to believe in Jesus. When we're told here that every person who believes in Jesus Christ, that belief is the product of God's power coming to you, that goes along with other places we see in the Bible like Romans 3 where Paul over and over says, no one seeks for God. Or John 6, 44, where Jesus says, no one can come to me unless the Father draws him. Now, let's look at that first part. Paul says, no one seeks for God. And we say, what do you mean? There's lots of people out there seeking for God. Sure, there's skeptical, maybe sometimes sort of hardcore atheists that say, I don't want God, I don't care about God. But there's lots of people who are praying and going to worship and they're seeking God. Well, of course there's a lot of people seeking God, ah-ah. But Romans 2 and 3, in Romans 2 and 3, Paul goes to great lengths to show that when religious people say, oh, if I pray, if I live a good life, if I do what I should do, then God will have to bless me, then God will save me, then God will take me to heaven, then God will answer my prayers. If you say, oh, if I do all these things, God will do all this, you're not really seeking him, not as the supreme Lord and Savior that he is. You're using him. You're making him a resource. You're trying to get things from him. But you are your own Savior and you are on the throne of your life. You are not seeking him as who he is. You are on the throne of your own life. And you know what the proof is of that? Because if you've been very good and very religious and you've gone to church and you've read your Bible and you've prayed and you've thought you've done everything and God doesn't give you the life that you really should have, you fire him. I can't tell you how many times as a pastor I've sat down with people and say, I lost my faith. Oh, really? I used to believe in God and maybe I still believe in God, but I did all these things and this happened to me and that happened to me. And so I have no use for a God who just won't even listen to my prayers. In other words, he was fired. You fired him. You weren't seeking God. You had him on retainer and he didn't come through for you. No, what Paul says, what Jesus says when he says, no one can come unless the father draws him in. What Paul's saying right here is if you believe, you only believe according to the power of God is because it takes the power of God to get any human heart to truly seek the God who exists, a supreme God. If you want him, it's only because God came to you, opened your heart and enabled you to want him. Now, can I ask you a question? If you believe in Jesus Christ today, do you see yourself, your faith, as being wholly attributable to the working of his mighty power, the working of his mighty strength? Do you? If you don't, you're not only robbing him of glory, you're not only robbing him of credit you ought to be giving him, but you're robbing yourself. First of all, you're robbing yourself of a sense of adventure, of narrative. See, once you realize that the only reason you believe is because God has been after you, he's been drawing you, you can go look back in your life and you suddenly see all sorts of things that you still thought were meaningless, but now you see that was God preparing you. That was God bringing you. a whole new, it just infuses your past life with a certain meaning it didn't have before, a lot of the parts of it. But more than that, if you don't see that your faith, your very faith is the result of God's power, you're going to be anxious. About the fact that an awful lot of times your heart is filled with doubts. Your heart is filled with a kind of spiritual darkness. Very often you're very dry spiritually. And over the years I've had people say, I feel like I'm losing him. I don't know if he's really there. I don't feel him. I don't sense him. I feel like maybe I've lost him. And I always say, if you're afraid of losing him, you've got him or better yet, he's got you because you're not capable of wanting God unless he was drawing you. So relax. See, when people say, I'm trying to get a connection with God. I don't feel like I can get a connection with God. Well, you're not capable of wanting a connection with God unless you were already, weren't already connected with him. So you will connect with him. Okay. Relax. Don't be afraid of your own doubts. Don't be afraid of those things because your very faith is a result of his power. That's how you believe to start with. That's his power for you in the past. Now there's two ways in which his power right now is working in us and for us in the present. The first you can see, if you go back to right before Paul starts his prayer in verse 15, starting in the middle of verse 13, Paul says, having believed, right, which is by his power, but then here's nothing else. Having believed by his power, you were marked in him with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit, who is a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until the redemption of those who are God's possession to the praise of his glory. Now we're God's possession. We belong to him. And it says, we got the Holy Spirit as a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance until our redemption. And you look at that and you say, wait a minute, I thought we already were redeemed. What do you mean? Why is redemption a future thing? And the answer, of course, is that it is true that we are redeemed from the penalty of sin. That when you become a Christian, you are completely redeemed from the penalty of sin. It's taken away. You're pardoned. There's no condemnation. But you are not yet delivered from the presence of sin. And the ravaging effects of sin. If you go back to Genesis 3, you see the minute that Adam and Eve sinned, what came into the world? Death, disease, fighting, anger, fear, anxiety, hiding. And all that's still there. It's still distorting our lives. We're still being all twisted and broken up by it. The world is still ravaged by the effects of sin. And therefore, in one sense, we are redeemed from the penalty of sin, but we're looking forward to that final and future redemption. What will we be like when we're finally redeemed from even the very presence of sin? Well, you know, there's one passage in one of C.S. Lewis's works that has had a, I guess I'd have to say a transformative effect on me. It's been an animating description of our future that has moved me and affected me and actually also quite to a great degree driven on my ministry for many years, the way I preach. And therefore, if you've been around, you've heard this before. There's a place in which C.S. Lewis, talking about our future, says this. He says, if we let him, he can make the feeblest and filthiest of us into dazzling, radiant, immortal creatures, pulsating all through with such energy and joy and wisdom and love as we cannot now imagine. He can make each of us a bright, stainless mirror, which reflects back to God perfectly, though, of course, on a smaller scale, his own boundless power and delight and goodness. The process will be long and in parts very painful, but that is what we are in for, nothing less. He can make us into radiant, immortal creatures, pulsating with such energy and joy and wisdom as love we can't imagine, bright, stainless mirrors reflecting back to God, his own boundless power and delight and goodness. Wow. But, okay, wow. Wow. Wow. Do you want that? Wow. But this passage says we have the Holy Spirit as a deposit guaranteeing that. Now, the trouble is the word deposit doesn't convey because we live in New York City. When you think of a deposit, you think of what? Your deposit on your apartment. It's a pledge. That's not what that word is. That word, the Greek word there means first installment. The Holy Spirit is the first installment. Let me put it to you in a principle. wipe you clean of everything that's wrong with you and everything that's wrong with the world is already in you now, partly. Partly, but it's the same stuff that's going to wipe you and the whole universe clean of everything that's wrong with you. It's in you now. That power's in you now. So, what does that mean? It means you should give up your small ambitions. It means you're settling. You know, when Ma and Pa Kent were talking to little Clark, you know, bouncing him on his knee, and he says, Mom, Dad, Pa, what can I be when I grow up? And he said, you have no idea. You have no idea. And that's what Paul's saying. Do you know what's in you? Esau had the birthright. Remember, he was the oldest of the two sons, Esau and Jacob, in the book of Genesis? And Esau had the birthright. He was the oldest, which, of course, meant he inherited the estate. But one day, he was famished, and he saw Jacob making some porridge, or the old King James would call it pottage, a mess of pottage. And he was so hungry, he said, I'll give you anything for that porridge. And Jacob said, give me your birthright. And Esau says, what good is my birthright if I'm starving to death? So he says, sure, you can have it. And he gave away his birthright, impulsively and impatiently, for a mess of pottage. He settled for a mess of pottage. I want to know what mess you're settling for. Because I can tell you, we all are. You're looking at your life, and you see character flaws in you. You see lack of self-control. You see fears. You see all kinds of stuff that are driving your life, and you know you shouldn't be that way. You read what the Bible says. We're supposed to be characterised by love and joy and peace and patience and kindness and faithfulness and meekness and humility and self-control. And you're nothing like that. And you're settling. You know, you hear that in prayer we ought to be able to really experience God. And you don't. And you're settling for a mess. Your sons and daughters are the king. That power is in you. Not fully, of course. But it's the same stuff. It's the first installment. The Holy Spirit. A first installment on the power that's going to wipe the universe clean of everything that's wrong with it. And it's in you. So first of all, you see his power in the past. Secondly, you see his power in the present, in your heart through the Holy Spirit. Now there's another way in which his power is for you. His enormous and his incomparable power is for you in the present. And that is in how he is guiding history. That comes, you see, the last and most climactic of the petitions is that you may know his incomparably great power. And that sets him off in talking about what God is doing through Jesus Christ. His power raised Jesus from the dead, seats him at the right hand of the throne, far above all rule and authority, power and dominion. And then it says, And God placed all things under Christ's feet and appointed him to be head over everything for the church. What? Now wasn't he already kind of king of the universe? Yes. But this is a specific commission that after he accomplished our salvation through his death and his resurrection, and he was raised from the dead and ascended to the throne, we're told that God now, the Father, has put all of life, all of the universe, all of history, everything that happens is under his feet. It's under his control in order to do what? To complete the plan of redemption. To complete your redemption. To complete the redemption of the world. To see it out to the end. What does that mean? Let me give you a little case study of an example of this, actually. This week, just because it came up in my reading through the Bible in a year, I read the story of Jacob and his 12 sons and Joseph and his brothers, and it was just, it was an amazing week. Every day I read it, and I said, This is one of the greatest, most moving, most wonderful stories that's ever been told. And you know something about it. That Jacob really, because Jacob favored one son over his others, he poisoned the family system, so the sons were filled with hatred and violence and anger and bickering and jealousy and rivalry. And of course, it also really destroyed Joseph himself, because Joseph was essentially spoiled. But he was egocentric, and he was out of touch with reality, and he was on, he was on, he was headed for a horrible life. And what the brothers did one day when they were, he was away, remote, away from him, then sold him into slavery and told his father that he had been killed by a wild beast and then he was sold into slavery went down to egypt and in egypt he was uh he was a slave but then he was falsely accused and then he was even put into prison and when he was in prison he met a man who was on his way out of prison he said please remember me when you get out but he the man forgot and so over think about over the years probably joseph prayed when he was in the pit oh please don't let me get sold into slavery but he was and then when he was a slave he said oh lord please let me out of slavery but he went into a dungeon and then when he was in dungeon oh lord please get me out of this dungeon let this man remember me to pharaoh and he didn't everything went wrong every circumstance went wrong everything and yet finally because of all those things joseph was in a position to interpret a dream of pharaoh to be brought out of prison to be actually put uh up as prime minister of egypt to develop a hunger relief program that saved thousands of people and eventually therefore to meet his brothers to bring them to repentance and reconciliation at the climax of the story in genesis chapter 50 joseph looks at them all and of course they've done terrible things they did evil things they did they tried to they tried to harm him they and he looked at them and said you meant it for evil but god meant it for good if i had gotten any of my prayers answered joseph said i wouldn't have been saved you wouldn't have been saved we would we would all starve to death but all these awful things that were happening that we thought oh my goodness we're out of control everything's everything's going wrong god was directing every one of them for salvation you say well now that's a wonderful story i would love it if i could be sure that that's how god was handling my life that's a great story i'd love to know if god's handling my life are you a christian then he is why because jesus christ is up there doing that right now for all of us jonathan edwards as an 18 year old wrote a sermon and the three points of the sermon was he as he reads the bible the bible says if you're a christian your bad things will turn out for your good your good things can never be taken away from you and the best things are yet to come all by the power of god the power of god is being brought to bear on every single circumstance of history for your good and for your redemption for your final redemption well that doesn't mean that you will even have any idea what's going on you know elizabeth elliott has a wonderful wonderful realistic you know both comforting and at the same time convicting statement where she says god is god and since he is god he is worthy of my worship and my service i will find rest nowhere but in his will and that will is necessarily infinitely immediate immeasurably and unspeakably beyond my largest notions of what he's up to see i will find no rest except in his will but that will is infinitely immeasurably and unspeakably beyond my largest notions of what he's up to to trust in the power of god over history for you is on the one hand to give up trying to figure out things but then on the other hand to trust so you see your faith is a result of the power of god the holy spirit in you is a result of the power of god is the everything that's happening in in in in the world right now is for you because of the power of god and lastly and we already mentioned it and i'll just be brief just to close the circle in the future even death is going to be taken away by the power of god the first example of that is the resurrection of jesus christ from the dead but in the end we're going to be fully redeemed we already saw that full redemption which means even death is going to be destroyed by the power of god now let me let's okay we're done for a minute we're done looking at the power of god for you and here's what we have if you see the power of god gave you your faith the power of god has put in you a power that will enable you to make enormous changes the power of god is actually ruling all of history so that you can go about life and confidence even when things look like they're going wrong there's always a plan you're not a victim and lastly you don't even have to be afraid of death and notice i believe that when paul says it's not enough for you just to know about the power of god i want the eyes of your heart to be enlightened so that you know not just know about You feel it. You sense it. It's shaping you. Well, how does it shape you? It gets rid of fear. The more I've thought about this, as all week as I've been meditating on it, is if I really know, if you and I really know that the power of God is all for us, then we're not afraid of any darkness. Fear no darkness. Why? There's darkness inside and I don't feel like I can overcome it. Yes, you can by the power of God. Your very faith, the Holy Spirit, you can. Well, there's darkness out here. Everything is awful. Everything is just going wrong. Everything's going wrong out here. No, it's not. He's in charge. And then there's the darkness ahead of us. Not just the darkness around us or the darkness within us. There's death. There's trouble up there and there's death itself. No. Fear no darkness. You know why? Any dark power that you meet, the world, the flesh, the devil, death, suffering, any dark power that you meet in this world is a small thing compared to God's power. It's a passing thing. God's power is infinitely greater and higher than it and it will sweep it someday away. So fear no darkness. And I want you to know if you and I actually did know his power and we were absolutely assured his power was for us, we would no longer have anxiety or fear about anything, but we do. That's the practical application of power. We would not be afraid, but we are. We would not be worried all the time, but we are. We would not be anxious. And by the way, I just want to speak as a slightly older person to a lot of fairly younger persons. It gets worse as you go and older. There are definitely some kinds of sins that actually get easier to resist as you get older. There are some sins that are easier to resist as you get older and there are some sins that are harder and this one is harder and harder and that is fear and anxiety. It gets worse for a lot of reasons I won't go into, but I bore some of you young people. How can we be sure? How can we have our hearts enlightened so that this certainty comes in and we live with confidence? How can we be sure it's for us? How can we be sure like this? The answer is not actually in this chapter, but you have to keep in mind that Ephesians has two prayers in it for his readers, two. There's two places in Ephesians where Paul is praying for his readers, which is us. This one is chapter one, verses 15 to 23. It's a wonderful prayer, but the other one is actually in chapter three. And that prayer is similar, but in it, it's got a couple of features that aren't in this one. And one of them is this. You've got the normal prayer for us to know the power of God. In Ephesians three, it says, I pray that you would be strengthened with his power in your inner being. There it is. And then he says, and I pray that you may have the power to grasp how long and high and wide and deep is the love of God. And I thought it was interesting because over the years, I've actually spent a lot of time, not only studying these two prayers, but praying them for myself and for people around me. I think it's pretty interesting that Paul says, I want you to have the power of God in you. I want you to feel his power and know his power. I want you to have his power. But he doesn't say, here's how you get the power of God in you by gazing at his power, by meditating on his power, by reflecting on his power. He doesn't say that. What does he say brings the power of God into your life, that assurance of his power, that it's by meditating and reflecting and looking on his love. Now, what's so intriguing about that is obviously the epitome of God's love is Jesus Christ going to the cross. And what is the relationship of the cross to power? It's paradoxical because here in 1 Corinthians 1, Paul says this, for the message, listen, please very carefully at this point, for the message of the cross is foolishness to those who are lost, but to us who are being saved, it is the power of God. Jews demand miracles and Greeks look for wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, a scandal to Jews and foolishness to the Gentiles. But to those whom God has called, Christ crucified is the power of God and the wisdom of God. For the foolishness of God is wiser than man's wisdom, and the weakness of God is stronger than man's strength. You see the paradox? First of all, Paul is saying that when most people look at the cross, they don't see power. When most people look at the cross, they don't see any power. And that's right. Why? Because there is no... cross. There is no greater picture of helplessness than a man nailed to a cross. He is utterly defenseless. You can stab him with a spear, and they did. He can hurl insults. He can't even answer because he's dying of suffocation. A man on a cross is absolutely powerless, absolutely helpless. But in Jesus' case, it was voluntary. It was radically voluntary. You know why? Remember the place in the Garden of Gethsemane when they're coming to get him, and they're about to arrest him, and somebody pulls out a sword? Peter pulls out a sword. And Jesus says in Matthew 26, he says, Put away your sword. Don't you know I could call on my father, and he would send 12 legions of angels? But then how would the scripture be fulfilled? 12 legions of angels. There was no other human being on the face of the earth that could snap his fingers and get 12 legions of angels. He was the most powerful human being on the face of the earth. But he didn't exercise his power. He became absolutely helpless. He became absolutely defenseless. Why? For love. He gave up his power for love. And when he was on the cross, looking down at the people he was doing all this for, and he saw us betraying him and denying him and abandoning him, in the greatest act of love in history, he didn't play Samson. Remember, Samson was bound. Remember? Samson was bound to a pillar, and all the people were around him, and they were betraying him, and they were being fools and all that. And what did Samson do when he saw all that sin and evil around him? He flexed. He broke the bands. And when Jesus Christ was on the cross, and he saw all the people abandoning him and denying him and betraying him, in the greatest act of love in history, he didn't flex. He stayed helpless. He stayed powerless. He stayed. Why? To pay the penalty for our sins. To bear the punishment that we should have borne. To pay the price that we should have paid. In other words, he gave up all of his power in order to love us. And yet, notice I said it was ambiguous, because Paul says, when you look at the cross, the first thing you see is weakness. The first thing you see is powerlessness. But for those who are being saved, it is the power of God. For the weakness of God is stronger than man's strength. What does that mean? You know what it means. There is no greater strength than the strength enough to be weak. There is no greater power than a person who is powerful enough to give up power to love somebody else. I want you to know sacrificial love can transform and triumph where naked force never can. And what the cross shows us is true strength, true power. In this world, the world says, be strong. And be strong means never let down your guard. Never lose control. Never give up power. Never be defenseless. And people who are never defenseless, never vulnerable, never give up power, are weak. They're weak. They're proud. They're afraid. They're trusting in their power. And we all know, the Bible says, pride goeth before a fall. There's nothing weaker than always feeling like I've got to exercise power. And there's nothing stronger than the ability to give up power and become vulnerable to serve other people. And therefore, the cross shows us real power so we don't make the mistake of getting in lockstep with everybody else in the world. But the other thing is, as you gaze at the cross, and as you gaze at the cross, you get the power of God in you. Why? Because here's how you know that God's power is for you. Here's how you know that all this is really happening for you. When you look at the cross and you see him giving up his power for you, that assures you. That's how you know. That's how you can know. That's how you can know that you're not a victim, that God, everything's working for good. That's how you can know that he's there even though your heart's filled with darkness. That's how you can know that even if you're facing death, he's going to bring you through it. That's how you know he's a powerful God and all that power is for you. How? You know he's for you because he gave it up on the cross. The key to the power of God in your life is to seeing him giving up all this power for you. It always is. Fear no darkness. Become people. Don't give any anxiety and worry and fear anymore because of what he has done for you. The power of God. Let us pray. Our Father, we thank you for offering us this life without the anxiety, without the fear. your power is for us is on how Jesus Christ gave up his power on the cross. Lord, when the world sees Jesus dying on the cross, it sees weakness, but we see true power, real power, and the certainty that your infinite power is now on our side. If God is for us, who can be against us? Let us go out with that ringing in our hearts so that whatever we're facing out there, well, whatever we're facing inside, darkness in our hearts, darkness inside, darkness around us, darkness before us, we know it's a passing thing because you are for us. Now, help us to live lives like that because of what your son did for us on the cross. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
