TITLE: The Compassion of God
SCRIPTURE: Jonah 4:1-11
TOPICS: Mercy & Justice Forgiveness God's Love
SERIES: To Know the Living God; The Adequacy of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-compassion-of-god/

============================================================

Our scripture reading tonight comes from the book of Jonah, chapter 4, verses 1 through 11. But it greatly displeased Jonah, and he became angry. He prayed to the Lord and said, Please, Lord, was not this what I said while I was still in my own country? Therefore, in order to forestall this, I fled to Tarshish, for I knew that you are a gracious and compassionate God, slow to anger and abundant in lovingkindness, and one who relents concerning calamity. Therefore now, O Lord, please take my life from me, for death is better to me than life. The Lord said, Do you have good reason to be angry? Then Jonah went out from the city and sat east of it. There he made a shelter for himself and sat under it in the shade until he could see what would happen in the city. So the Lord God appointed a plant, and it grew up over Jonah to be a shade over his head to deliver him from his discomfort. And Jonah was extremely happy about the plant. But God appointed a worm when dawn came the next day, and it attacked the plant, and it withered. When the sun came up, God appointed a scorching east wind, and the sun beat down on Jonah's head so that he became faint and begged with all his soul to die, saying, Death is better to me than life. Then God said to Jonah, Do you have good reason to be angry about the plant? And he said, I have good reason to be angry, even to death. Then the Lord said, You had compassion on the plant for which you did not work and which you did not cause to grow, which came up overnight and perished overnight. Should I not have compassion on Nineveh, the great city in which there are more than 120,000 persons who do not know the difference between their right and left hand, as well as many animals? This is the word of the Lord. Each week we're looking at another one of the attributes of God. And as you can see, three times in this passage, this is the end of the famous story of Jonah, three times the word compassion shows up. Once Jonah uses it, twice God uses it, and it's here to talk about the compassion of God. And I'd like to just look at this subject under three headings, actually. Firstly, I'd like to look at what God's compassion, you know, I'd like to look at the compassion of God. What does that mean? Secondly, I'd like to look at the compassion of Jesus, to which this passage points. And thirdly, I'd like to look at your compassion. What kind of lives you and I should be living if we're shaped by the mercy and the compassion of God. By way of introduction, let me remind you of two things. One is, this is the end of a story in which God sent Jonah to preach to Nineveh. That was the capital of the greatest empire at the time, a very big imperial power. And God told Jonah to go and preach to them and say, you have to repent of your violence. God held them responsible. Even though they weren't a believing country, they didn't know the God of Israel. Nevertheless, he held them responsible for how brutal they were and oppressive they were and violent they were. And he sent Jonah to preach to them and say he was going to send a calamity on them. He was going to send an invasion or a famine or something terrible if they didn't repent. And they did repent in chapter three. They did repent. They said, oh Lord, you know, God of Israel, don't smite us. We repent and we will turn away from our violence. And then Jonah got very angry and walked out of the city, as you can see, and went outside and was very angry that God had not smitten Nineveh with a calamity. And he's very upset because God, he says, you're compassionate. You forgive. By way of introduction, let me just keep something very important in mind. Most New Yorkers get upset with God and they say, I can't believe in your God because he's not compassionate enough. He's not compassionate enough. He lets all these terrible things happen, all these calamities. I can't believe in your God. He's not compassionate enough. And a lot of people say, that's the reason why I don't believe in the Christian God. He's not compassionate enough. And before you get your knickers in a twist like that, just keep in mind, I have a Korean friend of mine who's a pastor who said that his grandfather was a Confucianist and never embraced Christianity, just wouldn't embrace Christianity. And he said his grandfather's problem was almost totally different than most modern Western people. And that is, he says, his grandfather said, I have no problem with a guy who judges people and sends them to hell. He says, his grandfather said, I've seen atrocities. I've seen terrible things in life. And the idea of God he didn't like, what he could not accept was Christianity's teaching that a person who had done terrible things, really terrible things, could be completely forgiven, that God could forgive them through Jesus and them not be punished. He says, the idea that somebody could do atrocities, terrible things, and then get utterly forgiven, that he couldn't accept. He says, that's terrible. In other words, he rejected Christianity, not because the God of Christianity was not compassionate enough, but because it was too compassionate, which is the same problem that Jonah's got. And what that means is this, your social location, your culture, now here's Jonah, my friend's grandfather, here's your friends in New York, and everybody's offended by the compassion of God, right? They're all offended for totally different reasons. Why? Because of your social location, because of your culture, because of where you are. Every culture has problems with Christianity and the Bible, every culture. But you know what's really narrow is to think that your problems with Christianity are the problems. Because something that offends you about the Bible doesn't offend that person in that culture, they're offended by something that you like. Because every culture gives you a skewered idea about the God of the Bible. Every culture. And therefore, we need to turn to the Bible itself. If we're going to understand the compassion of God, we've got to turn to the Bible itself and see what the Bible says, what God says about himself in the Bible. You know, don't go off, you know, in a huff, because you're sure that your particular cultures take on the compassion of God is the take. How narrow, how ethnocentric, how arrogant. Now, three things. What's the compassion of God? What is the compassion of Jesus? And what is the compassion of you and me? What should we be like if we're supposed to be like God? First of all, there's three things that the text is telling us that helps us understand what does it mean when we say God is compassionate or merciful? Three things. One is, it means his heart is voluntarily attached to us. Down in verse 9 and 10, we're told about this plant. We'll get back to that, by the way. We'll get back to this. Jonah was in a very hot, arid climate. And there was this plant that grew up very rapidly and gave him shade. There are plants that grow almost overnight like that. Some translations say it was a gourd. Some translations say it was a vine. This translation calls it a plant. And it's a particular kind of fast-growing plant or gourd that grows up and becomes shade. And of course, we're told that Jonah was extremely happy with the plant. Of course, extremely happy because, you know, it was, you know, it was cool and it was green and all that. And then it died. And God comes to him and says in verse 10, you had compassion on the plant. Now, this word compassion, it shows up up in verse, you know, two where Jonah calls God compassionate. We'll get to that one in a minute. And down here in verse 10 and 11, where God says, I have compassion, you have compassion. This is a word that actually means to grieve. It means to mourn over someone who you love who's died. It's a very strong word. It means to have your heart broken. It means to weep almost. And what God is saying here is, Jonah, you got your heart attached to the plant so that when it died, you died. Your heart was so attached to it that what affected it affected you. And then God amazingly turns around and says, you have compassion on the plant. Well, I have compassion on people. I have compassion on this huge city. Now, that's amazing. Do you know why? You know, the Greeks used to talk about the love of benevolence and the love of attachment. The love of benevolence was something that you would be able to do without liking someone. Love of benevolence means you're loving them by giving them what they want, giving them what they need, serving them. You may not like somebody, but you can be benevolent. And it's called, it's love, right? It's love. You don't like them. And yet you're being kind to them. You're doing things for them. Well, that's the love of benevolence. And it can be done without any emotional attachment at all. But love of benevolence is not love of attachment. Love of benevolence has to do with the will, but love of attachment has to do with the heart. And in love of attachment, you so bind your heart up with someone or something, that what it, what happens to it affects you, which means you become vulnerable. Now, you and I don't have a whole lot to say about our attachments. It happens to us. You may not want to have gotten so attached to your pet, but when your pet dies and you're this tough New Yorker and you're walking around crying for three weeks, you don't want anybody to see, and you say. things, we need circumstances to be happy. We can't be happy on our own. We need things, and the things that make us happy we get attached to. But God doesn't need anything. God made everything. God does not depend on anything. Everything is dependent on Him. And God is utterly and perfectly happy in Himself, and He doesn't need us. So how could He get attached to us? And the answer is, the only answer is, voluntarily. The world is like a piece of lint to God, and we're smaller pieces of lint on the lint. We're bugs, we're insects, we're molecules, we're amoebas. Because, I mean, in other words, think of the distance between you and Amoeba. Think of the distance between you and God is way greater. Then why in the world, how could this be? How could God be attached? How could God say, what happens to Nineveh affects me? It moves me. It grieves me. It means He voluntarily attached Himself. He attached His heart. That's compassion. He got involved. And that's the reason why, for example, we have here, this is from C.S. Lewis' The Problem of Pain. Lewis says, He who contains in Himself the cause of His own and all other bliss. Hear that? That's God. He who contains in Himself the cause of His and all other bliss, His own. Nevertheless, He attaches Himself and He says, this is from the Bible, How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? How shall I abandon thee, O Israel? My heart is broken within me. That's from Ezekiel. Or, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings. But you would not listen. Weeping. Grieving. But God is completely happy in Himself. He doesn't need us. And how did He get vulnerable? How did He get so attached so that what happens to us affects Him? The answer is He did it voluntarily. Because compassion means to get yourself involved and make yourself vulnerable, and God did it voluntarily. You and I don't do that voluntarily. We've got to do it, but God didn't have to do it, but He did it. So the first thing about God, what does compassion mean? It means He voluntarily attaches His heart to ours, number one. Number two, He's moved not just by us in general, but our condition. Because look what He says. He doesn't just say, should I not have compassion on the end of that great city in which there are 120,000 persons? It doesn't stop there. What is it that's creating grief? Who don't know their right hand from their left. Now, what's that? That's a very evocative Hebraicism. It's a way of saying they're spiritually blind, and they're spiritually lost, and they don't know how they should live their lives. See, if you don't know God, then you say, I don't know where I'm from, and I don't know where I'm going, and I don't know the meaning of life, and I don't know what I should be doing, and I don't know my purpose in life. Do you know anybody like that? Sure. It's all of New York City. I don't know my meaning in life. I don't know where I'm from, and therefore, I don't know whether to turn to the right hand or the left. You see, I don't know what should I be spending my time doing. What should I, you know, what am I, who am I, you know, what am I for? And God looks down at that kind of spiritual fog, and that spiritual confusion, that spiritual blindness, that spiritual stupidity, and He doesn't say, you idiots. He has compassion. He's moved. He's grieved. And see, that's the second aspect of the word mercy or compassion in the Bible. It means to be moved by someone's trouble, moved by someone's problem, moved by someone's condition, their suffering or their difficulty, and want to do something about it. So, first, He attaches His heart to us voluntarily. And secondly, He's actually moved to want to relieve the trouble. He's moved and touched by our trouble, and He wants to do something about it. And thirdly, the mercy or compassion of God, of course, but this is important, means He forgives readily. That's what's gotten Jonah so upset, right? In fact, you know, the first part is supposed to be comedic. The first three or four verses is comedic. Now, I'm not a comedian. I'm not an actor. I'm just a teacher. But I mean, you're supposed to, it's basically, here, look at this. Here's what Jonah's saying. He says, this is why I fled to start with. This is why I left you to start with. I knew you were compassionate. I knew you were God who is abounded in loving kindness and slow to anger. You know, He's, I can't do it. I mean, you know, somebody could, could do this right. He was just saying, I just, you know, God is merciful and compassionate and loving and kind and quick to relent and turn away. Don't you just hate it when that happens? I mean, that's what he's saying. Why? If you go back to chapter three, you'll see that God says, I'm going to smite you. There's going to be an invasion. There's going to be a, you know, a famine or something like that. You must turn from your violence. And what do they do? They do not actually convert. If you go back to chapter three, you'll see the Ninevites do not take on the law of Moses. They don't get circumcised. They don't join Israel. They don't wholeheartedly come in under the law of God and say, now I'm going to live for you. They don't enter into a covenant with God. All they say is, we're sorry. We'll try not to be violent. And God forgives them. And of course, you know, from Jonah's point of view, let's just try to, you know, put ourselves in his shoes. Yes, Nineveh has now said, we're not going to do violence. But Nineveh continues to be this enormous political entity. They haven't entered. They haven't entered into covenant with God. They haven't been circumcised. They haven't joined up with Israel. And therefore, they still are an enormous threat to Israel's national interests. And Jonah sees that. And here's God saying, I'm going to smite you. And that would have been a big help for Israel, right? A big help. And all they do is say, we'll try not to be violent. They don't do anything else. And God says, okay. And Jonah says, what? Make them beg. Make them crawl. Put up conditions. You got them where you want them. Tell them, you know, make them say, we won't do this. We won't do this. No. And, you know, it's like, what's the matter with you, God? Why are you so quick to forgive? Why are you so quick? Because he's compassionate. Compassionate. Okay. But I want you to know that these three things, the compassion of God, is his voluntary heart attachment to us, his concern to relieve our suffering, and his readiness to forgive, find their absolute climax, not here, but in Jesus Christ. Why? This passage points forward. And you know why? Because it ends with God having compassion, a word that means to grieve or weep, weeping over a city. Does that make you think of anybody? Do you know of anybody else who did? Listen. Who was it that said, as he was riding into Jerusalem, the last week of his life, coming in to Jerusalem, knowing that a week from now he'd be dead, and he says, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, he's weeping. How often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings? But you would not. He's weeping. Jonah, as you can see in chapter four, went outside the city to root for its condemnation. But Jesus Christ went outside the city to die on a cross to accomplish its salvation. God, here, in Jonah chapter four, is looking down from heaven, and he's grieving, right? He's attached to us, and he's emotionally vulnerable. He's emotionally attached to us. So our spiritual lostness creates a kind of spiritual pain. But when he went to the cross, when he came in the form of Jesus Christ, and he went to the cross, his attachment brought not just spiritual pain, it brought pain. He was absolutely attached to us. He was completely attached, not just spiritually, not just emotionally, completely, really, personally. He put himself on the cross to do what? To forgive us, to forgive us readily. Jesus Christ is the ultimate expression of this. You can find this online. Over a hundred years ago, more than a hundred years ago, I think, B.B. Warfield, who taught a hundred years ago at Princeton Seminary, wrote an essay, it's a long essay, called The Emotional Life of Our Lord, looking at Jesus, and looking at every place in the Bible, in the New Testament, in the Gospels, that describe the emotional life of Christ. And you know what he found out? Jesus Christ weeps 20 times for every one time he laughs. He was a man of sorrows. He came and he grieved. He came and he wept. The main word that describes Jesus' emotions in the New Testament is a Greek word that means to be moved from the depths with compassion. But when he went to the cross, he attached himself in the ultimate way. He didn't just weep over the city and found that the spiritual lostness of the city created emotional pain. It created physical pain. It created... by the way, they went up, remember at the end when all the people up on the cross were dead, just to make sure they were dead, they stuck a spear in his side, and out came not just blood, but blood and water, which means his heart really broke. So there's the compassion of God. And there's the compassion of Jesus, which is the ultimate expression of the compassion of God, the climax, you might say. And there's a problem. The reason why I've gone as quickly through that, and I still have, I want to talk about, at some greater length, about what that looks like in your life is this. As New Yorkers, we like the idea of the compassion of God, right? We're not so much like Jonah. We're not so much like our friend's grandfather. Big parts of the world don't like the compassion of God. They feel like, it's too easy. That's what I don't like about Christianity. But most people in a place like New York, you know, we love the talking about compassion and forgiveness and mercy and, okay? And therefore, I can't stop yet. I got one more point. I want to know, if you believe Jesus did this for you, and therefore you should be merciful as God is merciful, what will that look like in your life? If you're really shaped by the mercy of God, what will that look like in your life? Five things. Five things. I can't end this sermon right now because you're probably too happy. Can't let that happen. Okay, number one, if you want to be merciful as God is merciful, don't enjoy or avoid criticism. It's all here. God had compassion for Nineveh. So what did he do? He sent Jonah to warn them he was going to smite them because he had enough compassion that he wanted to warn them, but he was grieving as it happened. He was grieving as it happened. Now, there's two ways you can be unmerciful when it comes to criticism. One is you can enjoy criticism. You just like correcting people. You like showing people what's wrong. You like to show people how you're wrong. Take that and that. You love to argue. That's not like God. If you can criticize without compassion, if you can criticize without weeping on the inside, you're not like God. On the other hand, if you're afraid of criticism and if you avoid criticism, that shows you've got compassion on yourself, but you don't have compassion on those people because they need to hear it. So you must neither enjoy nor avoid. If you want to be merciful as God is merciful, neither enjoy or avoid criticism. Point one, as we see here. Point two, you need to love cities. God says if you have a compassionate heart, Jonah, here you are attached to the plant, but I'm attached to people and there's no place on earth that has more people than a city. Notice what he says. 120,000 people. Why would God be impressed with 120,000? Well, in a way, God isn't impressed, but the point is, do you know that the average population of a city in those times was 3,000? That was the average population of a city. A city was a fortified, a settlement behind a wall. And when you build a wall and you put people in there, you might say 3,000 people was a city, yes. Because behind a wall, it was dense and so you had street life and people, that's what made it urban. But when Nineveh grew to 120,000 people, I mean, that was enormous. It's a megalopolis. But here's what God is saying. If you are compassionate like I'm compassionate, if you have attached yourself to people, to people, then you have to love cities because there's so many people there. Let me give you a little saying that when I go around and talk about cities, I use this, but I haven't used it much in New York. I have a friend, Bill Crispin, who is an urban missionary in Philadelphia. And Bill, looking at this passage, used to say this as a quip. The city is the place where there's more people than plants. And the countryside is the place where there's more plants than people. And because God absolutely loves people more than he loves plants, he's got to love the city more than he loves the countryside. And after you're done laughing, he says, theology, theology, friends, there's more image of God per square inch in New York City than there is out there in the country. And if you, listen, if you look out at all this image of God everywhere and you say, oh my gosh, it's so crowded. Let me out to the space. Let me out to the green. Let me out to the trees. What is the matter with your psychology? What is the matter with your heart? What is the matter with your theology? I mean, everybody's got to get out every so often just to breathe, yes. But if you just really dislike cities, you dislike them just because there's so many different kinds of people that are so crowded, you're not merciful as God is merciful. So if you're merciful as God is merciful, number one, Number one, love cities. Number three, forgive readily. Let me, listen, an awful lot of us takes a crowbar or a tow truck to get us to give up our grudges. And we will give up our grudges, but they've got to repent. And they've got to crawl and they've got to, they've got to, you know, they've got to beg and they got to, then I can do it. You see that with God? Do you see that with God? No. Mark chapter 11, verse 25 says, if you stand praying, Mark, make a mental note or a real note. Mark 11, 25 says, if you stand and you're praying and you realize you have anything against anybody, forgive them on the spot. You say, wait a minute. Shouldn't you try to get repentance? Yes. Out of love, out of mercy. If someone has wronged you, the most merciful thing you can do for that person is to show them what they've done so that they avoid it in the future. It's never merciful and loving to let someone just sin with impunity. And therefore, yes, you should go and seek repentance for their sake. But if you seek repentance for your sake, if you seek repentance so that you have a certain satisfaction to see that they're groveling now, now I can forgive them, you don't know the mercy of God. Because God forgives like that. You know the place where in Mark chapter 2, where the paralytic is lowered through the roof? He's a paralyzed young man. And obviously, the people want Jesus to heal him. So they lower him and Jesus walks over to him. Do you remember what the first thing he does is? He says to them, my son, your sins are forgiven. Now, Jesus is judge of all the earth. God is judge of all the earth. And there's no place where God would forgive sins unless somebody repents. But he doesn't, the young man hadn't said a thing. And yet, Jesus, I forgive you. Why? The only reason that Jesus could have done that is if there was some inarticulate yearning inside this young man, some imperfect fragmentary expression of a desire for mercy. And Jesus is so quick. Jesus is so eager to forgive and give grace and be merciful. He forgives them. You should be like that. You should not make people beg. Are there people who have wronged you and you are not giving up your grudge? Then you're not merciful the way God is merciful. And by the way, take a look at Matthew 18, where Jesus says, God has gone to the mat. God has gone to the mat. He has spent everything. He has given up everything. He went to the cross to forgive you. And now if you have the audacity to refuse forgiveness to somebody else, all that shows is you have no idea what God has done for you. It's pretty scary. If you want to be merciful as God is merciful, don't enjoy or avoid criticism. Love the city. Forgive readily. Number four, very important. Number four, if you understand the mercy of God, you will expect trouble in your life. You know why? Because God is so merciful, he will not let you just go on the way you're going. In other words, remember when he says, look at Nineveh. He says, they don't know the right hand, but from their left, we've got to do something. And when you're spiritually blind or you're spiritually stupid, like Jonah here, God is not going to let you go. He's not going to just say, okay, go off and be stupid. No, that's not, that's not merciful. What is God doing to Jonah here? God is not only grieving over Nineveh and their spiritual stupidity. He's also grieving over Jonah because what is he doing? He deliberately blasts Jonah's vine. He blasts his gourd. He blasts something that was giving Jonah some joy and he takes it out. Jonah gets really angry. Why is God doing that? To get Jonah to look at his heart to say, do you have a right to be angry? Why are you so angry? Why, what is your problem? God is trying to get him to think. God is trying to get him to look. God is trying to wake him up. Why? Because God's merciful. If you have a merciful God, then God is just too merciful to let you go. He just let you live. And generally speaking, difficulties, God will do the same thing. He'll, he'll, he'll blast certain gourds of your life. He'll, he'll, he'll take certain comforts away. And you're going to say, why are you doing this? And it's because God, the answer is God's merciful. John Newton has an entire hymn that he wrote about this passage where God blasts this vine, the gourd. Here's how it goes. I asked the Lord that I might grow. grace. Might more of his salvation know and seek more earnestly his face. I hope that in some favored hour at once he'd answer my request and by his love's constraining power subdue my sins and give me rest. Instead of this, he made me feel the hidden evils of my heart and let the angry powers of hell assault my soul in every part. Yea, more with his own hand, he seemed intent to aggravate my woe, crossed all the fair designs I schemed, blasted my gourds and laid me low. Lord, why is this? I trembling cried. Will thou pursue thy worm to death? It is in this way, the Lord replied. I answer prayers for grace and faith. These inward trials I employ from pride and self to set thee free and break thy schemes of earthly joy that thou mayest find thine all in me. If you've got a merciful God, you're going to expect trouble because of his mercy. And there's one last thing. If you want to be merciful as God in heaven is merciful, I want you to go out of your way to take time to weep. I actually think New Yorkers are too busy to do what God has done, which is this. If you've got a friend or somebody who's going through some really hard time, it's painful to spend time with them, and you're busy. No. No. Go to them and spend time with them and walk over the next week or several months or whatever it's going to take. Walk with them through this suffering. Of course you're going to weep. It's going to hurt. That's what God did for you. Or get involved with the poor. You know, no, I'd rather give money. No. Attach yourself. Get involved. It's very painful. It's very difficult to see it. But that's what God did for you. Attach yourself until you weep. Because that's what God did for you. So, you want to be merciful? You want to know a God of mercy? Don't enjoy. Or avoid criticism. Love the city. Forgive readily. Expect trouble. And weep with those who weep. Deliberately weep with those who weep. Let's pray. Our Father, we're grateful that you have shown us in your word how compassionate you are. And you've also shown us through Christ how you ultimately expressed that compassion on the cross. And you've given us a little bit of a hint of what it means to live in such a way that we're merciful as you have been merciful to us. We pray that our lives would really be shaped by what you have done and your mercy and compassion. And we'd be a whole church filled with people who are shaped by your compassion. And therefore, we'll be witnessing to who you are to the world. We thank you for this. And we ask that all these things would be realized in our lives. We pray it in Jesus' name. Amen.
