TITLE: The Love of the World (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 2:15-17
TOPICS: Stewardship, Generosity and Money Sin Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-love-of-the-world-part-1/

============================================================

The passage on which our teaching is taken tonight is found in your bulletin, 1 John, chapter 2, and I'm going to read to you the passages, just the last three verses of the passages printed. 1 John, chapter 2, I'm going to read verses 15, 16, and 17. Do not love the world, or anything in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For everything in the world, the cravings of sinful man, the lust of his eyes, and the boasting of what he has and does, comes not from the Father, but from the world. The world and its desires pass away, but the man who does the will of God lives forever. Now, the passage I just read is from the New International Version, and it's one of the less felicitous translations. It says, if you're familiar with any other of the translations, it'll be more familiar to you. Basically, John is saying, do not love the world, love not the world, or anything in the world. For if anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For everything in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, comes not from the Father, but from the world. The world and its desires pass away. The world and the lusts thereof pass away. But the one who does the will of the Father lives forever. Now, this passage is very, very, very rich, and extremely important, and I don't care how far I get tonight, we'll come back later and get all the rest of it, that's all. It has to be done. The reason it's so important is, it tells us about a subject that Christians are very confused about, and non-Christians are very confused about as well. What is the Christian's attitude toward the world? We get to one of the most misunderstood of all the things the Bible says, when the Bible here says, love not the world, nor anything in the world. What's that mean? And it's especially confusing in light of the fact that the same author, John, not in this letter of 1 John, but in his Gospel of John, the same author in one of the most famous verses in the New Testament says, what? For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever should believe in him wouldn't perish, but have everlasting life. That's a very familiar verse. God loved the world, which makes it a good thing to love the world, right? But here we're told, it's a bad thing to love the world. It's the same author. What's going on? And, of course, the answer is, the word world can be used in two different senses. And what's so critical to understand is, in one sense, we are to passionately and intensely love the world. And in a second sense, in another sense, we are to just as passionately and intensely hate the world. That's pretty important to get that distinction down, is it not? It's not just like it says, well, in one sense, we're supposed to love the world. In another sense, we're supposed to like the world. It says, in one sense, we're supposed to love it. In the other sense, we're supposed to hate it. And therefore, it's critical to understand what those two senses of the word world are, what the two meanings of the word world can denote in the Bible. In one sense, the word world can mean the material universe, the physical universe, the world of human beings, the world of nature, the world of the earth, the world of the material. But in other places in the Bible, the word world means, it refers to a system of thinking whereby the material world becomes ultimate in value. Worldliness, according to the Bible, is a state of mind in which the material world is all that there is. Worldliness is to live, you may not believe this, but worldliness is to act and to think as if the material is all that there is. That's worldliness. So sometimes the Bible calls the world that system of thinking. And other times, the Bible talks about the world as the material universe. And in one sense, we definitely are supposed to love the world, and in another sense, we're supposed to absolutely hate it. We're supposed to love the material world, we're supposed to hate the system by which we think of the material world as ultimate. This distinction is absolutely crucial for understanding Christianity and living Christianity. So let's go and make it. Let's lay it. tells us, I think, what worldliness is not, and verse 16 tells us what worldliness is, and verse 17 tells us what worldliness results in. So let's look at those three points. What worldliness is not, what worldliness is, what worldliness results in. Number one, to understand what John is not saying, if we're going to understand what John means when he says, hate the world, we have to understand in what sense we're supposed to love it. Because unless we understand what sense we're supposed to love the world, we'll not understand in what sense we're supposed to hate it. The Bible everywhere says that the material universe and the world of human beings is something that Christians are supposed to love. God so loved the world. He loved the world so much that he gave his greatest treasure. He emptied the heaven of its greatest treasure. Now, the Bible, especially in the beginning, you can see, when God created the physical universe, he created human beings in his image. That means every human being is made with a dignity, made in some sense similar to God. We'll get back to that in a minute. And he made the material world. He made food and drink. He made the earth. He made the skies. He made nature. He made matter. And he continually puts on it, if you go back to Genesis 1 and 2, you'll see God continually putting a benediction on the material world. He's constantly saying, he made this and it was good. He made this and it was good. He made this and it was good. God took on a human body, a human nature, a physical nature. When he came to earth in the form of Jesus Christ, every other religion gags on the idea of God getting a human nature. Other religions say, oh, God is too great for that. Actually, the way we look at it is, our God is so great that he did it. But I'll tell you one thing. There is no other religion that pays your body. There is no other religion that pays your humanity. There is no other religion that pays the material universe the most incredible compliment that any religion has ever paid it. Jesus Christ took on a human body, a human nature, and he still has one. Because after the resurrection, when he died and he rose again, did he get rid of the body? Did he say, ah, this unimportant thing. Now I've risen above matter, you know, as Yoda says to Luke, remember, in this swamp. Yoda says, ah, the important thing is the force, right? And what he put, you know, he pushes Mark Hamill, he pushes his shoulder and he says, not this crude matter. Remember that? Yes. You see, the force is spirit. And our problem, according to this point of view, is we have to rise above the material. You have to stop being, you see, trammeled by the material. You've got to rise above it. Is that what Jesus said? Ah, finally, this crude matter. Now I can be free. Oh, no. He walks through the walls, basically, he walks in through closed doors, and he says, so I know that this scares you, that I came in through the locked doors. I am not a ghost. I am flesh and blood. Give me something to eat. And it says he ate a fish. One of the most glorious verses in all the Bible. Here's Jesus Christ. In the future state of perfection, the state of absolute redemption, and he says, I'd like something to eat. There is no other religion that pays your body, that pays the physical, that pays the material, that kind of compliment. And therefore, you see that God both invented both matter and immatter, both spirit and body, and he's going to redeem both. Now, therefore, we're supposed to love the material universe just the way God loves the material universe. He loves it so much that he took it onto himself. He loves it so much that he's redeeming it. He loves it so much that our future is not an ethereal, disembodied paradise, but a new heavens and a new earth. What's that mean? There's going to be mountains. There's going to be seas. There's going to be food. Now, take the implications of that. What does it mean when you look at all that the Bible says about matter and what the biblical religion has a view of matter that no other philosophy, no other theology, no other religion has? What does it mean then for you, for Christians, to love the world? Let me just suggest, I'm going to do this kind of quickly, five things that it means when the Bible says love the world. We're supposed to love the world. Has God loved the world? What does it mean? Well, number one, it means you are supposed to have respect and awe before the needs and the rights of every other human being. is made in the image of God, in the image and likeness of God, we're told. Every human being is made rational because our God is a rational God, personal because our God is personal, creative because our God is creative, moral. We've all got consciences. Every human being is made in the image of likeness of God. That's why James has this amazing little statement. It's only an aside. There's a place in the book of James, and I forget exactly what, I think it must be chapter four. There's a place in the book of James where James says, don't use the same tongue to praise God and then to curse human beings made in God's image. Now that's just a little aside, but there's profound stuff in there. Listen, you know what he's saying? He says, ah, you say that you honor God, but when you trample, even with your tongue, when you treat lightly, when you cut down a human being, he doesn't say Christians, he says human beings, anyone made in God's image, you know what you're doing? If there is a portrait, let's just say your grandfather, for example, let's say your grandfather put you through college. You wouldn't be what you are today if your grandfather hadn't put the money out. You wouldn't even have been able to go to school. Let's imagine a situation like that. And you've got this wonderful picture of him, you know, in your living room. And you honor his memory. He's dead now, but you really say, boy, I would, what happens if one of your kids comes along and, you know, paints a mustache on the image? Well, you know, puts little eyeglasses, you know, sticks a little gap in the tooth, makes him look like David Letterman, you know, that kind of thing. What if it just tries to make him look kind of silly? You take it pretty personally, don't you? You say, you don't know what you're doing. When you trample on the image of my grandfather, you trample on the memory of my grandfather, you trample on my grandfather. Now, what James is saying is, you have to understand that every single human being, the needs and rights of every human being, if you trample on any of them, you're trampling on God himself. Therefore, Christians ought to be the leaders. And I'll show you why. Give me a second here. Christians ought to be the leaders in working to honor the needs and the rights of other human beings, all of them, even the ones with whom we differ the most deeply. And I'll tell you why. It is a great irony that the people who are most concerned, that we all get to live together, the people who are most concerned to create a basis for what they call a multicultural society, where people who differ deeply are able to respect and love each other, the people who are leading that movement tend to be what we call secular folks who are relativists. And here's how they argue. They say, since everything is relative, we can be tolerant of each other. This is how they reason. Listen. They say, how are atheists and believers going to get along? How are Jew and Gentile and Christian and Muslim going to get along? How are gay and straight going to get along? There's only one way. We have to agree that all of us have our own values, but they're all relative. We have to agree that nobody has ultimate. Nobody has the final morality. Everybody has their own morality. Nobody has the final word on God. Everybody has their own God. Nobody has the ultimate absolute values. All values are relative. And if all values are relative, then we, and only then, can we be tolerant of each other. You realize how stupid that is? If everything is relative, then tolerance would be relative. You can't say everything's relative except relativism. You can't say, since everything's relative, you must be tolerant, because what you're doing is you're pressing for an absolute value. You just said it's impossible. If you say everything is relative, we have to be tolerant. I say, wait a minute, if everything's relative, why can't I hit you in the mouth right now? And you might not like it, but you have no basis to say it's wrong. You may say, I'm going to hit you back, and that's fine, but all we've got is a struggle for power now. Friends, Christians, anybody who believes the Bible, has got a far more profound basis for saying, we have got to live, and with an attitude toward every other human being, regardless of what they believe, we've got to live with an attitude of profound respect. On a PBS special this week, I saw Michael Lerner, who's a Jewish thinker, and he's the editor of Tikkun, and he's considered a liberal person politically. You know what he says? But he goes to the Bible. He says, let me tell you something. Do you know why you have to take care of the homeless? Do you know why we have got to love each other? Do you know why we've got to look out for each other's civil rights? Do you know why we have to do these things? Because every human being, he said, is made in the image and likeness of God. And if you don't believe in that, then why take care? Why be tolerant? Why... We're just animals. We're highly evolved animals. There's no reason. He was right. Now, I told you I was going to do this quickly, so I still have to do it quickly. But let me give you the second point. To love the world means you honor and respect. In a sense, you have a sense of fear and trembling before every other human being. Their rights and their needs. Christians have to show that. If you don't, if you let secular relatives be better at this, secular relativists be better than this, than you, well, this just doesn't follow. Secondly, you love the world by recognizing the fact that God has given gifts of skill, gifts of wisdom, gifts of art, gifts of beauty, gifts of moral sense to all kinds of people. All kinds of people. Listen to these verses. Just let me quickly sort of run down them. Romans 2, 14 and 15 says, and it's talking about all human beings. They show the word of the law is written in their hearts. Their conscience is bearing witness. That says that every human being has an essential moral conscience that's there. Whether or not they intellectually believe in God or not, no matter what, they still have a lot of moral sense. God put it in them. Pardon me. James 1, 17. Every good and perfect gift comes down from above, from the Father of lights. In Exodus 31, God talks about the fact that when they're building the tabernacle, he says, go get your best artists. Go get your best craftsmen. Go get the people who are best at working with gold and silver and with wood and with cloth. You know why, he says? Because they have got gifts for me. They have artistic gifts, and every artistic gift is from God. In Isaiah 45, Cyrus, who's a pagan king of Persia, God says, I've anointed him with the spirit for world leadership. He's a pagan. He's not a believer. And yet God has given him a gift of leadership that he's using to make the world a good place. See, Martin Luther understood this when he said, and everybody laughs at it, he said, I'd be much rather, I would much rather be ruled by a stupid, by a wise Turk than a stupid Christian. And when he says Turk, he's talking about Muslims. I would much rather, he says, be ruled by a wise Muslim than a stupid Christian. What is he saying? What are all these texts saying? These texts are saying, because every human being is in the image of God, we've all got moral sense, and we've all got creative ability. And God makes the world a far better place than it ought to be, because he gives gifts of moral sense to people who aren't Christians, as well as Christians. He gives gifts of creativity, and art, and music, and literature, to all sorts of people, whether or not they're Christian. They've got a knowledge of God in them, and yet he brightens the world up, even if they intellectually deny it. A Christian loves the world by honoring those gifts of leadership, and those gifts of skill, and those gifts of wisdom, and those gifts of moral sense that you see. In other words, Christians move out into the culture, and they enjoy what God's doing out there. Now, if you don't understand this, you're going to be just as confused as Salieri was in Amadeus. Salieri sits there and says, Clearly, God has given this incredible gift of music to this degenerate, obnoxious person named Mozart. Mozart, remember? See the play, see the movie? How could God be singing to the world through this kind of person? Why would God give this incredible gift? See, Salieri was continually having to bow the knee in a kind of honor of the gift of music that God had given to Mozart. But he hated it. He says, What does God ever do? Because he's gracious. He's unjust. Because it says in Psalm 145, 9, The Lord is good to all. He has compassion on all he has made. He loves the world. And because he loves the world, he spreads out all kinds of great gifts. A Christian is someone who knows that when you talk to a non-Christian, you very, very, very possibly, even if that person is not saved, even if that person has no concept of God, even if that person, I mean, intellectually, even if that person is going off in a very, very bad direction morally. But yet you may still find this a person whose creative abilities are greater than yours. In fact, you can find lots of Christians whose moral self-control and decency is better than yours. See, Christians have a theology to understand why many non-Christians are morally superior to us. We're saved by grace, not by works, right? Because we're sinners, we are never as good as our right theology should make us. And because they're in the image of God, they're never as bad as their bad theology should make them. Therefore, Christians move out into the society, and they love the world. They see God having compassion on all he's made. God giving good gifts. Every good gift comes down from God. Now, God help. God help. God help. God help. Thank you. culture. You see art. You see things being given by God to people. And you honor them and you enjoy them because they're made for all of us to make the world a brighter place. First, to love the world means that we honor the needs and rights of the people around us, whether they're Christians or not. Number two, to love the world means that you honor the good gifts that God has given and you participate in the culture. Number three, now these are real fast. Number three, Christians ought to be working, what? To really be careful about the environment. Why? Why? Because God put Adam and Eve here to take care of the environment. because this is a new heavens and new earth that God's going to give us because matter is good. Okay, I'm really going fast now. Number four, okay, to love the world also means that we have to love the lost people just because they're lost. You see, here's a place where Jesus says, it's in John chapter 12. John chapter 12, I come not to condemn the world but to save it Christians move out without a condemning attitude toward the world. You get in the subway and you wish, you see all the, you know, it's like getting in the subway is a lot like reliving the great Beatles song, Eleanor Rigby. You know, all the lonely people, where do they all come from? And you can see that you wish you could, a person who's loving the world says, I wish I could talk to them, I wish they'd open up. Bill Crispin in Philadelphia, some of you heard me say this, Crispin says, you know why God loves cities more than he loves the country? Well, he says, because, you see, cities are places where there's more people than there are plants and country is the place where there's more plants than people. And since God loves people far more than he loves plants, he loves the city far more than the country. And so should you. There should be something, in spite of how hard it is to live in the city and in spite of how difficult it is and despite how draining it is, there should be something, if you love the world as God loved the world and sent his only begotten son, there should be something that just attracts you to the masses. Something that attracts you to all the lonely people. You know, there's a fifth way in which you love the world and that is you do your job right. See, there's an ascetic approach to worldliness that says a worldly person is someone who's out there physically in the world, you need to get away. See, a lot of people say it's more spiritual to work for Redeemer Presbyterian Church than for Cinebank. See, it's worldly to work for Citibank. It's not worldly to work for Redeemer. Redeemer, 16th floor, 1208 Madison, is every bit as much in the material universe as Citibank. And it has every bit as much difficulty when you're working there with worldliness as you will at Citibank. If you love the world, you honor every individual, you appreciate the gifts of beauty and culture that God's given, you get out there and you work for the preservation of the environment. You also do your job in your work wherever it is to God's glory and you see that this is just as glorifying to God as it is to do, quote, church work. Last of all, you care for people who are lost. You want to be involved with them. You don't say, oh my gosh, look at all these sinful people. That's just not the way God operated. He loved the world, not only as created, but even as fallen, he loved it. He loved the material universe. He ate a fish. Okay? He loves the world. Secondly, now, I'm going to give you kind of an overview of what we will get back to in the future. On the other hand then, you might say, well, what does it mean then to be worldly? And the answer is right here in verse 16. It's the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Let me just give you an outline. What makes the world bad is not the material universe as such. Worldliness is a system of thinking whereby you treat the material as if it's all that there is. You know how, is there anything wrong with being human? No. But humanism is where you say what human beings think and do is ultimate. Is there anything wrong with pleasure? No. But hedonism means that pleasure is the ultimate. Hedonism is bad. You see? Pleasure isn't bad. Pleasureism is bad. All right? The world isn't bad. World-ism is bad. When you look at the material world as if that's all that there is, then you're in trouble. And what the word lust means is, the word lust literally means an over-desire. In verse 16, the word lust is actually there twice. Once it's translated craving, once it's translated lust. The word lust means to over-desire something that's good. In verse 16, nothing wrong with eating, but to live to eat is worldliness. There's nothing wrong with sexuality, but to live for sex. There's nothing wrong with trying to look good, but when you live to look good. There's nothing wrong with money, but to live for money is worldliness. A worldly person is someone who doesn't just love the material, and we've just said that it's a false understanding of Christianity to interpret loving the world as loving matter. There are many Christians, both Protestant and Catholic, many churches that teach that Christians ought to be ascetics. They shouldn't enjoy a good movie. They shouldn't enjoy good food. They shouldn't be out in the world at all. They shouldn't like matter. Sex is bad. See? All of those things indicate that when John says, don't love the world, he means don't love matter. That's not what John means. Instead, what we're being told is, don't you dare live as if matter is all that matters. For example, you're worldly if you spend all your money on yourself. You may say, well, I'm a Christian, but if you just think it's absolutely unreasonable to give away 10 or 20 percent of your income, you're worldly. Because you act as if this world is what's really important. People who really understand that there's this world, but then there's the bigger world, and they let the bigger world influence the way they spend their money, become radically generous. See, Martin Luther says a Christian lives subspecie eternity, which means from the perspective of eternity. From the world's perspective, it's stupid to give away a cent. You only go around once in life, and you've got to grab for all the gusto that you can. That's worldliness. This life is all you've got. This is the only place you're ever going to be happy, so you better be as happy as you possibly can. That's worldliness. Whether or not you intellectually believe that, you can see whether you're living in a worldly way by the way you spend your money. I'll give you another indication of worldliness by whether or not you're a worrier. What is the most typical way the Bible calls, most typical phrase that the Bible uses for worry? Do you know what it is? The cares of the world. It's one thing to be concerned, but if you're just worried about your job, if you're just worried about money, if you're worried about, you know, as Jesus says, what you shall eat and what you shall drink and what you shall put on, that's worldliness. Because you're just so absolutely concerned. Peggy Noonan, in her famous article in Forbes a couple years ago, puts it perfectly, frankly. I have no idea where she is spiritually, but she sure nailed this. She says, I think we have lost the old knowledge that happiness is overrated, that in a way life is overrated. Our ancestors believed in two worlds and understood this to be the solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, short one. We are the first generation that actually expected to find happiness here on earth, and our search for it has actually caused such unhappiness. The reason, if you do not believe in another higher world, if you believe this is your only chance at happiness, then you're not disappointed when the world doesn't give you a measure of its riches. You're in despair. That's perfect. That's exactly it. She says, you can live as if there's two worlds, and therefore you don't overworry, and you're not all that upset about being a nice person and finding occasionally you get ripped off, and you're not that upset about giving your money away and finding, well, you can't do everything you'd like to do. A worldly person is uptight. A worldly person is concentrating on the material. A worldly person is concentrating on image, on power, on chic. All the superficial things, those are the important things. A Christian is not. A Christian says, how does this look from the standpoint of eternity? What about my life right now will still be true five billion years from now? That's what's important. What am I doing with my money right now that if I use it now it's going to have an impact five billion years from now? If I put it into people, if I put it into the Word of God, if I put my time and effort into it, everything else is going to burn up. And what Peggy Noonan is actually saying is there's an equilibrium, a lack of manicness, not way high up when you're successful, way down when you're unsuccessful. That is worldliness. Love not the world. The lust. The over-desire for the flesh. The flesh is fine. The over-desire for the eyes. The over-desire, you see, for the things of life. That's worldliness. Are you calm? Are you cool? Can you handle anything? Are you generous with your money? You don't worry too much? Then you're a person who's living subspecie from the viewpoint of eternity. Now, last thing, just got to say rather quickly. The last thing we're told here is, the world and its desires pass away, but the one who does the will of God lives forever. See, the ultimate argument against the world, and against putting all your emphasis on, you know, if you live to look good, you can't hold up. You can't hold, you're going to, it doesn't matter how many facelifts, look at Jaja DeBoer, 20 facelifts, it finally falls, it will fall. It doesn't matter, okay? The world is passing away. It is passing away physically, it is passing away intellectually. Some of you are afraid, I'm continually talking to people who aren't Christians, and they say, you know what, if I became a Christian, you know, I work in the newsroom, or I'm, you know, I'm in a particular department at the university. If I became a Christian, they would start to look at me like I was a six-foot lobster. I mean, people would say, a Christian, good night, how can you believe that? Because all intelligent people know this now. Yeah. This now. 30 years from now, the books that these people are writing are going to be laughed at by skeptics. See, the skepticism continually changes. Everybody's attacking Christianity, Christianity, and yet, the intellectual basis for the world's skepticism is continually changing. Christians still believe the same things they believed 500 years ago. But you see, the skeptics of 500 years ago are now utterly ridiculed by the people of today. And you, if you are a skeptic, you will be ridiculed too. Everything is passing away. The world's passing away philosophically, it's passing away intellectually, it's passing away physically, it's passing away in every other way. Only the one who does what? The one who does the will of God lasts forever. Jesus Christ says, not my will, but thine be done. He planted his foot. And because he planted his foot, he lasted. You know, in the little quote that we put in the beginning, don't look at it, just now listen to it. At the climax of the great novel, Jane Eyre, Jane Eyre is being asked by a man to be his mistress, even though he's still married. But he's married to a woman who's mentally ill. And so he says, you know, I'm just asking you to do something. I know it's breaking the rules. I know it's breaking the civil laws. I know it's breaking the law of God. But you've got to understand. And she's just about ready to say yes. And then she says, when he spoke, my very conscience and reason turned traitorous inside me. And I began to feel that I was wrong to resist him. My conscience and reason spoke loud. And they clamored wildly. Oh, comply, they said. Think of his misery. Consider the recklessness following on despair. Soothe him, save him, love him. Tell him you love him and will be his. Who in the world cares for you? Who will be injured by what you do? And then she says, still indomitable was the reply. I care for myself. I will keep the law given by God. Sanctioned by man. I will hold to the principles received by me when I was sane and not mad as I am right now. Laws and principles were not for times when there's no temptation. They're for such moments as this. When body and soul rise in mutiny against their rigor. If at my individual convenience I might break them, what would be their worth? They have a worth, so I have always believed. And if I cannot believe it now, it's because I am insane, quite insane, with my veins running fire and my heart beating faster than I can count its throbs. Preconceived opinions, foregone determinations are all I have at this hour to stand by. Here, there, I plant my foot. And I did. See what she said? If I put my foot on anything but the will of God, I won't last. This is how I feel now, but maybe later on I'll feel like something else later. Oh no. Here I plant my foot. The world passes away and the lusts thereof. And if you plant your feet on anything in the world, you'll pass away with it. But the one who does the will of God abides forever. The one who does the will of God. Jesus said, not my will, but thine be done. And what he did last forever. And if you say the same thing, not the world, not the things in the world, not the lusts of the world, not the fashions of the world. I plant my foot on the will of God. You'll last forever too. The one who does that will abide forever. Let's pray. Give us, Father, the permanence that comes from seeing, though the material world is a good thing, that we have to plant our feet. God and on the will of God alone. Then we'll be like your Son. We ask, Father, that you would help us to see that everything else is passing away, good as it is. Give us the ability to look so much at your Son and what he did for us on the cross, planting his foot, that we will be able to plant our feet, staying with your will and abiding forever so that we can also stay with your will and abide forever. Help us to understand these things and apply these things to our lives through your Spirit, we pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
