TITLE: The World and Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 2:13-23
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Matthew’s Messiah
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-magi-and-jesus-2/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from Matthew chapter 2, verses 13 through 23. When they had gone, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream. Get up, he said. Take the child and his mother and escape to Egypt. Stay there until I tell you, for Herod is going to search for the child to kill him. So he got up, took the child and his mother during the night, and left for Egypt, where he stayed until the death of Herod. And so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet. Out of Egypt I called my son. When Herod realized that he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious, and gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity, who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. That was said through the prophet Jeremiah was fulfilled. A voice is heard in Ramah, weeping and great mourning. Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted, because they are no more. After Herod died, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt and said, Get up, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel, for those who were trying to take the child's life are dead. So he got up, took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning in Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. Having been warned in a dream, he withdrew to the district of Galilee, and went and lived in the town called Nazareth. So was fulfilled what was said through the prophets, that he would be a Nazarene. The word of the Lord. So, most all the stories about Christmas, about the birth of Jesus that we see in Luke and Matthew, are filled with glad tidings and great joy, right? But this is a dark, it's a dark episode. And it's here for a number of reasons, but one, and I'll give you some of them in a second. But it's also important, especially since, you know, New York City is going through a very dark chapter right now, that Christmas doesn't mean the end of darkness. I mean, Jesus comes into a very dark world, and there's immediately violence, as we've read here. And it doesn't, Christmas doesn't immediately mean the end of darkness, it means a light in the darkness. And that's extremely important for us to understand. So let's take a look and see what it is we're supposed to learn from this passage. And there's, it's, of course, the story of, it's often called the slaughter of the innocents, because Herod kills all the children in Bethlehem under the age of two, just to make sure he got the Messiah. He hopes he did. But we, there's other things that this passage says, and we need to look at three verses tonight. Sort of a brief meditation on three different verses and three lessons we learn about the coming of Jesus into the world. The three things we learn from this passage are that the coming of Jesus evokes hostility. Secondly, that God works in unexpected ways. And thirdly, that, and thirdly, that the whole Bible is really about Jesus. Those are the three lessons. Let me show you the first one. The first one is that the coming of Jesus into the world evokes hostility. Now, it's, this is the, the heart of the, of the passage. It's verse 16. When Herod realized he had been outwitted by the Magi, he was furious and he gave orders to kill all the boys in Bethlehem and its vicinity who were two years old and under, in accordance with the time he had learned from the Magi. Now, the story is that the wise men came to Jerusalem and said, where's the king that's to be born? Herod gets the scholars together. They say, well, the prophecy says it's in Bethlehem. So he sends the wise men to Bethlehem, the Magi. And he says, well, make sure that when you found him, come back and tell me where he is so I can honor him. Of course, he wanted to kill him. So, the Magi, though, pardon me, the wise men got wise to the situation and didn't go back to Herod. And when Herod realized that they had not come back to him, that was supposed to be a joke. You know, it's, I know it's, I know it's cold. I know it's very cold, but you need to listen more carefully. No, I'll tell you what, I won't tax you. That's the last joke. That's the last one. Okay. Unless I think of something. So, they decide to leave. When Herod decides, oh, they're not coming back, he says, well, it's been so many months, so I know I can wipe out the Messiah as long as I kill all the children under the age of two. probably not a lot of people. It was likely 20 or 30 children, considering what we know about the population at the time. And it was completely in, it completely fits in with what we know about Herod the Great. He was a very brutal man. In fact, what we know about those kings in ancient times, how if they thought there was somebody who might be usurping them, they just killed them and the whole family and every niece and nephew. Now, just because it was typical doesn't mean it's not terrible. And just because he's a tyrant doesn't mean we shouldn't see what Matthew's trying to get at. The coming of Jesus into the world evokes hostility and pushback. And it's not just, we shouldn't look at Herod and say, well, he was a tyrant. Yes, but the Bible actually also says, Romans chapter 8, verse 7, that your natural heart, my heart, your heart, the Bible, well, here's what it says. It says, the natural heart is enmity toward God. Now, that's what the English says, enmity toward God and right wing. Well, what's that mean? It means in your natural state, you hate God. Not just you don't believe in God, you hate him. You say, what's that all about? Well, look, here's King Herod and in comes somebody saying, where's the new king to be born? Now, if you're the CEO and you find out that the board of trustees has appointed a new CEO, if you're the editor in chief and you find that a new editor in chief has been appointed, if you're the king and you want to be king and you find somebody's appointed another king, you get angry. You push back. You retaliate. Now, every single person in this room, you know your own heart, you want to be in, you don't want other people telling you how to live your life. You want to choose for yourself. And by the way, we live in one of the few cultures in history that tells you that's right. Most cultures have told you, you should fight against that. You should obey your father and mother. You should follow the tradition of the elders. You should, you know, you should conform. That's how most cultures have been. Western culture says, no, no, no. You and you alone have the right to live as you want. So we're actually encouraged in this. And along comes Jesus Christ. He says things like this, unless you hate your father and mother for my sake and even your own life and even your very life, you can't be my disciple. Do you know what that means? That's Semitic idiom. And what it means is, unless you love me more than your mother and father and even more than life itself, unless you're willing to follow me rather than decide how you want to live your life. Unless you make me your king, you can't follow me at all. Or here's another place where he says, you call me teacher and Lord, and you are right for that is what I am. But why do you call me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? See, we just sang about it. Joy to the world. The Lord has come. Let earth receive her king. And yet you and I, every one of us has a little inherent in our heart. We've got a part of our heart that says, nobody tells me what to do. It's very deep. And what that means is that when Jesus comes into the world or Jesus comes into your life, there's always pushback. There's always retaliation. It's always there. In fact, that's one of the reasons why most people who've read the Bible closely know that when people actually met Jesus, they always acted in an extreme way. They never acted moderately. Never. They either ran from him in terror or they assaulted him in anger or they bowed the knee in loving ardor and surrender. But they never acted in a moderate way. They were either all for him or all against him. They're afraid of him or they're angry at him or they gave him everything and centered their entire life around them. But nobody responded moderately. Why? Because of his claims. He's the king. See? Unless you deny yourself and take up your cross, you cannot be my disciple. Now, that's the first point. That Jesus comes into the world, there is always hostility. Jesus comes into your heart, there will be hostility. So let me just briefly say what that means to three groups of people. If you're a Christian, you say, I'm a Christian, I'm a strong Christian, I want to be a Christian. Well, I want you to recognize that there's still residual anger toward God in your heart. There's still residual hostility toward the authority of God, toward the sovereignty of Jesus Christ. Why is prayer so hard? his letters, John Newton is the great, you know, he was a hymn writer, he wrote Amazing Grace, but he was also a great pastor, and he wrote letters to his people. And at one point he says, all it takes to destroy my prayer life is the buzzing of a fly. He says, some days I sit down, I'm going to have a half an hour of prayer, and there's a fly in the room, and I can't stop, and that's it, it's over. Why is my prayer life so weak that the buzzing of a fly is enough to shatter it? It's because there's something in our heart that makes it hard for us to pray, hard for us to obey, hard for us to be accountable. Christianity is not a waltz, it's a fight, because of our own hearts. And therefore, you're never going to be any kind of Christian unless you're willing to fight. Fight to put Jesus in the center. Fight to make him Lord of your life. So that's one group. Here's a second group. If you're a skeptic, if you really, really find it hard to believe in Christianity or not sure you believe in God, if you're a skeptic, okay, I just want you to know one thing. You are not objective. And it's very important to keep that in mind. You say, what do I mean? Well, Thomas Nagel, who is a philosopher at NYU, who's a philosophy professor, Thomas Nagel some years ago wrote a book in which he said, I'm an atheist, I don't believe in God, I'm a convinced atheist, I don't think the arguments for God are valid. But then he said there was one thing that bothered him. He said, the problem is I want atheism to be true. It's not just I don't believe in God and naturally I hope that my belief is right. It's that I hope there is no God. I don't want there to be a God. I don't want the universe to be like that. And then he said, I have a cosmic authority problem. And I don't think it's rare. I doubt that there's anyone who is genuinely indifferent as to whether there's a God or not. Now, did you hear that? He's perfectly right. He says, you're not, if you come to this idea, is there a God or not? Well, see, if there is a God, you lose control. If Jesus Christ is who he said he is, you lose control. You can't live any way you want. And so you're not coming objectively. If you were the judge, if you were a judge and a case came before you involving a company in which you had an investment, you wouldn't be allowed to, you'd have to recuse yourself, right? You wouldn't be allowed to adjudicate the case. Why? Because the problem is if it goes in a certain direction, if the case goes in a direction, you lose money. So you're not objective. If you're skeptical of Christianity in particular or the belief in God in general, just realize you're not objective. You're going to have to adjudicate that case. You're going to have to think it out. But just realize you're not objective. It's not a simple abstraction. Because if you lose, if you, if he, God exists, you lose control. And you don't want that. We all have a cosmic authority problem. Christians have it. Non-Christians have it. People in the middle have it. And that's the last person I like to talk to. Some of you are not really skeptics, but you're not very strong Christians, right? You kind of believe in God. You believe maybe in Christianity. You come to church sometimes, but you always say, I wish I were a better Christian. And I'm really not the Christian I ought to be. In other words, you're moderate toward Jesus. You're not angry at him. You're not scared of him. But you're not sold out, every day getting up, centering your entire life on him, reason for living. See, you're moderate. Anything but that. I want you to be anything but that. And you're saying, you mean you'd rather I was angry at Jesus? Yes. Because you'd be closer to knowing who he is. And therefore closer, I think, to bowing the knee to him in worship. Read what the scripture says about him and you'll see an incomparable life. And a life that will, I think, move you toward him. And certainly out of being just moderate. So, when Jesus comes in the world, there's hostility. That's the first thing. Here's the second verse I'd like you to look at with me. It's the very end. Joseph, when he came back from Egypt with Mary and Jesus, wanted to live in Judea. But he realized he couldn't because he was afraid. Because in Judea, Herod's son was and he was afraid of him. So, he ends up, it says, and he went and lived in a town called Nazareth. Now, that's all by itself. The fact that Jesus is from Nazareth is really interesting. Here's the savior of the world. Here's the person. Here is the most influential person in the history of the world. And he's coming from Nazareth. He's going to grow up there. Nazareth was a nowhere place. It was a back of beyond. With full of things. With Fox. He winged. It was men. really impressed with Jesus, so he grabs his friend, Nathaniel, and he says, Nathaniel, come on. I want you to meet Jesus. He says, Rabbi, he might be the Messiah. And Nathaniel says, where is he from? And Philip says, Nazareth. And Nathaniel says, Nazareth? You think somebody important came out of Nazareth? No way. Now, you see, every society has a pecking order. There's desirable and posh and exclusive neighborhoods and towns where all the important people live and where the important things happen. That's how the world thinks of it. And then there's the other end of the spectrum. So, for example, they had Jerusalem, and then at the other end was Nazareth. Now, we have what? We have Beverly Hills or parts of Manhattan, but at the other end of the spectrum, I was looking this up, we have a town called Oatmeal, Texas. It's called Oatmeal, Texas, that in 1990 had a population of 20. And honestly, in the year 2000, this is what it said, by the way, in the year 1990, population 20, year 2000, what it said was, about that. And evidently, in the year 2010, nobody seemed to think it was important to count. So there's nothing from 2010. Oh yeah, oatmeal. You're laughing, you're right. Just like Nathaniel laughed at Nazareth. It's a laughing stock. Nothing important happens there. Nothing that really would change the world would come out of a place like that. So that's how the world thinks. And right here, in the very beginning of Jesus' life, God is serving notice. I don't do things the way the world thinks they should be done. I do things almost upside down, counterintuitively. I love that. And you should love it too. In an age in which the oldest son got everything, the oldest son got the birthright, the oldest son got all the money, all the power, all the estate, everybody else got just a little bit, right? God works through Abel, not Cain, Isaac, not Ishmael, Jacob, not Esau, Ephraim, not Manasseh, David, not his older brothers. When God wants to work through a woman and bring his salvation into the world through a woman, Rebecca, the mother of Isaac and Samson's mother and Hannah, the mother of Samuel and Elizabeth, the mother of John the Baptist, weren't supposed to have children. And God always chooses the infertile woman or the unloved woman or the socially ashamed woman. So it's old Sarah, not fertile Hagar. And it's unloved Leah, and it's not beautiful Rachel. God always chooses Nazareth, not Rome, not Athens, not even Jerusalem, Nazareth. The girl nobody wanted is the one he chooses. The boy that everyone else forgot is the one he chooses. That's how he does it. And you say, oh, that's kind of nice. He likes underdogs. No, it's more than that. When we talk about God's work, we're talking about his salvation. And to say that God's salvation works in a counterintuitive way, upside down from the way the world would expect. Jesus comes from Nazareth because the salvation that Jesus brings is almost the opposite of what people would think. The world does not think it will be anything like what Jesus says it will be. When I was 40 years ago, went to my first church, small town in Virginia, the 1970s. This is a long time ago. This is not very traditional. Everybody believes in God. Everybody's very religious. Everybody's very conservative. And one of the things we used to do is we used to, some of us from the church, we used to actually go around and visit the houses, knock on doors of the houses around the church. We'd go and visit and go in and sit down. And people were happy to have somebody from the church and happy to meet the pastor. Those were the days. No, I, well, maybe not. Because you see, even though they were all very religious and very conservative, very traditional, we had a set of questions. And one of the questions we used to ask them is this, if you were to die tonight and go before God and he were to ask you, why should I let you into my heaven? What would you say? And if you were to die tonight and say, why should I let you into my heaven? God, and he were to ask you, why should I let you into my heaven, what would you say? And 98% of the people would say something like this to us. They would say, well, I try my best to live a good life. I try to obey the Ten Commandments. I try to obey the Bible. I try to live like a Christian. I try to live like Jesus. You see, the world, that's how the world thinks salvation should work. It's for the strong. It's for the people who can pull themselves together. It's for the people who can stiffen the sinews and summons up the blood. It's for the people who are strong. And of course, they can pull it together and be moral and good. But Jesus Christ comes, not from the place of the strong, not from Rome, not from Athens, not from Jerusalem, but from Nazareth. Jesus comes and goes to the cross. He says, I have come in weakness, and I only save those who know they're weak. It's completely the opposite. He comes from Nazareth. He works in unexpected ways. He confounds. He doesn't just make the world hostile, but he confounds, by the way, their expectations, and he shatters their categories. How can salvation be by the week for the week? Last point. Last thing to see here. My favorite verse, but it's only after 40 years of thinking about this passage. My favorite verse is actually up here in verse 15. You see, Jesus and Joseph and Mary went down into Egypt to get away from Herod, and when Herod died, they came up out of Egypt and went back to Judea, okay, and then to Galilee, to Nazareth. And it says in verse 15, and so was fulfilled what the Lord had said through the prophet, this is the Old Testament prophet Hosea, out of Egypt I have called my son. Out of Egypt I've called my son. Now, when you see that, you say, okay, the reason why you probably did not pick this up and why I didn't pick it up for many, many years is because you say, okay, that must be a prophecy where in the Old Testament there was a prophecy about the Messiah spending time in Egypt and coming to Judea and Galilee. No. If you go back to Hosea chapter 11, verse 1, and actually read it, you'll immediately see it's not a prophecy at all. In fact, when you first read it, you'll say, huh? In the Old Testament, when God spoke to Israel, he often called Israel my son, the nation of Israel he often called my son. And if you go to Hosea 11, all you have is the story of Israel, that Israel was exiled in Egypt, right? But God brought his son out of Egypt, took them to Mount Sinai, gave them the Ten Commandments, and then sent them to Judea, sent them to the Promised Land. In other words, what he did was he brought them out of Egypt, they were in trouble, he brought them out of Egypt, he gives them the law and says, now obey me and I will bless you, and sends them to the Promised Land. Rescue you, obey me and I'll bless you, go to the Promised Land, and they don't. They don't obey him. Obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. In fact, since I try to read the Bible, I read the Bible through every year, and the last part of the year I'm reading 1 and 2 Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles, I'm in 2 Chronicles right now. And it's a story of over and over and over again, God saying, here's my law, obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. Obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. He gets them out of trouble, out of Egypt. Obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. Eventually, they're in exile in Babylon, and he brings them home and he says, obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. Over and over. That's the story of Israel. Israel. And as soon as us Gentiles start to say, oh yeah, that's the story of Israel. No, no, you can't. We better not think ill of them, because essentially, Israel is a microcosm of the human race. And if you actually scroll out enough to see the whole Bible, and you see Adam and Eve, who of course were the representatives of the entire human race, we see the same thing. God puts them in the garden and says, obey me and I will bless you, and they don't. And it's the reason why the world's such a dark place tonight. It's the reason why we've got so much stuff that we're dealing with. Because God says to the human race, obey me. Love me with all your heart, soul, strength, and mind. Love your neighbor as yourself. And I will bless you. I will give you peace. I will give you shalom. But they don't. We don't. Is there any hope? Yeah. What if God's true son, his real son, came to earth? And he comes to earth, and immediately he's in trouble, and he goes to Egypt. when he's brought out of Egypt, he goes to Judea, but unlike anyone else, he does obey his father. The Bible says that he obeyed his father. He loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, he loved his neighbor as himself. Read about it. Read the New Testament. It was an incomparable life. It was a life of justice and of love and of wisdom. It was an astounding life. He was the only person who ever, ever actually obeyed the father. He was the only true son. He was the only true Israelite. He was the only true human being. See, all other sons and Israelites and human beings have been called to obey. And I will bless you and we haven't, but now one comes along the only true son, the only true human being, the only true Israelite. And he obeys fully, completely. And he's the only one who's ever earned the blessing for perfect obedience, the blessing of God. But when he gets to the end of his life, he doesn't get it. What happens? There's no pomp and circumstance. There's no gold crown. There's only a crown of thorns and there's no royal robes except the robe they put on him. Remember in mockery so they could beat him and pummel him and spit on him and then torture him and then kill him. Why? What was going on? I'll tell you what was going on. He was getting the curse for disobedience. See, all other sons, all other Israelites, all other human beings were told, obey me and I'll bless you. We didn't obey. We get the, we deserve a curse for disobedience, but he got the curse for our disobedience so that if we believe in him, we get the blessing for his obedience. We get the blessing he deserved. Now here's what's so wonderful about this verse. Matthew can look at this passage in the Old Testament, which is actually about Israel and it is about Israel and about how they're supposed to obey and how they're supposed to obey the Ten Commandments. It is. And yet Matthew reads that as if it's about Jesus. And you know why? There's two ways you can read the Bible. Is it basically about you and what you must do to be saved? Are you like those people who, those 98% of the people who back in, in Virginia told me that that's what it means to be saved? You read the Bible and you try your very hardest to live a good life. You summons up the blood, you stiffen the sinews, you live a good life. Is that what you think? Then the Bible is basically about you or is the Bible basically about him? That he has come and he has been the perfect son and the perfect human being and the perfect Israelite. And he's fulfilled the law fully so that you can be saved by grace. Which is it? Of course the Bible tells you you have to obey the Ten Commandments. Of course you do. I do. You do. But is that the main message? No. And Matthew can read the entire Old Testament and see it all about Jesus. He can read about Israel coming out and he says, but Jesus did that. He can read about every prophet, every priest, every king, every deliverer. Jesus is the true prophet, the true priest, the true deliverer. He's the true temple. He's the true tabernacle. He's the true altar. He's the true sacrifice. It's all about him. And once you understand that, that you can be saved by grace, that the Bible is really about him, then you understand why the world's understanding of salvation is turned upside down and you're saved by grace. And that, by the way, knowing that, knowing what he did for you, that will take away the hostility of your heart. You know that. That's the only thing. You can't just coerce your heart and just say, you know, there's a part of your heart that says, I don't want to obey him. I want to be in charge. And you can just say, but you have to, you have to. Or you can say, look what he did for you. See, if you just beat your heart into submission, it'll break. It'll break. It'll break. You'll break your own heart. But you can melt your heart. You can melt your heart with the knowledge of what he did. You know what he did? It said, you know, this interesting passage where it says Rachel weeping for her children. I mean, it's, there's a lot of interesting stuff there about what's, that is a passage from Jeremiah. And it's talking about the fact that Rachel, Jacob's wife, Rachel died in childbirth. She died giving life to her son, Benjamin. She died giving life to Benjamin. And there is a sense in which Jesus Christ died giving us life. But here's the good news. He's, he lives again and you will live again. And by the way, probably even Rachel will live again. Meanwhile, see what he did for you. Use that on your heart and it'll be a light in the dark. even when all of the lights do. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for giving us our assurance that even in dark times, even in a dark place like this world, your son comes, and he's the light. And he comes into our lives, and sometimes before he brings us peace, he stirs up dissension in our own heart. But we pray that you would help us see the wonder of grace and by it subdue our hearts out of and through love. And we also thank you that you work through not only the powerful and the elite, but you work through anybody. In fact, you prefer to work through anybody. And we ask that you would make us people at Christmas who remember that there's no more anti-Christmas spirit than the spirit of a snob. So Father, all these things, use them on our hearts and help us to enjoy and just rejoice in all that you have done for us this Christmas. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
