TITLE: The Offense of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Mark 6:1-13
TOPICS: Salvation
SERIES: King’s Cross: The Gospel of Mark, Part 1: The Coming of the King
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-offense-of-jesus/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from the book of Mark, chapter 6, verses 1 through 13. Jesus left there and went to his hometown, accompanied by his disciples. When the Sabbath came, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many who heard him were amazed. Where did this man get these things, they asked? What's this wisdom that has been given him that he even does miracles? Isn't this the carpenter? Isn't this Mary's son and the brother of James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us? And they took offense at him. Jesus said to them, only in his hometown, among his relatives and in his own house, is a prophet without honor. He could not do any miracles there except to lay his hands on a few sick people and heal them. And he was amazed at their lack of faith. Then Jesus went around teaching from village to village, calling the twelve to him. He sent them out, two by two, and gave them authority over evil spirits. These were his instructions. Take nothing for your journey except a staff. No bread, no bag, no money in your belts. Wear sandals, but not an extra tunic. Whenever you enter a house, stay there until you leave that town. And if any place will not welcome you or listen to you, shake the dust off your feet when you leave as a testimony against them. They went out and preached that people should repent. They drove out many demons and anointed many sick people with oil and healed them. This is God's word. We're looking at the book of Mark, the life of Jesus in the gospel of Mark. Today, the key word is this word, took offense, in verse 3. They were offended at him. And it's the Greek word skandalon, from which we get our word scandal. It says they were scandalized by him. Now, what does that mean? To be scandalized, to be offended, according to the Bible, is not just to disagree with what somebody says or does, but to viscerally reject and to be hostile, to feel hostility toward what someone said or did. This passage is saying to us that Jesus always, everywhere, offends people, evokes visceral rejection and hostility. And if you follow Jesus, you will too. That's the point, okay? Should we close in prayer or would you like me to elaborate? Jesus always, everywhere, offends people, evokes visceral rejection and hostility, and if you follow him, you will too. That's the point. There's a great quote by J.P. Meyer, who's a historian and scholar, who says it this way. What is beyond dispute is that in the ministry of two or three years, Jesus of Nazareth attracted and infuriated his contemporaries, mesmerized and alienated the ancient world, unleashed a movement that has done the same ever since, and thus changed the course of history forever. See that? Attracted and infuriated, mesmerized and alienated the ancient world, and all of his followers, the movement of his followers have done the very same thing. Unless you understand the offensiveness of Jesus, you really won't understand who he is or what it means to follow him. Let's break this down into three parts. I think the text is telling us three things about this. First, it tells us that Jesus is offensive. Secondly, it tells us why Jesus is offensive. And then thirdly, it tells us how you can be selectively offensive to. It's a how-to sermon. How you can be selectively offensive to. So, Jesus is offensive, why he's offensive, and how his followers should be selectively offensive to. Number one, Jesus is offensive. You see this right at the top because we're told in verse 1, Jesus went to his hometown. This is Nazareth. Accompanied by his disciples, and they took offense at him. Now, let's put this together with everything else we've seen. In Mark chapter 3, we're told that the leaders, the civic and religious leaders from Jerusalem, were offended at Jesus. So, that's the elites. We're also told in chapter 3 that both the Herodians and the Pharisees plotted together to kill him. In other words, both the left wing and the right wing of the elites were offended at him. These are two groups of people that didn't agree on anything else. They hated each other, but they agreed that Jesus had to go. So, we're told that Jesus had to go. So, we're told that Jesus had to go. So, we're told that Jesus had to go. So, we're told that Jesus had to go. So, we're told that Jesus had to go. and the right wing of the elites were offended at him. These are two groups of people that didn't agree on anything else. They hated each other, but they agreed that Jesus had to go. So the elites have been offended, and the left and the right have been offended. Now we come to Nazareth. Now Nazareth was the most humble little village. We almost know nothing about it. It was a real nowheresville. We almost know nothing about it except that Jesus is from there. It's never mentioned in history otherwise, really, hardly. Remember Nathaniel in John 1 says, can anything good come out of Nazareth? How could the Messiah come from a little place like Nazareth? This is a nowheresville. This is a little town, small town, okay? And there we have the people who knew Jesus. They're grassroots people. They're simple people. They're humble people, and they've known him since he was a little boy. They knew him growing up, and they're offended at him too. This is the very opposite of the elites, and they're offended. So this is everybody. There's no one left, you know. Big city, small town, offended. Elites, hoi polloi, offended. Left, right, offended. Plebeians, patricians, offended. But wait a minute. How is this possible? Because all these different groups don't like one another. They hate each other. So how is it possible that all of them seem to be offended at Jesus? And the answer is that Jesus does offend everybody, but in very different ways. In other words, every one of these groups has a very different reason for why they're offended at Jesus. In fact, a lot of them would be offended at why you're offended at Jesus. But they all agree that he's offensive. They all viscerally reject him. For example, for different reasons, though, this is very important to understand. For example, in New York City, Western culture, you find that some people love certain things about Christianity. They like the grace stuff. They like to talk about forgiveness. They like all that. But as soon as a New Yorker hears you say, Jesus is the one true and only Lord and Savior of the world, New Yorkers start to go brrrr. They just start to shake. You know, it's funny. It just gives them the willies. But ah, but let's go to a traditional culture. Let's go to the East or the Middle East or the Near East and go there and say, well, there couldn't just be one true religion. And they'd say, why not? And on the other hand, if you start talking there about forgiving 70 times 7 or turning the other cheek or when he comes, someone comes and asks you to take your cloak, give him your tunic also, they'd say, you people have no integrity. You people have no honor. You're nuts if you think that you can live like that. Every place is offended by different things in the gospel. But every place is offended. What we're really learning here is that no matter who you are, when Jesus Christ says, by the way, in John chapter 15, verse 18, when he says, if the world hates you, remember it hated me first. The world hates me, says Jesus. He doesn't say, well, the northern hemisphere hates me more than the southern hemisphere, or the eastern hates me more than the western, or this kind of, you know, the wealthy people hate me more than the poor people. He doesn't say that. He says the world, every part of the world, there is no people group, there's no class, there's no group of people who is friendlier or more likely naturally to receive Jesus. Jesus offends everyone but for different reasons. Now, that's the first point. He's very offensive. But let me just ask you a question just before we move on to the second point, kind of an application sort of question. Is there anybody here who's struggling with Christianity because there's a certain part of it you find offensive? A certain part of it you find regressive? And you say, I find that just offensive and regressive and primitive. Let me ask you a question. Why should what your culture and your mindset, why should the part of the world you're from, why should your culture's troubles with Christianity trump every other one? Because you know the things you like about Christianity some other culture hates. And the things that you don't like about Christianity you think are regressive some other culture thinks is progressive. And so for you to just stay away from Christianity because, oh, it's regressive, that's very culturally narrow of you. What you're saying is my culture's problems with Christianity are different than anybody else's. But here's what I want you to think. If Jesus is the Son of God from heaven, risen from the dead, if He's from outside the world, He's going to offend you in some way because He's from outside the world. And therefore, every single place in the world, every mindset, every culture, at some point will be offended by Him. And you inhabit some part of that world. So if He really is from outside, of course He would offend you. See, if you're sitting around saying, well, I accept Jesus as long as, I wish He didn't say this, or I wish the Bible didn't say this, or I wish Christians were like this, because that offends me. If He's real, He will have to offend you someplace. So here's the to accept him with the part about him that offends your part of the world, and your cultural sensibility, and your temperament, because he's real. In fact, if he is real, of course he would offend you in some way. Either he is the Son of God risen from the dead, and you have to take him with his offensiveness, or he's not, and so who cares? Why would he even be offended? You can just forget Christianity. You can ignore it. It's not true, because he's not the Son of God risen from the dead. Sometimes I ask people who say, this part of Christianity offends me, and I always say, now, do you mean that because that part offends you, Jesus couldn't be the Son of God risen from the dead? You're saying because that offends you, Jesus couldn't be risen from the dead, and they say, well, no, I don't mean that. I say, well, you have to figure that out. If he's risen from the dead, of course he's going to offend you some way, because you inhabit some part of the world, and he says, the world hates me. So Jesus is offensive. Secondly, we learn here why he's offensive. Now, some of you may say, well, wait a minute, you just said that every single group of people, every time, every age, every culture, every mindset is offended by Jesus in different ways. Yeah, but there are some themes, and I think when we see what led his hometown folks to reject him, viscerally reject him, be offended by him, I think we'll understand a little bit about why Jesus is so widely offensive. Notice what he says here in verse…what they say in verse 3. They say, where did this man get these things? What's his wisdom? Who does he think he is? What makes him think he's such hot stuff? Isn't this just a carpenter? Haven't we known his family? Aren't his brothers, James, Joseph, Judas, and Simon with us? Aren't his sisters with us? And they were offended at him. Now, what's going on here? Are they saying, well, I just can't believe that the Messiah who's going to save Israel would come from such humble socioeconomic stock? Probably. I'm sure that's part of it, but I think there's something much more here. Bill Lane, in his commentary on Mark, puts it beautifully when he says about his hometown, he says, their discernment could not penetrate the veil of ordinariness that surrounded him. Ordinariness. If this is the Messiah who's going to save us, he couldn't be so ordinary, he's just so ordinary. That offended them. And here's why. The ordinariness of Jesus offends the normal human understanding of how salvation works. Jesus' ordinariness subverts the normal way in which our hearts think of and want salvation to be in two ways. His ordinariness offends and subverts our understanding of salvation in two ways. First of all, Jesus' ordinariness subverts what I might call the trajectory of salvation. Now, that's a big word. What do I mean by that? The direction. There's a really great little book. It's like a booklet called The Scandal of Jesus. It's written by Vinath Ramachandra from Sri Lanka. And he says there, and maybe from his vantage point he can see this even better than we can, he says there, quote, all other religions offer as salvation some form of liberation from ordinary humanness. Ultimate salvation in all other religions, he's saying, is always seen as someday escaping the shackles of our humanity, the shackles of our individuality, our physical embodiment, getting away from the ordinary human life, like eating and drinking and sleeping and working. Someday, every other religion says salvation means we'll be released and liberated from ordinary humanness into a kind of ethereal, esoteric, transcendent, spiritual, pure spiritual existence. But, Ramachandra goes on to say, biblical salvation lies not in an escape from this world, but in the transformation of this world. You will not find hope for this world in any religious system, any other religious system, or any other philosophy of humankind. The biblical vision is unique. Now, do you hear what he's saying? The ordinariness of Jesus subverts and contradicts what almost every other religion, except biblical religion, every other religion says about salvation. Every other every other approach says salvation means God releasing us from ordinary human life. But when you read the Bible, when you see the life of Jesus, who is Jesus? It's God. According to the Bible, salvation goes in the opposite direction, the opposite trajectory. God comes down into our humanness. He gets entangled in it. He immerses in it. kind of person that needs to know, where am I going to eat tomorrow? What am I going to drink tomorrow? And he not only gets involved in just simply ordinary human life, but also in the vulnerability and the pain and the suffering of our human life, and eventually he dies to redeem it. But, this is the week after Easter, when you go to Luke chapter 24 to read about the risen Christ, you'll see accounts there about the risen Christ that no one could have ever in a million years made up. If you were going to make up accounts of the risen Christ, what would you have said? You know, you would have said, well, a week later, this is what it says in Luke 24, a week later, Jesus appeared before his disciples, and his beauty and his effulgence was such that they fell onto the ground and worshiped him. But instead, he shows up, even though the doors are locked, and they say, what are you doing here? And they're scared, and they pull back, and he says, uh-uh, uh-uh, a spirit hath not flesh and bones. Let me prove it to you. Give me a fish. So, they give him a fish, and he eats it. See, he says, who would have made up anything like that? Why is the risen Christ so ordinary? He says, give me a fish, and I'll prove that I'm not a ghost. And they watch him eat the fish. Who would have made up something like that? That's nuts. That's crazy. But here's what it's saying. The reason it's crazy to us, the reason it's nuts, is because our understanding of salvation is released from ordinary human life, and the whole purpose of Jesus Christ's death and resurrection is to redeem it. The new heavens and new earth is our goal. God is not removing us, but he's coming down to renew ordinary human life. And I'll tell you this, in the new heavens and new earth, we are not going to be floating six feet above the ground. We will march. We will walk. We will dance. I think we're going to fly, but it'll be real wind on our faces. We will hug. We will kiss. We will eat and drink in the kingdom of God. In the new heavens and new earth, there's going to be food. There's going to be music. There's going to be arts and sciences. There's going to be economics and politics. And there's going to be sea and sky. And there's going to be oceans lapping on the shore. Why is it that there is nothing more deeply and enduringly satisfying than the most ordinary aspects of human life? There's nothing better, nothing better to work in a garden and then sit by a wall in the sun, laughing and eating and drinking with your best friends. There's nothing better than watching birds fly. There's nothing better than watching the waves come in on the shore. Why? Because we're made for that. And in the new heavens and new earth, all of that is there, but cleansed. And in Romans chapter 8, in Romans chapter 8, we're told this, that the creation, all of nature is groaning. It's standing on tiptoes. It knows it's subject to decay. It knows it's not what it ought to be. It knows it hasn't been cleansed. It hasn't been made everything it ought to be. But it can't wait. It's standing on tiptoe for the glorious liberty of the children of God. On the last day, a glory is going to come down into us and will not just transform us but the entire world. And then we're told Psalm 96, the trees of the world will be dancing and singing for joy. If the trees of the wood can sing for joy, what will you and I be able to do? And that's why Ramachandra, when he's asked this question, and this is a terrific reply because you'll be asked this question too. Let me go back to his little book. He says, that is why when some people ask me, do you think there's salvation in other faiths too? See, people are always saying that. Don't you think there's salvation in other faiths too? You're a Christian, but aren't there salvation in other faiths too? When people ask me, is there not salvation in other faiths too? I always ask them, what kind of salvation are you talking about? Not this kind. This kind of salvation is in no other religion. No faith holds out a promise of eternal salvation for the world, for the ordinary world, that the cross and the resurrection hold out. They don't even claim to. Now, that's offensive. To say only Christianity is even claiming salvation for this world, for the ordinary world, ordinary human life, the ordinariness of Jesus, the ordinariness of the gospel, the ordinariness of all that, tells us that only Christianity is even promising that kind of salvation. And that's offensive. You say, don't you believe all religions are going to the same place? No. They have totally different trajectories. They don't even claim to be going to the same place. Is that offensive? Yes. The ordinariness of Jesus Christ subverts our understanding of the trajectory of salvation. Secondly, the ordinariness of Jesus Christ subverts our understanding of the story of Naaman. Naaman was a great Syrian general, and he had leprosy, and he heard about the great God of Israel. And he decided he was going to go to the God of Israel and to his prophet Elisha to get the healing from God. So he took everything he thought he would need in order to get it. He took a whole lot of money, you know. He took, in a sense, his resume. He brought all of his letters of recommendation from the king of Syria and the prime minister and all that. In other words, you know, he lived in New York City. He knew how to go to an interview. He brought the money, he brought the resume, he brought the recommendations, he brought everything. And he also brought his sword in case the God would say, you must do a great act of prowess, some great deed in order to win your salvation. But when he gets there, Elisha doesn't even come to the door. He sends his messenger and he says, you want your healing? Go into the Jordan River and wash. Naaman is furious. And in tremendous anger, he leaves the prophet's house. And all the servants go after him saying, Master, Master, now why? Why is he so upset? You know why he's so upset? He's offended by the ordinariness of God's prescription. In other words, are you saying, says Naaman, my money doesn't mean anything? My sword doesn't mean anything? My prowess, my accomplishments mean nothing? Any idiot can wash in the Jordan River. Anybody can wash in the Jordan River. It doesn't make any difference. Are you trying to say I'm on the same level as anyone else? And they come to him and they say, the servants are begging him to reconsider. And they say, this is 2 Kings 5, Master, if the prophet had told you to do some great deed, would you not have done it? How much more then when he tells you, wash and be cleansed? See, he expected to be asked for a great deed. That would have been fine. He thought, you know, he would come and say, I would like your salvation, O Lord God of Israel. And God's, he expected the prophet to say something like, Bring me the broomstick of the wicked witch of the West. Or you see yonder mountain, you see yonder dragon on yonder mountain, slay the dragon in return. And, you know, in that case, Naaman would have said, yeah. Now, there's a salvation, there's a crunchy salvation. There's a salvation I can, you know, get my teeth into. There's a salvation that fits my ego. There's a salvation that fits the human ego. You see, on the one hand, if he had been told, do some great deed to earn your salvation, then he could have said, yeah, I don't really need charity. I don't really need charity, at least not total charity. I just need a chance to show what I can do and to put things right. And also, the great deed kind of salvation gives you leverage with God. Because, you see, if you've done some great deed or you've, you know, you've done this or you've done that, and then God takes you, gives you his salvation because you've lived such a good life or you've studied the Bible or you've prayed so much or you've rescued some damsel or you've done whatever, then you've got leverage over God. You know that. He can't just ask anything of you. You've got rights. You've paid your dues. You've got some control. But the ordinariness of God's offer, the graciousness of it, levels him. Basically, he says, just go watch in the Jordan River. He knows what that means. It means a prostitute could do that as well as a man of moral virtue like himself. Everybody's on the same level. Everybody's a sinner. Everybody's lost. And everybody can be saved only through sheer grace equally. And he hated that. You know why? It offended him. You know why? It offended his pride. And guess what, friends? The gospel of grace, the ordinariness of the gospel of grace, I can't tell you how many times over the years people have said, well, what do I have to do to be connected to God? When I tell them, I say, that's it? That's all there is to it? You mean it doesn't matter how I live up to this moment? And there's nothing? I can just do it right now? Is that it? Too easy. Their pride is offended. And your pride in your heart is the thing making this world a miserable place. The gospel of Jesus Christ does offend everybody, everybody, everybody, but it offends the part of your heart that's making this world a miserable place. It offends the part of your heart that needs to be challenged or there's no hope for the world. Do you see it? salvation that offends our pride. And therefore, it offends everybody. Traditional societies are offended. Why? Because it says that morally virtuous people and morally failed people are on the same level. Huh! Traditional conservative societies don't want to hear that. But it offends liberal and secular societies because it says, no, it's not true that everybody can find God in their own way. You've got to come through the grace of Jesus Christ. So everybody's offended, but good, because. Jesus actually says in Matthew 11, he actually gives us a beatitude about his offensiveness. In Matthew 11, he says, Blessed is the one who does not take offense at me. And over the years, as I've thought about that, you know, this is what it must mean. First of all, he says, you want blessedness? Blessedness? Then when you feel the offense, see, what he's saying is anybody who really gets to know him will feel offense, will wrestle with the offense. And if you've never wrestled with the offensiveness of Jesus Christ, you haven't actually come to understand the trajectory of his salvation. You haven't come to understand the graciousness of his salvation. You really don't know what he stands for. If you've never felt the offensiveness of Jesus Christ and sensed it and struggled with it, you don't really know what the gospel is. So you should feel the offense, but you mustn't take offense. Because he says, if you take offense, my blessedness cannot come into your life. If you let the fact that my gospel, who I am, offends the part of the world that you're from to some degree, and you let that keep you away from me, I can't do miracles in your life. I won't do miracles in your life. That's not because it has to work through. You have to receive me. You have to embrace me. So that's the fact that Jesus is offensive, and secondly, that's why he's offensive. Now, thirdly, how does this relate to us? In the last part of this passage, Jesus shows us that if you follow him, just as he offends people, and therefore, just as he evokes visceral rejection, you too will offend people and evoke visceral rejection. He's preparing them for rejection. That's what the dust off the feet thing is about. But if we look more carefully, you'll see that Jesus is calling us to highly selective offensiveness. What do I mean by that? Well, look, first of all, at the directions. What is he saying to people here? He's coming to them, and he's saying, when I send you out, I want you to go out into the villages to minister like this, and it's extremely interesting. First of all, he says, I don't want you to go with a war chest. I don't want you to go with so much money that you can live on the outskirts of town and then kind of, you know, commute in in order to preach on the square. He says, I want you to be dependent on the hospitality of the people you're ministering to. I want you to really live among them. And you have to remember that in those days, hospitality was a much more sacred thing than it is now, and therefore, for them to come with the message of Jesus, but depend on the hospitality of the people there, to live among them, and to become dependent on them was an act of tremendous respect and humility. Secondly, they don't go just talking. They go acting. They go serving. Notice they anoint the sick. They heal the sick. They exercise demons. They're not just going simply to tell people things. They're going to minister. They're going to serve. They're going to meet needs. Also, they're supposed to come with amazing integrity and simplicity of life with regard to money. But Jesus says, in spite of the fact you're going to go and serve people, in spite of the fact you're going to pour yourself out for people, you're going to get rejection. Because he says, in many cases, people will reject you, and then you have to shake the dust off your feet, which was just an ancient Near Eastern way of saying, you are now responsible for what I told you. I've told you about Jesus. I've given you the information. And now your responsibility belongs to you. It's not on me anymore. That's what that meant. So here's what Jesus is saying. You should be incredibly attractive. You should go out loving people. You should go out sacrificially giving to people, serving people, healing the sick, exercising demons. And in that sense, you're going to be incredibly attractive. But on the other hand, you're still going to be telling people that I am the Lord and Savior of the world, the only Lord and Savior of the world, and that's going to be very offensive. And guess what? This mixture of attraction and offense is exactly what we see in the history of the early church. Historians will tell you that on the one hand, the message of Jesus Christ, the message of the early Christians, was the most exclusive and therefore offensive message that the pagan world had ever heard. The pagan world said, everybody has their own God. You have your God. They have their God. Everybody's got their own God. See? And along comes the Christians saying, no, Jesus is Lord. That was the most exclusive of the acting people the world had ever seen. They were the most exclusive sounding people they'd ever heard, but they were the most inclusive acting people they'd ever seen. Christians cared for the poor in the way the pagan world didn't do. Christianity included the different races. It brought the races together. It brought the classes together in a way that the pagans just thought was completely improper. How do you account for this? The most exclusive sounding group of people in history up to that point was the most inclusive acting group of people in history. And as a result, they were both incredibly attractive and they grew like wildfire and they were also incredibly offensive and therefore they were often persecuted. That's the fact. They did exactly what Jesus said about them. They were selectively offensive. Not offensive to everybody, not attractive to everybody. They were selectively offensive and attractive. Now, by the way, that's a test for us. Christian friends, brothers, sisters, anyone in this room that says, I'm a follower of Jesus, here's your test. If you are never offensive, if you never experience visceral rejection and hostility for your Christian beliefs or your Christian practices, if you never are offensive, you are being a coward or you are being inconsistent or something. But if you're constantly offensive, if you're constantly clashing with people over your Christian beliefs and over your Christian practice, if you're always in conflict, if you feel like people are always picking on you for it, if you feel like you're always being offensive, may I suggest that you're probably not being persecuted for righteousness' sake, you're probably being persecuted for obnoxiousness' sake. And God doesn't promise any help in that case. You were probably adding, you know, it doesn't say blessed are those who are persecuted for obnoxiousness' sake. It says blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake. If you add personal obnoxiousness, abrasiveness, majoring in the minors, fighting over everything, acting like a victim all the time, being very unwise in the way in which you speak, if you add personal obnoxiousness to the natural offense of the gospel, you're going to find yourself constantly being offensive and really not very attractive to anybody. But I want you, this is kind of frightening to me. According to the Bible, if you find yourself always being offensive or never being offensive, if you find yourself being attractive but not offensive or offensive and not attractive, there's something wrong. But that's how most all of us are. We tend to be one or the other. Some of us have sort of gone back and forth. We were very offensive for four or five years as Christians, so we said, oh, I've really overdone it. And now nobody's been offended at us in five years. Why? Do we pass the test? I don't think so. And if we don't pass the test, where do we get the power to be selectively offensive? And here's where you get the power. And it's a very important power. Where do you get the power to be exclusive-sounding but inclusive acting like the early Christians? And the answer is right here. We really miss the ultimate put-down. We miss the ultimate way that the hometown people bashed Jesus. Where did this man get these things, they asked. What is this wisdom that has been given to him? Who does he think he is? He thinks he's hot stuff. But we know this. Isn't this Mary's son? You probably didn't notice that as being the incredible, incredible put-down that it is. But you have to keep something in mind. This is a patriarchal society, and therefore, this is a patrilineal society. This is a society in which the name, the descent, the lineage of every person is always, always, always traced through the father, never through the mother. No one has ever named Jesus bar Mary. Never. It's always Jesus bar Joseph. Always. That's the way it was. And to call someone Mary's son, what does that mean? I probably know what it means. This is the hometown. You can't hide things in a small town. One of the things you can't hide is when Joseph and Mary get married in June and a baby's born in September. Small towns never forget things like that. Never, never, never forget things like that. And you know what they're saying? And it is really pretty scathing. They're saying, you think you're such hot stuff, Jesus Christ? We don't even know who your father is. We have no idea who your father is. Could be Joseph, but might be not. We don't even know who your father is. And therefore, you're a man without a father. And in our culture, that means you're a man without an identity. You're nobody. You're a bastard. Well, you say, how unfair. be a sign to Jesus when He didn't deserve it. Yeah, but that's what He came to do. Because on the cross, Jesus Christ truly became a man without a father. When He said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Why was that happening? Because on the cross, He got the only visceral rejection that can really destroy you. He got the rejection of God. He stood in our place and took the penalty and punishment for everything that we have ever deserved and anything we've ever done. And He did it voluntarily. And He did it out of love. He got the ultimate rejection so that we could get the ultimate acceptance. His rejection is our acceptance. And our acceptance, in order for that to happen, meant His rejection. And now we are children of the King, of the Father, sons and daughters. We've got a name. We've got a place. And that means we can take any other kind of rejection there is. It doesn't matter what they call you. It doesn't matter what they say. Who cares what they think? Who cares what the peasants think when you have the love of the King? The King of all. The King of the universe. Now, do you see Jesus Christ doing that so that you could handle rejection? Do you see Him being rejected, getting the ultimate rejection, the only rejection that really could have destroyed you so that we could be brought into the family of God? Does it melt you? Does it change you? Does it affirm you? And when you see that, now we have the truth that doesn't lead to exclusivity but inclusivity. What do I mean? People say, if you think you have the truth, you're going to be exclusive. Well, it depends on what you think the truth is. If the core truth of your life is a man dying for his enemies, people who don't believe what he believes, how can that lead you to be superior and mean and self-righteous and exclusive toward people who have different views? And guess what? The man dying on the cross is not just a man, not just anybody. That would be a moving example. But if he's really the unique son of God, if God himself, when he comes into earth, does that, then I know at the heart of the universe, at the heart of the universe, in the heart of ultimate reality, is self-giving love, not power and conquest. And that gives me both the power and the reason to turn to people around me who don't believe what I believe, who maybe are even enemies, and to pour my life out for them anyway. That is the most exclusive possible truth, that the Son of God himself has come and died for me, see? But it leads me to the most inclusive possible life. You see it. Are you willing to be both attractive and offensive? Can you be? The closer you get in heart and life to what Jesus has done, to that ultimate visceral rejection that he got on the cross, the more you will become the most attractive and offensive person. Most of us aren't either, you know that. We're kind of just blah. But if we ask God to make this truth real to our lives, we might start to actually begin to become the attractive, offensive people who can really make a difference in this world. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us this sobering account that Jesus Christ everywhere and always offends people. He evokes visceral rejection, and yet that's the way the world will be saved. We need to follow in his footsteps, and we want to do that by remembering what he did for us on the cross, transform us so that we can also be his agents for the salvation of this world and agents of love and service in the lives of the people around us. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
