TITLE: The Freedom of Truth (2nd)
SCRIPTURE: Colossians 1:15-23
TOPICS: The Ten Commandments
SERIES: Ten Commandments 1994
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-freedom-of-truth-2nd/

============================================================

A teaching is taken from the book of Colossians, chapter 1. I'm reading verses 15 to 23. It's printed in your bulletin. Colossians 1, 15 to 23. He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation. For by him all things were created, things in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible, whether thrones or powers or rulers or authorities. All things were created by him and for him. He is before all things, and in him all things hold together. And he is the head of the body, the church. He is the beginning and the firstborn from among the dead, so that in everything he might have the supremacy. For God was pleased to have all his fullness dwell in him, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether things on earth or things in heaven, by making peace through his blood shed on the cross. Once you were alienated from God and were enemies in your minds because of your evil behavior, but now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you wholly in his sight, without blemish and free from accusation. If you continue in your faith, established and firm, not move from the hope held out in the gospel. This is the gospel that you heard, and that has been proclaimed to every creature under heaven, and of which I, Paul, have become a servant. The verse especially we'll be looking at, we're not able to look at this whole passage. We're able to today pull out one particular theme, and a little more concisely than usual, since this is the Lord's Supper day, look at this theme, and it's embodied in both of its aspects in verse 15. He is the image of the invisible God. He is the image of the invisible God. We're looking at the Ten Commandments. Today we come to the Second Commandment, and we're always trying to find another place in the Scripture that gives us a fuller exposition of the commandment. You notice we're not preaching out of Exodus 20 every week, which is where the commandments are originally written. And the Second Commandment is, you shall not make to yourself a graven image of anything in heavens above, on the earth beneath, or in the water below. You shall not bow down to them, says the Lord. Now, in relationships, I can say this knowing that there's consensus here of expert counseling opinion and plain common sense. In relationships, we see one of the worst things, one of the worst problems that comes up, is when one person wants to believe the other party is a particular way instead of listening to what the other party actually says he or she really is. In other words, if I impose my needs, if I impose my wishes, if I decide a person in a relationship should be like this, instead of listening to that person's actual revealing of him or herself to me, then I inject distortions into the relationship. I can be funny about it, just to, I can be crass and show you the extreme case. I can't look at somebody and say, you tell me that you're an artist, but I prefer to think of you as a professional football player. You know, that would be, that's an extreme. But I tell you that most of our relationships are marred by this problem. I relate to the person as I imagine the person to be, not as the person reveals him or herself to be. Now, everybody knows that's destructive. Why do we do it? It's, I can go so far as to say that sometime within five to ten years after you're married, you come to realize that you married a mental image of your spouse and not your spouse. Why do we do it? Why is it so widespread? The answer of the old psychologist was, it's the will to power. The answer of the new psychologist is, it's the need for control. The answer of the Bible is, it's sin. It's the God complex. And what all three would agree on, the old, the new, and the Bible, is that we manipulate our world by imagining it to be, we manipulate our environment by imagining the environment to be what we want, what we prefer, what will please us. An environment in which we can be in charge, and after we image it, after we imagine it to be that, we then respond to that rather than the reality. And the problems of our life so often come from that. Why? Why? be in charge. The will to power, yes. The need to control, yes. Sin, yes. They're all right. And as a result, because this is such a serious problem, it's such a serious part of what our heart wants to do, because it's such a, it injects such destruction into relationships and such distortion into our lives, it only stands to reason that we want to do it with God more than anyone else. We want to make God into our image. We want to imagine Him to be what we want to imagine Him to be. And if it's destructive to do that in relationships, how much more destructive will it be to do it with God? That will distort your entire life. And as a result, there is an entire one of the Ten Commandments devoted completely to this particular sin, because it's so bad. It's so awful for us. It wreaks such havoc in our lives. You shall not make any graven images. Ah, somebody says, I thought the first commandment was, you shall worship no other gods. And now the second commandment is, you shouldn't make any graven images. It's the same thing. No, it's not. The first commandment says, you mustn't worship other gods than the true God. But the second commandment is actually saying, you mustn't worship the true God and imagine Him to be what you prefer Him to be. But you must worship Him as He reveals Himself to be. Okay. In a sense, the first one is against idolatry. The second one is against doctrinal distortions, heresies, trying to make God into what we want Him to be. Now, the whole thing is actually summed up, though, in verse 15. And I just want to show you the two aspects to what the Bible teaches about imagining God, making an image. See, a graven image means a human-made image of God, whether physical or mental. When the Bible talks about this, it sums up everything that it says in that verse. God is invisible, but He has made Himself visible in Jesus Christ. In other words, there's two parts to the teaching, two parts to what the Bible says about this issue. Number one, it is absolutely forbidden for you or me to try to make the invisible God visible. It is absolutely forbidden for us to create images on our own of what we want Him to be. But secondly, God has made Himself visible, knowing that we need an image. But He has given us an image in Jesus. The reason we can't make our own images is because God will provide the right image that will not distort our lives. So there's the two points. We must not, it's forbidden for us to ever try to make the invisible God visible, because secondly, God has made Himself visible in Jesus. Let me show you what those two things teach. Number one, first of all, it's forbidden for us to make the invisible God visible. Now that, first of all, means we are forbidden to worship physical representations of God. Now that's something you see all the way through the book, Old and New Testament. For example, in Deuteronomy 4, the second commandment is drawn out a little bit more. And in Deuteronomy 4, it says this, Then the Lord spoke to you out of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but saw no form. There was only a voice. You saw no form. Therefore, watch yourselves carefully so that you do not become corrupt and make for yourselves an idol, an image of any shape at all, whether form like a man or a woman or an animal on earth or a bird of the air or a fish in the water. You shall not bow down. You worship it. Now, why? The reason you're not supposed to worship physical representations is because any physical picture that you would use to represent God will always conceal more than it will reveal. It will reveal, perhaps, but it will always conceal more than it will reveal, and it will hijack your heart when you're trying to worship. So you see, for example, Aaron made the golden calf, and they worshiped God through the image of the golden calf. Well, now, the golden calf can give you a picture of God's strength, of course, by saying, well, here's a depiction of the God, of the true God. Worship this calf. It can show you the strength, you see, the power of God, but it can't show you the purity of God. You know, the calf immediately, it is no reference to purity in a calf. Not only that, it doesn't show you the personality of God. Any picture that you try to bow down to will always conceal more than it will reveal. If you're going to depict God, will he be smiling or frowning? Well, it's got to be one or the other. So, in other words, if you have a picture of God smiling, then that conceals the fact that he's got wrath against downs, then you will be the�acen thing. Then, you know, throwing up the объяс for or frowning. Well, it's got to be one or the other. So, in other words, if you have a picture of God smiling, then that conceals the fact that he's got wrath against evil. But if you show a picture of him looking like this with thunderbolts, then that conceals his grace and his tenderness, no matter what, you see. Anything you try to depict will always conceal more than it will reveal. And there's great problems, by the way. There's limitations to pictures. Now, it doesn't say that you must never make a picture. I don't think that's what the Bible teaches. I think it teaches you must not bow down to pictures. But before we leave this, I ought to tell you there's always limitations in physical representations. Tom Skinner, the great Christian evangelist who was raised on the streets of Harlem, he, at one of his talks, I heard him say the reason that he didn't become a Christian growing up, the reason he wasn't a Christian as a teenager, was because he saw those pictures of Jesus they used to see at Sunday school. And he looked at those pictures and he said, that guy wouldn't last one hour in my neighborhood. Because you see, if you depict Jesus as he is, meek, mild, approachable, melt-in-your-mouth sweetness, you're not going to be able to depict the wrath and the fury and the courage and the virility of the one who drove out the money changers. That's the problem with creating physical representations. But that's not the main point. Deeper than that, what God is actually trying to say is, you shall not imagine me. The word imagination and the word image are the same word. When we think of an image, we're thinking always of a physical image. But physical images are based on mental images. And God says, you must not imagine me to be whatever you want me to be, but rather, you must let your imagination be regulated by the truth. You must not say, I like to think of God. See, J.I. Packer, the great British theologian, says the second commandment means, the second commandment means that any statement that begins, I like to think of God as, should never be trusted. That's what the whole commandment's about. We live in a time in which the idea of objective spiritual truth, objective moral truth, hard copy truth, truth that can't be manipulated, truth that's there whether you believe it or not, isn't even understood. It's not even a concept most people have. And that's what the second commandment's about, objectivity of truth. The second commandment is just about that. God is saying, do not, worship me as you want me to be. Do not think of me as you want me to be. Worship me and think of me as I reveal myself to be, as I really am. Now, the problem is that the imagination is as corrupt as all the other appetites and capacities. If you ate whatever you felt like eating, whenever you felt like eating, however you felt like eating, we'd be in trouble. Now, some of you do it that way and you are in trouble. If you follow your appetite completely, you will certainly not eat in a healthy way. You will either over or under eat. We've learned enough not to trust the appetites. Okay? If you relate to people, if you develop relationships on the basis of visceral feeling, there'd be a lot of bias and prejudice and discrimination. Why? Because, you see, I'm going to say our relational appetites always means that we are oriented toward the familiar and we have disdain and a sense of condescension toward that which is unfamiliar. And that means that we would only relate to people just like us. And we would never learn to reach out. We would never learn to treat other people equally. We would never learn to overcome our prejudices. Our prejudices are basically formed on the basis of what I call relational appetites. We don't trust them. If you have sex with anybody with whom you feel like having sex, now that happens more and more now than it ever did, but it wreaks personal and social havoc. Now, the Bible says the imagination is no different. The imagination is corrupted by sin. The imagination can be great if it's filled with truth. Because then it can depict the truth and it can articulate the truth. It can burn the truth in. It can help you govern yourself with the truth if your imagination is fired by the truth. But first, the truth has got to regulate it. It's got to come in. Will the truth regulate your imagination or will your imagination shape the truth? Will the truth shape you or will your imagination or will your imagination shape the truth? That's the issue of the second commandment. Now, you've got to see how sin has corrupted our imagination all the way around. My wife knows that I hate to believe there's ever anything wrong with my car. If she ever says, do you hear that? Is that right? It's nothing. It's fine. All cars with 50,000 miles. hate the expense. I hate the inconvenience. I hate the whole thing. So the other day we turn on our air conditioner. Of course the air conditioning in the car hasn't been on in a year almost or a long time. And it was just blowing, you know, just regular air. And she says, oh my gosh, the air conditioning is either broken or it needs to be recharged. We're going to have to take it. I said, now wait. It hasn't been on in months. It'll be okay. I'll just run it here for a while. It'll be a while. It'll come on. It'll come on. Fifteen minutes later, she says, it's broken. I can feel the cool air coming. I can feel it. She says, that's because you've got your window open. It's cooler outside than it is inside. And finally, I had to realize, I had imagined what I really wanted. I would have more control over my life if I imagined a working air conditioner. I have less control over my life if it's not working because then I'm going to have to take it off. I'm going to have to spend the money. I'm going to have to, I won't have the car for a certain number of days and so on. You see, I want to manipulate my environment through my imagination. Now that's funny. But you see, I was running up against reality. Because when you let your imagination shape the truth, you're on a collision course with reality. Now that's a cute one. What when you do it with your children? How easy it is to decide to imagine your children are this or your children are that because you desperately want them to be that. Because then you're more in charge. Because then you have control in life. It's the God complex. How easy in relate, as I mentioned at the top, it is normal to some degree to marry a person and to discover that you haven't married the person you thought you had. And generally speaking, the only way that your marriage survives and grows is that if you let reality into your imagination. But if you continue to decide, I'm going to shape reality by my imagination, eventually you're going to end up in a counseling office, I hope, sitting there with one of you saying, I feel so depersonalized because he or she tells me I'm this or thinks I'm this and I'm not now. How many of you say, I just can't believe in a God who sends people to hell? I just can't believe in a God who hasn't come back yet. He says he doesn't dislike, he says he dislikes suffering and yet he seems to allow a lot of suffering. I can't believe in a God who says, you must never have sex outside of marriage, no matter how good it feels. I cannot believe, and so on. Let me just give you, you know, you're modern American types. So there's at least 30 things that, 30 things that the Bible says, that God says through the Bible about himself, that grate against your spirit. But if I went to some other century and some other culture, there'd be 30 different ones, totally different. The ones that bother you wouldn't bother them. But no matter who you are, no matter where you are, you will have to come up against the fact that our imaginations are always fallen. We want to think of him as the God we want him to be. And yet, how dare you? If your understanding of your air conditioner has to be regulated by reality, if your imagination of your spouse, of your children, of your friends have to be regulated by reality, surely your understanding and imagination of God has to be. Or put it one other way, how dare you treat God in a way that you would never want to be treated yourself? What do you say in relationships? You say, I'm a person. I'm not a canvas on which you can draw what you wish. I'm not a book for you to edit. You can't edit me. I'm a person. You can't draw me. You can't shape me. I'm a person. You must be receptive to what I'm telling you. Now, by the way, that doesn't always work in human relationships because human beings are often mistaken about who they are. They are. But when it comes to God, there's no mistake. And the second commandment says, in the second commandment, God comes and says, I am God. I am not safe. I am not tame. I am not a God on a leash. I am not a God in a box. I am not a God in your pocket. And if you imagine me to be a God, other than the one that I really am, you are on a collision course with reality. How dare you treat me in a way that you wouldn't want to be treated yourself? That's why Martin Luther puts it, and I put the quote in the bulletin, but Martin Luther says, people want to say, I like to think of God this way. I believe that what I'm doing will glorify God. But God will not have you tell him how he would be served. He tells you in his word how he must be served. Debbie Boone sings, I don't know if she meant it, it can't be wrong if it feels so right, which is a way of saying, I know the Bible. can feel the cool air coming. The Bible says, God says, you must listen to me. You must open to me. You must obey me as I reveal myself to be. Now, what's the solution? You see the problem? What's the solution? The solution is that God has made himself visible. One of the reasons why we imagine him to be what we want him to be is because of our God complex. But there's another reason why we want to create images. That's because we want to relate to him personally. And God knew that, and he revealed himself what it says in Colossians 1, verse 15, it says, literally in the Greek, it says, Jesus is the icon of the invisible God. He's the representative. He's the representation. I will never forget going to a group of Muslims and talking about this. I went back three times because every time I gave this talk, they asked me to come back because they were so blown away by it. Not because of my decintillating delivery, but because of the penetrating truth of Colossians 1, verse 15. And I said this very simply. I said, if we're allowed to make our own images of God, we cannot avoid controlling him. But if we have no images of God, then we just have this invisible abstraction and we can't know him personally. You see, in other words, if you're allowed to make your image any old way, you'll control God. But if you don't have any image at all, you can't have a personal relationship. It'll just be an abstraction. And I said, the only way would be the way the Christian message goes. And that is, God says, you must not make your own icons. I have given you the icon. And the Muslims were kind of blown away by that because they were seeing something that maybe they hadn't seen before. Christianity says, here's how you can know God without controlling God. Here's how you can have a personal relationship with God without actually trying to put your fingers on him. Now, how does Jesus Christ, how can Jesus Christ be the antidote to our problems, the need to manipulate God? It's pretty simple. Jesus gives you such a vivid picture of who God is. This is what I suggest you do. Three things. Find the places in your life where you're having the most havoc wreaked. Where you're struggling the most. Where you have the most problems. And you will find, secondly, underneath, there's always a distorted view of God. There's always a false image of God underneath your problem. And number three, put Jesus in there. Find the havoc. Check out the distortion which is underneath it. And put Jesus in there. Let me just give you two. I've only got time for two. Number one, worry. This is an easy one. I use it. But let me just show you. Worry and anxiety. Some of you are desperately afraid and worried about something. That assumes always that you are wiser than God. If you're worried about how things are going this week, what you are assuming at some level. Maybe it's conscious. Maybe it's unconscious. But there would be no fear. There'd be no anxiety unless you believed at a certain level, I know better what should happen in my life than God does. I am wiser than God. I am smarter than God. You say, oh, I don't believe that. Yes, you do. You have to believe that or you wouldn't be worried. Think about it. Under the havoc of the anxiety, under the havoc of the terrible fear, is a false image of God. You're breaking the second commandment or you wouldn't be worried. You ever hear the story about the two guys that were in the service and the preacher was preaching on the Ten Commandments and on the way out, one was heard to say to the other, at least we didn't make any graven images this week. And what the problem was, they were wrong. Because you can't break one commandment without breaking this one too. You can't worry without making a graven image. And so what are you supposed to do? Go to Jesus in the garden. Look at Jesus Christ, the only person who ever suffered unjustly. The only person who really didn't deserve the thing that he got. And look at him down there saying, Father, isn't there some other way we could do this? Father, isn't there some other way that we can do this? Can't this cup pass from me? Nevertheless, Father, you're God. You're the Father. Father, I trust you. I give myself to you. If he did that, I mean, listen, that's personal. If you didn't have Jesus, if you didn't have the New Testament, what would you say? Don't worry why. Because God's... your heart. No, it won't. Under the havoc of anxiety, look at Jesus. Look at Jesus trusting. Look at Jesus giving himself to the wisdom and the goodness of the Father. Well, let me give you one other. A lot of you struggle, I'm talking to Christians in particular here. A lot of you struggle with temptation. Boy, you do. You say, there's some things that I'm doing that I know are destructive to me, and I know are destructive to other people, and I can't seem to stop. Now, this is a big subject, and here I'm going to deal with it in about 90 seconds, but this is how this bears on your problem. I knew a man a long time ago. I don't even remember his name. I only talked to him once. I met a man a long time ago, I should say, in a galaxy far, far away, in a time long ago. But I'll never forget what he told me. His wife went to visit her mother on the weekends, and he had his mistress in on the weekends. And he says, one of the things that he always had to do, because his mistress demanded it, and he did too. He says, all over the house, I always had to put down any picture of my wife face down, because they all were pictures of her beaming in love toward me. You know, her face was always full of beaming love toward me. And he says, you know, the only way I could do what I did was I had to remember all the places and the times in which she said unfair things about me. He says, I had to create an image in my mind of her being a shrew, of her being a very, very unfeeling and thoughtless person. And those pictures, you see, regulated his imagination back to reality, that she loved him. She adored him. So every one of those pictures had to go down, and he had to create another image. Friends, next time you know you're about to do something wrong, look at the picture of Jesus. Look at his face beaming with love down from the cross and saying this. He says something like this. He says, you know, why are you doing this? I'm up here dying so that you wouldn't do this. Haven't I been pierced enough? Don't I have enough nails in my hands? Haven't enough people hit me? Are you going to hit me too? And if you see him in beaming in love toward you, you won't be able to go to bed with the mistress, whatever that mistress is. Why? It's all the image. Can you fill your mind with who Jesus is? Jesus is so physically, so personal. It's right there. Take the gospels, burn them in, read them backwards and forwards, and I tell you, it will change the distortions in your life. Your impatience comes because you don't see the patience of God. Your bitterness comes because you don't see the grace of God. Your worry comes because you don't see the wisdom of God. Your lack of temptation comes, your lack of self-control comes because you don't see the goodness of God. God never commands you to do something that's not good for you. Look at his beaming face. Don't you see? Remember how Elizabeth Elliot ended her book, No Graven Image? Everything went wrong for the missionary lady in that novel? Everything went wrong. Her whole life's work went down the drain. And at the very end of the novel, when everything had gone wrong and all the things that she thought God was going to help her to do didn't happen, and she looks down and at the very end of the book, the last phrase is this. She says, Now in the clear light of day, I see that if God was merely my assistant, he had betrayed me. But if on the other hand he was God, he had freed me. I find I can no longer table, I can no longer label this activity as useless or that activity as useful because now the work as well as the labeling is God's. She had a mental image in her head of God being her assistant, that he was just going to come through and do whatever she wanted. She was going to pray, she was going to do good things, and he was never going to edit her. She was going to edit him. He was never going to reshape her. She was going to shape him. And if you have a view of God like that, it will run aground on the rocks of reality. You will be on a collision course with reality. The end result is going to be absolute disaster. Or, she said, in the clear light of day, when I start letting God be God, when I realized it wouldn't make sense if everything he did to me made sense. That wouldn't make sense. What kind of God do I want that is in my pocket? And when she began to look at the real God as he reveals himself to be, love beyond my ability to imagine, grace beyond my ability to imagine, letting him be God, submitting even when he didn't understand, you didn't understand. And on the other hand, finding new depths of grace and understanding that you never would have found if you hadn't done the submitting. And she found her life began to be reshaped. No more distortions. On. Do you worry? Okay. Thank you. image? Are you bitter, or are you worshipping a graven image? Do you have self-control, or are you worshipping a graven image? Do you have self-control? If you only will let me stretch your imagination instead of you confining me to your imagination, I can make you into something beyond your wildest imagination. Come, let's pray. We thank you, O Father, that it's possible to have a God who tells us who He is. We thank you that you are not the unknown God. You're not the mysterious God who doesn't speak, that we have to grope after. But you're a God who's come and said, I am the Lord thy God. You shall have no other gods before me, and this is who I am. Help us to embark today on that great adventure of coming to know you as you really are, and worshipping you as the same. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
