TITLE: The Dead Are Raised
SCRIPTURE: 2 Kings 4:27-37
TOPICS: Race Salvation
SERIES: Receiving the Spirit (with Elisha)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-dead-are-raised/

============================================================

So, I'm going to do something a little different tonight, and that is I have to tell you the first part of the story and then pick it up where we have it printed. 2 Kings 4 is the story of the resurrection of the son of the Shunammite woman by the prophet Elisha. And chapter 4, it actually starts in chapter 4, verse 8, and it goes all the way to chapter 4, verse 37. Now, what I want to do is I want to tell you a little bit about the background. I want to tell you how the story goes before we get to the place that we have printed. Then I'll read it to you and pick it up at verse 27. We're looking at the career of Elijah and Elisha, and we find in this particular narrative that Elisha has met in his travels a woman in the little village of Shunamm. That's why she's called the Shunammite woman. And she was without child, had no children when Elisha met her. And it's hard for us in our day and age to understand the cultural pressure and the desire to have heirs and to have children that they had in those times and those places. Elisha said to her, God's going to bless you and give you a child. And a year later, she has a child. But one day, the little boy is out in the field with his father, and they're out with the reapers and out in the harvest. And suddenly, the little boy, in verse 18 of the chapter, the little boy says, My head, my head. And the father assumes that the little boy has had too much sun. And this often happens in that climate, in that time, that he has perhaps had too much sun and he has a bad headache. So the father says to the servant, Take him back to his mother. But we read in verse 20, it's not here, but I'll tell you. In verse 20, we read, The boy sat on her lap until noon and died. Now, what did she do? Her only son, dead in her lap. First, she does several remarkable things. First, she does, she puts him in a room, a private room, and doesn't tell anyone, including the father, that he's dead. She comes out to her husband and says, I need a servant, and I need a steed, because I have to run, I have to go as quickly as I can to the prophet, to Elisha, the man of God. And the husband says, Why? Why do you have to go? Is everything all right? And she says, Everything's all right. And then she and the servant begin to ride like the wind to Mount Carmel, where Elisha is now living. And Elisha sees her far off in the distance, and sends his servant Gehazi to her, and says, I don't know what's going on. You know, she's riding like the wind. Something I think is wrong. So he sends Gehazi the servant out. And Gehazi comes out to see her and says, Is it well with your child? And she says, Everything's all right. But she won't really talk to him. And she kind of blows right by him, and doesn't really give him the time of day. And so she gets to the feet of Elisha on Mount Carmel, and that's where we pick up here at verse 27. Read with me. And when she, not only read out loud, follow me. When she reached the man of God at the mountain, she took hold of his feet. Gehazi came over to push her away. Push her away. But the man of God said, Leave her alone. She is in bitter distress. But the Lord has hidden it from me and has not told me why. Did I ask you for a son, my Lord, she said. Didn't I tell you, Don't raise my hopes? Elisha said to Gehazi, Tuck your cloak into your belt. Take my staff in your hand and run. If you meet anyone, don't greet him. If anyone greets you, don't answer. Lay my staff on the boy's face. But the child's mother said, As surely as the Lord lives and as you live, I will not leave you. So he got up and followed her. Gehazi went on ahead and laid the staff on the boy's face. But there was no sound or response. So Gehazi came back or went back to meet Elisha and told him, The boy has not awakened. When Elisha reached the house, there was the boy lying dead on his couch. He went in and shut the door on the two of them and prayed to the Lord. Then he got on the bed and lay upon the boy, mouth to mouth, eyes to eyes, hands to hands. As he stretched himself out upon him, the boy's body grew warm. Elisha turned away and walked back and forth in the room and then got on the bed and stretched out upon him once more. The boy sneezed seven times and opened his eyes. Elisha summoned Gehazi and said, Call the Shunammite. And he did. And when she came, he said, Take your son. She came in and fell at his feet and bowed to the ground. Then she took her son and went out. This is God's word. Now, what do we learn? We learn that the divine power, resurrection, of course, is a great divine power. Of all the miracles, let's say, of all the miracles you have in the Bible, surely resurrection from the dead. dramatic, it's the most unmistakably divine power. The blind see, the lepers are cleansed, yes, but raised from the dead. Who gets this power? When does this power come? How can this power come? And what are the results in our lives when this power comes? Who, when, how, what? Who? Who is the channel in this story for the power? Who's the real channel for the little boy's resurrection? Who's the one who really is the one through whom the resurrection power comes into the boy's life? Now, the answer is obvious, but I want to think about this for a minute. It's the mother, it's the woman. It's not the men. First of all, the father is not the one through whom the resurrection power comes. In fact, it's pretty interesting. You can go back and read it sometime in the, in the Bible. But she doesn't even tell the father that he's dead. Now, I, I think that's perfect, it makes perfect sense. I know, I know a little bit about how fathers and mothers react. And I think I know what he would have done. I know what I would have done. I would have just despaired. And she says, I'm going to go see the man of God. And I wouldn't have, you know, the husband said, why do that? Don't be ridiculous. Don't be silly. What is the good in that? And she knows he would have gotten in the way. So he doesn't, she doesn't even tell him. And then secondly, Gehazi, the servant. Now, he's no help. In fact, if you look carefully, you'll see what's interesting is, is why in the world does he actually push her away when she gets the prophet? Well, the answer is, Elisha had sent Gehazi out to find out from her what the problem was. And you can imagine what really, really happened out there. Gehazi comes on out and says, is it all right with your son? In other words, he comes out and he basically says this, hello, I am the personal assistant of the man of God. What is this concerning? And she says, I just want to see the man of God. God, ahem, excuse me. I am the personal executive assistant of the man of God. What is the problem? Please tell me what the problem is. And she basically says, you are the problem. I need to see the man of God. And every indication is, she just basically wouldn't even stop. She wouldn't talk to him. She wouldn't give him a straight answer. She just comes right on through. And when she gets to the feet of the prophet of God, what does he do? Gehazi says, I've had enough of your impertinence. You can't barge right in. You had no appointment. And so he pushes her out, pushes her out. And so obviously he's no help. But even Elisha, you say, ah, Elisha's the channel. Well, wait a minute. We're going to get back to this in the middle. But Elisha doesn't really know what to do. Elisha makes a number of mistakes. Elisha does a few things that really don't happen. In fact, look carefully. Elisha sends Gehazi with a staff to try to resurrect the boy. But what does the wife, what does the woman do? What does the mother do? Verse 30. She says, I'm staying with you. She seems to understand better than he does, Elisha, what needs to be done. So obviously the woman receives the resurrection power. Now let me push this a little bit. One of the things that amazed me was when I read this, I said, well, okay, she just happened to be the only woman in the story, happens to be the one through whom all of the power of God comes. She's the one who has the faith. She's the one through whom it comes. And that just, of course, that's just an accident. It happened to be like that, you know. The men all look like idiots, but that just happens to be the three men in this story are idiots. Doesn't mean that men in general are idiots. But you know what? Well, it's, there is a verse in Hebrews chapter 11, verse 35, that says, by faith, women received their dead back to life. By faith, women received their dead back to life. Now you say, well, now that's a kind of exaggeration. Surely men and women, you look through the Bible and you have a number of miracles in which God visited the people. You have two or three in the Old Testament. You have three or four or five in the New Testament where God actually visited people and there were great resurrections and people who were dead came back to life to the ones they loved. So surely you shouldn't say women received back their dead. But Hebrews 11, 35 says women received back their dead. And I looked through and I realized after looking through that in almost every case, in fact, every case except one, it is women who received their dead back to life. Not men. The widow of Zarephath gets her little boy back. The Shunammite woman gets her little boy back here in the Old Testament. In the New Testament, it's Mary and Martha who get Lazarus back. In Luke 7, it's the widow of Nain who gets her boy back when Jesus raised them from the dead. Even in Acts chapter 9, it is the widows of Joppa who get Dorcas, their friend, back. In verse 6, the faith through whom God raises people from the dead. Let me push you a little further on this. You're saying, where are you going with that? Well, wait a minute. Let me push you a little further on that. Who receives Jesus himself back from the dead? Who received the ultimate resurrection? Jesus. Who receives him? And every single gospel, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, the first people Jesus appears to, the first people who find him, the first people, the people who receive him back from the dead are all women. Let me push you a little further. John chapter 20. You have Mary, and you have Peter, and you have John, and they go to the, on Easter Sunday morning, they go to the tomb of Jesus, and it's empty. And what happens? It's exactly what happens in this passage right here. Peter and John are confused. They go home shaking their head, and Mary stays. Mary Magdalene stays. She, she, she will not be deterred. She wanders around the garden looking for him. She meets some angels, and the angel says, what are you looking for? Now, you know, when most people see angels, you fall on the ground, you tremble and quake, you know, what happens? They say, where, and what does Mary do? He says, where is he? She meets somebody who she thinks is the robber. It's actually Jesus, but she thinks he's the grave robber. She says, if you've taken his body, just tell me. You know, he talks to the grave robber. She's just like here. The woman is the one with the faith through whom the resurrection come over and over and over and over again. Almost never men. You think that's an accident? You think, oh, that just happens to be, you know, the ten times in the history of the world that God raised somebody from the dead, the ten times we have written in the Bible, nine of them were to women. That's just an accident. You think it's an accident? No. Well, what am I, what is a dead white male like me making a point like this for? I'll tell you what it means. The Bible over and over again does this, and we're going to talk about this in two weeks, so I want to move on. Now, the Bible over and over again says, it's the people in this life who have been marginalized. It's the people in this life who the world has kept power away from, who are always the first ones to understand the gospel. They're the first ones to understand the difference between the gospel of grace and surrender from religion, which is filled with self-reliance and control. I'll say that again. Again, people that the world has marginalized and kept out of power, the people that the world has kept powerless in general are those who in general understand the gospel quicker, understand the gospel more instinctively, understand the difference between the gospel of grace and surrender, as different from a religion of self-reliance and control. Why? Because, see, people over the years, both people groups and genders, women by and large have been kept out of power, or groups of people who've been kept out of power, people who've been kept out of power over the years understand power as an idol. And therefore, they are quicker to understand the gospel of grace, because look at how different the gospel is than every other religion. Every other religion says, summons up all your strength, and do what you need to do, and then God will bless you. But the gospel says that salvation was accomplished by someone who lost all of his power. It was accomplished by someone who went down to a terrible defeat. And this salvation is received by people who are only willing to give up all their power, and admit that they're moral failures. I'm sorry. People who are running things always have been, and always will be, the last people understand that. They will understand the gospel of grace. They will try to turn everything into a religion of self-reliance and control. I do things right, and then God has to bless me. The gospel is completely a different thing. And that's the reason why, in general, in fact, I can prove this, but I'm not going to. I can prove it historically. I can prove it statistically. I can prove it anecdotally. I can prove it just an appeal to common sense. That people, groups, ethnic minorities who have been shut out of power are quicker to understand the gospel than the dominant ruling culture. Women, in general, are quicker to understand the gospel than men. Can I press you a little further? I know an awful lot of men who think the fact that Christianity, in general, is understood better by racial minorities and women as an evidence that it's not true. I think it's a great evidence that it is true. What do you think? Who receives the resurrection power? People with faith and grace. Okay? People who don't make an idol out of power. People with faith and grace. That's who receive it. Secondly, when do we receive this? This story is a very interesting story, and it shows by the way that Elisha tries to get this miracle done, and it just doesn't seem to work. We learn here that here's when we receive the resurrection power. Therefore, it's only by God's, not automatically, but by God's personal wise choice in his personal wise time. We receive the resurrection power in God's personal wise time, not automatically. This story is amazing. Now, look at this story. When you read it, did it strike you? The man of God, the prophet Elisha, and he tries to do a miracle, and two or three times it doesn't work. So, first of all, he sends Gehazi. Why? Because he thinks Gehazi's young. They're 20 miles away. He says to Gehazi, run. And the first thing that Elisha decides is that if we're going to do this miracle, time is of the essence. Time is critical. We can't let the boy decay. We've got to get to him soon. Time is critical. That's what his first assumption, right? But he was wrong. Time wasn't a big deal. Secondly, he sends the staff. He says, take my prophet's staff and put it on the boy's face. Why? Well, Moses' staff worked. I mean, you see, now look, I don't know what you thought right away, but look here. Here's a prophet. Put the staff on his face. He puts it on his face. It doesn't work. Now, what kind of miracle story is this? Look into the legends of the other religions and the other cultures. Look at all the stories about miracles and magicians and all the, look at the fairy tales. Do you ever see a sorcerer? Do you ever see a magician? Do you ever see a prophet or an oracle come out? Wave the hand. Oh, that didn't work. Well, let's see. Now, maybe, do you ever see that? Put a staff on his face. Well, that didn't work. Okay. Well, then maybe I should just say these three words. No, that didn't work. Well, okay. Maybe I should throw dust in the air. Oh, that didn't work. What kind of miracle story is this? The only way you can explain this story is that it happened. Nobody writes stories like this. You're not going to, this happened. What's this thing about, he does all this stuff. When the boy finally comes up, instead of the boy coming up and saying, you know, praise the Lord, the boy sneezes seven times. What does that mean? Why would you make that up if you were writing a miracle story? You wouldn't. The only reason the boy says the boy sneezed seven times is because somebody remembered it happened. But here's what's interesting. Not only does this story tell us this really happened. The details of the story just have the ring of truth. But it also shows that God's power is absolutely not under your control. It doesn't matter what kind of man of God, what kind of woman of God you are. Because we have a God of grace who is a personal God. What do I mean? Well, see, in religion, your relationship to the divine power is always automatic. Here's how religion works. If I do everything right, God has to bless me. If I live right, if I go to church, if I do the sacrifice, if I do the rituals, if I read, if I do everything I have to do, God has to bless me. It's automatic. Because religion is an issue, is a matter of self-reliance and control of God. But the gospel is a matter of grace. In the gospel, you're saved by grace, and there's no obligation. And therefore, in the gospel, grace acts personally, not mechanically. Every time I push the wrong button in my elevator, which happens fairly often, I don't know why, I walk around, I do this, I'm too fast. I walk in the door, I hit the elevator button, I'm trying to get to, you know, five, or I'm trying to get to one. I mean, I either live on five and I try to get down to one, but I'm always hitting the wrong button. And, you know, on some days, okay, so I hit, I hit number nine. Okay, well, see what ninth floor looks like. I'm, I'm having no trouble. I'm having fun. I'm having, but other days, I'm late. I'm late. I'm late. And you know what? Every time you hit the nine button in my elevator, it goes to nine. Every time. It never says, oh, well, I know you're late. That's different. The elevator's a machine. Two times I asked Jesus Christ, please let this woman marry me. Let this woman want to marry me. Two different times in my life, two different women. In both situations, I was living good lives. One time he said no. The second time he said yes. Thank goodness he's not a machine. He's personal. See, he doesn't just say, well, you know, he's living at this level and he made this prayer. I've got to answer it. In other words, our relationship to the divine power is not mechanical because he's a gracious God. He's not a God who owes us. He's not a God who's under our control. And secondly, he's a personal God. And therefore, never think that he's automatic or a machine. And so the second thing we learn here is not only who gets the power, those with faith and grace. Secondly, when do we get the power? thirdly, how can this come to us? It's not enough just to say we have to have faith, but how can it come? How dare this woman think she can get an exemption from something that happens to everybody? Now, let me explain what I mean. Do you see there is a problem here? You may say, oh, Lord, you know, bring down... We don't deserve the power. Put it this way. The Bible has a remarkably coherent explanation of death. You know, in all the great literature of the world, in all the great music and the great art, people just struggle with death. But the Bible has an incredibly coherent explanation. Think about it like this. If you put somebody in charge of something and they're not competent, it falls apart. If you take an eight-year-old and say, and put it behind the steering wheel of a car and let it drive off, it won't be long before that car will be in pieces. If you put an incompetent person in charge of a business, it won't be long before the business is in pieces. Now, the Bible says you and I, the human race, has decided we want to be in charge of our own lives. We want to call the shots. We want to be masters and in charge of our own lives. But the Bible says we want to be in charge of our own lives. We want to be in charge of our world. And as... But we're... We are incompetent for that. We're not built for that. And as a result, everything's falling apart. It's called the second law of thermodynamics. thermodynamics. Every bit as certainly as if you put an incompetent person in charge of a business, the business will go into pieces. So that because you and I are in charge of our lives, we are literally going to pieces. It doesn't matter how much you work out. It doesn't matter how many faceless you have. It doesn't matter how well you eat. Eventually, we are going to be in pieces. We are going to be bags. We're going to be piles of chemicals six feet under the ground. We're all going to pieces, every one of us. Because we're incompetent to lead our lives. Therefore, our lives fall apart. We're incompetent to run the world. Therefore, the world falls apart. And therefore, death is the sentence. And it's coming to us all. Because of the way in which we treat each other, because of the way in which we treat God, the wages of sin is death. So then how dare she come and say, I want a resurrection. I want an exemption. How can God possibly do this? Well, I'll tell you why. Elisha stretches out. What does that mean? What is that pointing to? Well, here's what it means. You know, you can't tell it as well when you read the Elijah narrative. But when you read the Elisha narrative, it says literally, he lay on the boy, mouth to mouth, eye to eye, and it actually literally says palm to palm. And what that means is when God looked down from heaven, he couldn't have seen the boy. He could only see the prophet, the man of God. But Elisha identified with the boy. Elisha filled the exact space of the boy so that when God looked down, the boy was hidden in him. Now, the Bible tells us that what Elisha, the man of God, did symbolically, Jesus Christ, the God-man, did in reality. It says in 2 Corinthians 5.21, God made him sin who knew no sin that we might become the righteousness of God in him. You know what that means? Our Savior stretched himself out on us, lip to lip, eye to eye, hand to hand, so that two times when God looked down, we were hidden. The first time on the cross, what does it say? 2 Corinthians 5.21 that I just quoted? God made him sin who knew no sin. What that means is, down comes the justice of God. Down comes the death we deserve. Down comes the punishment. That's what the Bible says. But who? On to who? On to who? On to Jesus. Jesus, it's, imagine you're in a foxhole, and a grenade gets thrown into the foxhole, and you can't get to the grenade. You can either jump out, or you can jump on top of your friend. You can either save yourself, and your friend dies, or you can save your friend, and you die. You cover him, see? You take the shrapnel, you take the explosion, you take the death. What are you going to do? Well, we know what Jesus did. He stretched himself out on us, mouth to mouth, eye to eye, hand to hand, palm to palm, so that when the judgment of God came down, it didn't touch us. God treated him as if he had done everything we did. God made him to be sin, who knew no sin. But, what does that mean now? Here's what it means to be a Christian. For you to go lip to lip, eye to eye, and hand to hand. To become a Christian does not mean, now I'm going to try to be good. I'm going to come to church, read my Bible, turn over a new leaf, do all the good things. No! The Bible says what it means to become a Christian is to say, look. In other words, because you took my sin on yourself, now, oh Father, accept me because of what Jesus did. And the Bible says, the minute we say, Father, don't accept me because of what I've done, don't look at my record, look at Jesus' record, we are clothed with his righteousness. That means we're hidden in him. That means when God looks down, just as when he looked down on the little boy and saw only the man of God, when God looks down on you as a Christian, all he sees is a beauty. All he sees is the record of Jesus. All he sees is a perfect life. Jesus identified with us, so our sin became his. We identify with him, so his righteousness becomes ours. And until you understand that, you're just a religious person. You're a person doing self-reliance, you're a person in control, you're a person trying to control God, and you're a person who's always anxious, never, it's always winter, never Christmas in your life. But the minute you say, hide me in him, he does. And what's interesting, the minute you understand the real meaning of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, it wasn't just a miracle, it wasn't just a wonderful miracle, even though it was all that. But it was his way of stretching out on you. So that he identified with our sin, and our sin became his, so that when we identify with him, and we believe in him, his righteousness becomes ours. Do you understand that? Now, here's what I want to push you on. If you understand, and to the degree you understand, and only the minute you understand the real meaning of his death and resurrection, the minute you understand that, when you understand that's what he feels like when he sees me, he sees a beauty. He looks down and just sees, he sees godliness and beauty. He accepts me completely. He loves me as much as if I'd done everything Jesus Christ had done. Do you believe that? When you believe that, it creates a spiritual resurrection in you now. The minute you believe in the physical resurrection of Jesus in the right way, the minute you identify with it, the minute you put lip to lip and eye to eye and hand to hand, and you rest in him and you identify with him, that minute you realize that that's how he sees you, it changes everything in your life. You have a new birth. You have a spiritual resurrection. Look at how you relate to people for a minute. Why is it that you're always having your feelings hurt? Why is it you need to be with cool people? You stay away from people who aren't so slick. Why? You don't have an identity of your own. You don't know who you are. You're always trying to live up. You're always trying to feel good about yourself. What if you had an identity? What if you knew what God felt about you? What if you lived in absolute assurance of it? What if you lived in holy consciousness of it all the time? You would be so different in relationships. You would look at people differently. Nothing would make you afraid. There'd be a fountain of joy in you. You would look at the world differently. You'd look at money differently. You'd look at your career differently. You'd be spiritually resurrected. The minute you understand the meaning of his death and resurrection, you get spiritually resurrected. He stretched himself out on you. Stretch yourself out on him. And when that happens, you know what's going to happen in your life? You're going to have the poise that that woman had. Look at her. Nothing stops her. And she didn't even understand the resurrection of Jesus Christ. If you did, think of the balance you'd have. Nothing stops her. Secondly, you'd be not afraid of death ever again. I was reading about the rise of Christianity by a historian named Rodney Stark. And he tells a great story. It's not a story. It's true. That one of the reasons that Christianity succeeded in the Roman Empire was that during the third century AD, in the Roman Empire, there was plague after plague after plague that came through the cities. And when the pagans saw people starting to die, they left their own sick people right there and ran out of the cities and went into the hills to get away till the plague was over. And the Christians stayed. They stayed there. They bound up the wounds. They cared for the pagan sick. They cared for their own sick. Many of them died doing it. Why? Were they better people? Were they stronger people? No. They believed in the resurrection. They believed in the resurrection. They knew the physical resurrection had happened because of the eyewitness accounts in the Bible. And they also knew, what? The spiritual resurrection of their own new birth. And as a result, because they believed in the new resurrection, the resurrection, they were not afraid of death. And if you're not at all afraid of death, you're going to live in a whole new way. You're not going to be afraid when funerals come, even if they're your own loved ones. Because you know, someday, you know, I was recently at a funeral memorial service of a Christian young woman who just lost her Christian husband. And as awful as that is, she knows that someday Jesus is going to say to her what Elisha said, basically. Woman, behold your husband. Okay. other words, you're not afraid of death. You're not afraid of life. And here's one more last thing. The resurrection means that we fight against the problems of this life. The resurrection of the body means that God is not escaping, He's trying to escape the world. What God wants us to do is fight against injustice, fight against disease, fight against death, fight against poverty, because He's against it. If Jesus had only been resurrected spiritually, that probably just means that in Christianity you're getting forgiveness of sin and paradise someday. But because Jesus Christ was also resurrected physically, that means God wants to rehabilitate the world. And that makes Christianity a fighting religion. It fights against the things it does. It fights against sickness. It fights against famine. It fights against disease. It fights against disaster. It fights against death. It fights against injustice and poverty. All those things. Be as relentless as she is, because your Savior is stretched out on you. Have a spiritual resurrection as you understand the physical death and resurrection of Jesus. With that in mind, let's partake of the Lord's Supper. Would you turn in your bulletin to the prayer of confession? We'll pray this prayer of confession together, and then we'll do some time silently. Pray the prayer of confession with me, and then afterwards we'll have a time of silent confession. Together, O Lord, no day of our lives has passed that has not proved us guilty in your sight. Prayers have been uttered from a prayerless heart. Praise has often been a praiseless sound. Identify with him, and be righteousness of God. You know, Jesus Christ, though, stretched himself out on us when we were cadavers. Think about it. Putting your mouth and your eyes on a dead person. Remember the Three Faces of Eve, the movie, the book about a woman who goes into multiple personality disorder because she has to kiss a dead body? How much worse was that for Jesus? Beauty kissed the beast and became a beast so that we could become the beauty. Now, lastly, what happens? If this is who gets it, faith and grace, if this is when we get it, whenever he says, if this is how we get it, to the God-man identifying with himself in our death so that we can identify ourselves with him and receive his righteousness. Then lastly, what happens in your life when this happens? Well, be brief here. Number one, look at this unbelievable, unbelievable poise and balance in this woman's life. And she didn't even understand what we understand. I mean, if she can do this, we can do this. When, she's relentless. She's like a laser beam. She's just knocking the men aside. They don't know what's going on. They don't even tell her husband. She knows. She's got an amazing face. She's relentless. She's fighting against the condition of her son. She's not accepting the brokenness of the world. But, two times, now you only see this in the authorized version, in the old King James version, two times, the husband says, are you all right? And the NIV translation says, everything's all right, she says. And the second time, they say, is your child all right? And in the NIV translation, she says, everything is all right. Now, you notice that is not a direct answer. The questions are, is your child okay? And she says, yes, my child's okay. That's a lie, but that's not what she says. In the old King James, it says, is it well with your child? And she says, it is well. She says, I don't have peace in particular, but I got peace in general. She says, even though right now, I am just hurting over my child, and I am going to fight against the situation. I'm not going to acquiesce in the brokenness. Yet I know, in a deeper sense, everything will be all right. Horatio Spofford, when all of his children died in 1873, all of his children died in a, when the boat on which they were sailing sunk, wrote the hymn, after his whole family practically died, he wrote the hymn, it is well with my soul. And it didn't even occur to me until this week that this must be the text. He, what did he do? He probably, he turned to the Bible and realizing all four of his children were dead. How could he possibly deal with it? How could he possibly deal with it? And here he sees the Shunammite woman saying, is it well with your child? No, it's not well with my child. My child is dead, but it is well. It will be all right. I believe in God. I understand God. I know that I have a deep conviction, foundationally, whatever happens. God is in his heaven. God is good. There is resurrection. There is hope. Now, if she could do that, have this incredible, reason to go running off. That's what her husband would have said. But on the other hand, she doesn't say, It is not right. Everything's terrible. No, she doesn't. She says, It is not well with my son, but it's well. It is well. Where are you going to get that balance? Only if you believe in a God who resurrects, which means he's not happy with life the way it is, but on the other hand, a God who does it by grace and who guarantees that eventually I'll get it straight so that you can acquiesce and you can wait for him in his time. That's the only possible way you can get that incredible poise. Otherwise, you'll be a romantic or a cynic. I don't know any other way to do it. Balance. Number one. Number two. Second thing we see here is what? We have a picture of what you could be doing with your friends. I'm talking to Christians now. Now, to the degree that you are a man or woman of God, you can bring spiritual resurrection to the life of your friends. But how? Not just by sending your staff. You know what the staff is? That was basically a stethoscope. He was a professional. He sent his staff. No, no, no, no. If you want to see people come to life through you, you're going to have to stretch out on them. You're going to have to be personally involved with them. You're going to have to know what they know and feel what they feel. There's going to have to be a deep sympathy. And you may have to do it again and again and again and again. And in the end, they may not get up and recite the shorter catechism. They just may sneeze. But you see, this is the way you can see your friends become spiritually warm. Lots of sympathy. Lots of involvement. Not just sending some information. Not just having a meeting. Deep, patient, sympathetic identification. And then thirdly, the other thing that's great about this, resurrection means we do not have to acquiesce in the way the world is. We're not here just simply as Christians to just, you know, help people escape this world, help people get forgiveness. Oh, no. Let me read you one last thing from N.T. Wright, who says something about the resurrection that's pretty remarkable. He says, The message of the resurrection is that this world matters, that God cares about the problems and pains of this physical world. If Jesus Christ only was raised spiritually, then Christianity is only about me, finding new spiritual power and escaping this world. But if Christianity, if Jesus Christ is risen physically, then God is not going to tolerate injustice, violence, or sickness. And we must work with all the energy of God to implement victory over them. Take away the physical resurrection of Jesus, and Karl Marx was probably right to accuse Christianity of ignoring the problems of this world. Take away physical resurrection, and Freud was probably right to say Christianity is just wish fulfillment. And take away the physical resurrection, Nietzsche was probably right that it's just for wimps. But with the physical resurrection, we don't look at this world and say, Oh, this doesn't matter. We're just passing through. Things are bad. We just try to hope and wait for pie in the sky by and by. No. We are a fighting religion. We look at injustice. We look at sickness. We look at death. We look at disease. We look at poverty, and we say, God hates that, and I'm part of this program, and I'm going to do whatever I can now. And even if it is not well with this or that, it is well. The dead are raised through you. The dead are raised through him. Let's pray. Father, we thank you for the comprehensiveness of this passage, for the comprehensiveness of this miracle. It shows us so much. Would you give us now the ability to implement it? Help us to see the difference between religion and Christianity. Help us to see what it means to believe in your grace. Help us to see what it means to be a channel of your power. We pray that you'd give us the spiritual resurrection that comes from believing rightly in the death and resurrection of your son, Jesus. Help us to be people who exhibit all these qualities in our lives. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
