TITLE: The Gospel-Shaped Community
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The Gospel-Transformed Community (Leader Talks)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-gospel-shaped-community/

============================================================

It's not a filter we have so much as human beings. It's not the default mode of every human heart. It's a filter that we read the Bible through so we miss what the Bible is really saying. It's a set of prejudices and biases. It's not the moralistic filter and set of prejudices. It's the individualistic filter. And it's not something we have just as human beings. It's something we have as people from Western cultures. Those of you whose parents are not from a Western culture but you've been raised in a Western culture, you're probably going to understand this better than anybody else, okay? Because you're somewhat trapped between the individualism of our Western culture and the more normal collectivism, I guess, of other cultures. What I put down here is we may not realize the filter we have, so I'm going to take you to a couple of places in the Bible where our individualistic lens not only makes us miss what the text is saying but makes us offended. So for example, the example of Achan. Now here is something you probably never, you may never have heard anybody ever preach a sermon on. I'm not even sure I have. And I've been at this for a long time. And now you'll immediately know why. Let me read you the passage. This is at the bottom of the page, Joshua 7. But the people of Israel acted unfaithfully in regard to the devoted things. Achan, son of Carmi, the son of Zimri, the son of Zerah of the tribe of Judah, took some of them, the devoted things. So the Lord's anger burned against Israel. Now let me just explain what this is. When the children of Israel were going into the promised land, they, of course, it was occupied, so they went to war. And they fought against armies and they besieged town so that they could eventually occupy. And God's rule was that when you as soldiers, Jewish soldiers, Israel soldiers, when you defeat an army or when you besiege and conquer a city, you must never take any wealth as plunder. See, back in those days, and even maybe today to some degree, when an army conquers, the soldiers basically take the things in the homes and in the city and they just take it home and they just enrich themselves through what's called booty or plunder, right? And God had said, no one can do that. Either it must be destroyed or it must be given to the priests to be part of the tabernacle's wealth or an endowment, basically. So that if you get anything, you must never take it for yourself. So if you're a soldier, you're out there, you're conquering, you can't take it home. Achan, when they were doing a battle, the battle of Jericho, by the way, Achan saw some wonderful things and he took them home and hid them. And so when the children of Israel acted unfaithfully in regard to the devoted things, Achan, son of Carmi, son of Zimri, took some of them. And so the Lord's anger burned against Israel. And God comes to Joshua and says, somebody has done wrong. Israel has sinned. And Joshua gets all of Israel together and basically figures out who it was that had done it. And then Achan replied, it is true. I have sinned against the Lord, the God of Israel. This is what I have done. When I saw in the plunder a beautiful robe from Babylonia, 200 shekels of silver and a wedge of gold weighing 50 shekels, I coveted them and I took them. They are hidden in the ground inside my tent with the silver underneath. So Joshua sent messengers. They ran to the tent and there it was hidden in the tent with the silver underneath. They took the things from the tent, brought them to Joshua and all the Israelites and spread them out before the Lord. Then Joshua, together with all Israel, took Achan, son of Zerah, the silver, the robe, the gold wedge, his sons and daughters, his cattle, donkeys and sheep, his tent and all that he had to the valley of Achor. Then all Israel stoned him and after they had stoned the rest, they burned them. Okay, so not only Achan did wrong, but they took everybody, took his sons, his daughters, his wife, his cattle, everything in his household, took them to the valley of Achor and they stoned them to death, all of them to death and then burned them. So this is the reason why you've never heard a sermon on this. Because we listen to that and we say, that is the worst thing I've ever heard. And what is the first thing we say? What is so bad about it? Here's what's so bad, right? You say, okay, maybe he took the money, but they didn't. It was his sin. Listen, why would you hold the entire family? it says sons and daughters, it probably meant the parents. I mean, it was like an extended family. Why would you hold them all responsible? That's not right. And at that point, whether you know it or not, is you're reading the Bible through a Western bias. And here's the reason why. Number one, violation of community, okay? First, the sin was, and I'll be brief on this one, the sin was an offense against God. Akin's sin was an offense against God. But it was mainly a violation of community. Here's why. It was not just an ethical code. God did not just say, oh, you as individuals, don't take the plunder when you come into the promised land. God's command about not taking the plunder was part of his challenge to Israel to be a holy nation. The word holy means set apart, different, distinct. And what God was saying is, I want you to be a new society, a human society unlike any other human society. And here's the one way in which you're going to be different. The invasion of Canaan was not to be an imperialistic action. It was not to be undertaken to enhance the power and wealth of the Israelites. They were entering the homeland in obedience to God's command. They were to build a holy society there. They were going to have to fight because people were not going to let them go in. But when you fought and when you won, you were not to take the wealth like any other invading army at the time would ever have done. You don't take it for yourself. You don't exploit and become rich through the pain and weakness of defeated enemies, which is the way everybody did it. You're going to be a different kind of society. So when Achan sinned, he was not just breaking a rule. See, it was not enough for God just that every individual Israelite followed the ethical code. What Achan was doing was he was causing Israel to fail to be a holy nation. When he took that, he was making Israel like everybody else, and just one more imperialistic invading army that gets rich out of the pain and defeat of someone else. As a community, they were supposed to be a light to the nations. As a community, see, in Deuteronomy 4, 5 to 8, it says, See, I have taught you decrees and laws, this is Moses speaking, as the Lord my God commanded me, so that you may follow them in the land you're entering into to take possession of it. Observe them carefully, for this will show your wisdom and understanding to the nations, who will hear about all these decrees and say, surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people. What other nation is so great as to have such righteous decrees and laws as this body of laws I am setting before you today? The whole idea was the nations will find out who God is when they look at this society and say, wow, this is different than any other society. It's as a community. It's as a community who's, the way in which they treat one another, the justice, the peace, the love, the relationships of the community were to show to the world who God was. So what Achan was doing wasn't just breaking an individual ethical command. He was destroying the holy nation. He was destroying the community as a counterculture, as God's new holy nation. And he was therefore destroying, he was completely undermining the mission of God because the mission of God is to create a community of people that show forth God's glory by being completely different than other communities and other societies. Was that only for the Old Testament? No, because Jesus on the night before he dies, he actually says in John 17, 21 to the father, very famously, father, let my disciples be one in love, even as we are one so that the world will know you sent me. It's very famous. He's basically saying the world will know the gospel is true by the quality of the community I leave behind among my disciples. So it's the same thing in the Old Testament as the New Testament. I'll keep going here. Therefore, scroll forward to where it says corporate responsibility. So that's the first thing you need to realize about the Achan incident. The reason it was so serious, and by the way, the reason it was so serious was because Achan was destroying the mission of God. And the mission of God is a community of God's believers have got to be an alternate society. So the world can see the beauty of that society. Now, second thing we learned from the Achan incident is corporate responsibility. One of the most amazing things about this, you might want to go back and read the whole thing. It's actually more horrifying than what I gave you. I mean, I just took parts of it out. But what's most interesting is in verse 1, we're told the people... read this and it says, hey, only Achan sinned. But that's not what God says. God says the people have sinned. Israel has sinned. Not Achan has sinned. And then, when Achan is executed for his sin, look at the second paragraph under number two. His entire family is executed with him. Now, modern Western readers are totally horrified. Why? If Achan broke God's law, then he should bear the responsibility, not his entire family. But most people understand that it is impossible for an individual's character to be produced by himself. The individual is like a stone on a seashore. Every day, the wind, the waves are slowly, slowly, but surely giving the stone its shape. And in the same way, the character of a person does not come mainly from his or her personal decisions. It comes from his or her family. It comes from their relationships. It comes from the community. And to put it more colloquially, you essentially become like the people you hang out with the most. So most cultures have always known, and the Bible knows, that if a family member does something horrendous, the family has to share major responsibility. There's no way that that horrendousness could have developed without at least the passive help of the family. Now, look, my pastoral hat wants to go on here, because I'm a father. I got grown children. And I can tell you two things, okay? Most of you are not parents with grown children. I can tell you that, because this is a redeemer. So, okay. Most of you are grown children, but most of you do not have grown children. When you're young and single, especially in the West, you are under the illusion that what makes you what you are is your own personal choices. The scary thing that happens as you get older is you become more and more aware of the fact that you are almost inexorably drawn to being like your parents. It's pretty scary how much you can see, how much of your parents are in you. And your character, there's two ways a family can be to some degree responsible for the character of its individual member. The one is you may actively have encouraged, actively have really encouraged the person to become the person that they turn out to be. But at the very least, you may have failed to stop a person from becoming the person he or she was on the way to becoming. And this is the reason, by the way, for example, after Columbine, even in America, even in the West, there were people who occasionally said, well, you know, their parents shouldn't feel guilty. That was their choice. Do you think your parents felt that way? Nobody felt that way. Because everybody knows that at the very least, the parents failed to keep the kids from becoming what they were. Or maybe they were actively, in a sense, having done that. And maybe in some ways, they actively brought about the kind of character that the children eventually did. But nobody is so dumb as to think that when the Columbine, you know, kids did what they did, that the family wasn't in any way responsible. Of course it was. Now, here's my pastoral hat. Generally, I find that when you're younger, like most of you are, you feel too much like, my family's not responsible for my behavior. I am, I am who I choose to be. But when you get to be my age, you feel, you almost go to the other extreme. And anything that goes wrong with your kids, you feel responsible for. Now, I would actually say, intellectually, it's more true, it's more true to feel that the way my kids turn out is to a great degree the product of the family and my parenting. That's truer than the illusion of saying, oh, no, you know, my family has nothing to do with it. I am who I choose to be. And yet, there's this thing called grace. You know, I can't tell you how many times over the years I've had to, I just, I've just had to, I've just had to take barrels of grace and throw it on guilty parents and say, you know, in the end, your children do stand before God. And they are, they have, they have, they are responsible moral agents. And God does hold them responsible for what they've done. And yet, if everything the Bible says is true, that you are the product of your community more than you are the product of your individual choices, then you do need to take some responsibility for what's wrong with your children and ask God's forgiveness. And you got to, you can't look back and you can't be dogged by a horrible guilt all the time. And you might say, oh, parent who's dogged by guilt, that you are filled with, you believe in. that you don't really believe the gospel. You need to use the gospel in your heart until you're able to get past your guilt. Now, this is all to say, you might say, what's this got to do with Redeemer? You know, we don't have that many families around here. Well, I'm trying to get across the principle. And the principle is, you are the product of your community much more than you are the product of your own individual choices. That's the only thing that makes sense. That idea is the only thing that makes sense of Joshua 7. In fact, it's the only thing that makes sense of an awful lot of the Bible. A huge amount of the Bible will not make any kind of sense otherwise. So, for example, keep on going. Let's skip the roots of Western individualism. I hope you read this handout. I worked very hard on it. Because you're our leaders, and you're important, and nobody else gets this. And I think you'll find it very, very interesting. There are reasons why Western culture is individualistic. Part of it's philosophical, the Enlightenment. Part of it's technological, by the way. You know, part of it is consumer capitalism. I'm not anti-capitalistic at all. But part of it is that the idea of the marketplace is sort of impinging itself. And you can read all about that. But what I want you to do is to come all the way over to a theology of Christian community, which should be on your page what? I just want to overview this for another two or three minutes here. What page is it for you? Whew. Okay. Let me show you the importance of community according to these passages. Churches, in Matthew 5, 14 to 16, Jesus says, we are a city on a hill. Redeemer Church is a city inside New York City. Our visible behavior shines out and shows the world the glory of God. See, it's exactly like Deuteronomy. He says, you're a city on a hill, and the Gentiles, the pagans, will see your good deeds and glorify God. It's very, very breathtaking. And here's what it means. It means Redeemer is to be an alternate New York City. Now, why does Jesus not say you're a fellowship, but you're a city? I think it means, first of all, we are to bring into our Christian community all the kinds of people in the city. We're supposed to be as diverse as possible. Secondly, we're to be a model of alternate ways to do everything. See, the word fellowship means, oh, we just get together to kind of talk about Jesus. But if we're an alternate city, that means God wants us to exhibit to the rest of New York City how families get together, yes, how art is done, how business relationships work, how you use your money, how you date or be single or be married. Every single thing that happens out there in the city needs to be happening in here in gospel-shaped ways. And that's what Jesus says is your witness. Your witness is not just I like to talk to my friends about Jesus and bring them to church. Your witness is the world needs to see us doing everything in our counterculture in a way that's different and distinct and attractive to them, different and distinct from the rest of the city and attractive. Now, by the way, my time is running out, so let me rush ahead. An example, which always gets a lot of silence whenever I say this at Redeemer. For example, if you think individualistically about sex and dating, you can say, well, what is the Christian ethic of sex and dating? Well, here's what you're going to tell people. Okay, individualistically, what are the moral rules for sex and dating from the Bible? There's only two. One is, as I know, is you can't have sex until you're married, and number two is you need to marry a Christian. Okay, there's two rules. And you say, okay, that's the biblical view of sex and dating. Now, wait a minute. You're thinking individualistically. What about corporately? How can the world out there look inside here and see us, see men and women dating and courting and pairing and breaking up and getting married in ways that are different than out there? Well, I put down in here, for example, out there, women know that unless they're really attractive, guys aren't even going to look at them. They're not going to look at their character. They're going to look at their looks. Guys out there know women are not going to look at their character. They're going to look at their bank account. That's gender stereotype, but it's true. In Redeemer, that's all different, of course. And if it's not all different, then we are, that's the sin of Achan. We're not being a holy nation. We're not different. We're just like everybody else. In other words, in our corporate life, we haven't figured out how to mirror the glory of God corporately. You know, we're all worried about keeping the rules individualistically, aren't we? And not corporately, see. You know, out there, by the way, in the world, how do artists and business people get along? You know, out there, how do people... they reconcile or maybe not reconcile? See, in all these ways, it's our job to be a city. And our mission is so much, our mission to such a great degree surrounds the quality of our corporate life together. I really don't have time to make you go through much of the rest of it. Let me, you know, let me conclude with one thing. I gave the example of dating in there. You can get to it. And ethics and spirituality, all the ways in which, see, you know, spirituality is individual. You have to pray and read your Bible. But it's also corporate in the way in which we worship and pray together. Ethics is individual, but it's also corporate. Witnessing is individual. You know, share your faith with your friends and then bring them to church. But it's also corporate in the way in which we work together. But I'll tell you what, look at the place where it says, according to Paul, Romans 12, 1 to 2. That's probably, what, page 12 for you? Okay, just look at that. Let me just read you this paragraph and then we'll finish. Here's one more text that will show you how every biblical writer understood the radical nature of Christian community. And I'll give you another biblical text that you probably haven't thought of communally, have you? You probably thought of this individualistically. Let me paraphrase. Paul in Romans 12, 1 to 2. He says, well, look up here for a minute. What does Romans 1 and 2 say? It says, offer your bodies as living sacrifices to the Lord, which is your reasonable service. Have you heard that before? Offer your bodies as living sacrifices. And right away you think that means that I individually have to give God my whole body and my whole self and live a holy, pure life. That's true. However, here is what it actually says in Greek. He says, present your collective bodies as a single living sacrifice, holy, distinct, and pleasing to God. Do this to show an alternative to the spirit of this world and age. Continue to renew your mind in order to do this. Now, please notice, here's what Paul is saying in these verses. Number one, he says, present your bodies. It's plural. And then he says, to be a holy sacrifice to the Lord, singular. It's deliberate. It's deliberate. He says, present your bodies to be a sacrifice. Not present your bodies to be sacrifices. Not present your body to be a sacrifice. Present your bodies to be a sacrifice. Why? The disagreement of singular and plural nouns is deliberate. He says, we are to take our individual lives and behavior, which is usually what bodies means when Paul uses the word body. We're supposed to take our individual lives and behavior and unite them together as a corporate sacrifice. We are to become a unified being. We're supposed to be a unified community. Then he says, do not be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, which means the purpose of our corporate unity is to have an alternate to the world, the world's way of living. Our community is to be carefully thought out through the renewing of our minds as an alternate way to live in the world. So the purpose of Jesus' salvation is not just to save individuals, but to form a new alternate society. It's a sign that Jesus is Lord of the world and is going to redeem all of creation, and that's because we are made in the image of a triune God who himself is a community. So for all the rest of the beta group time, the seven weeks we're doing on community, for your discussion tonight, the next Leaders at Seven, I'm going to go into more detail. About the fact that this has always been the weakest of the three things for Redeemer. Gospel in the heart, gospel in community, gospel in the world. We've always been better at gospel in the heart. Why? Because we're an individualist society that loves to think about how the gospel changes in my life. And we're also actually pretty good at gospel in the world because we live in New York City, which is a kind of energetic, outward, international place, and people love to think about outreach and reaching out to people and helping people. But when it comes to gospel in community, we've always been weak here. And I'd like to hide behind the fact that there's never been a more individualistic culture than New York City that I know. And so I'd like to hide behind that, but I think we need to take responsibility for it. And to say, we're not that different corporately than the world. Even if you're keeping your little, even if you're keeping your little individual life kind of holy and feeling pretty good about it, we shouldn't feel very good about whether or not we are in a, we've created a community that is so beautiful that the world looks into it like in Deuteronomy 4, looks into it like in Matthew 5, and praises God because of the light, the radiant light it sees there and the way in which we live together. Okay, let me just close in prayer. Is that all right, Bruce? Can I just pray before we move on to the next part? Pardon me? Yeah, oh, you'll do the Q&A before the prayer. Yeah, you're right. Thank you. if you just ask a question, bark it out. I think I can understand. I know there are microphones, but you see these two mics? Come to them. Okay, stand right where you are. I think I can get you. Oh, you actually read the handout. Congratulations. Oh, I don't think that non-Western cultures necessarily... No, here's a problem. Now, listen, wait. One of the problems that non-Western cultures give you, where the family is incredibly important, unbelievably important. It's not as individualistic. In their own way, they create as many barriers for creating a gospel-shaped community as we do. Let me give you a perfect example of this. I mean, when I was in the South, it was a more collectivistic society, especially my older people. In the 1970s, my older people were pretty collectivistic. They weren't very individualistic. They were older. They were big on family and clan. Some of you who come from non-Western cultures can relate to this. All right. They were racist, too. And therefore, I remember I used to ask this question to my older people, and they just realized, I said, I said, do you believe that you need to marry, you know, do you believe what the Bible says that you shouldn't be unequally yoked, and therefore, if you're a Christian, you should marry a Christian? Oh, yeah, I believe that. So, I would say, would you, would, I said, would you be, what would you rather have your grandchild marry? A person of another race who's a Christian? Or a person of the same race who's not a Christian? If that was your choice, what would you do? And every single time they'd say, you got me there, but I'd rather the person married someone of the same race who wasn't a Christian. I'd say, well, wait a minute. See, now that's, and those of you whose parents come from more collectivistic, non-Western cultures, you know about this, don't you? You know that your parents would rather you married a non-believer of the same race than a believer of a different race, which means that in, that in non-individualistic cultures, they really don't make the church your ultimate family. Your family is the ultimate church. So, I, I could give you a long list of ways in which that in non-Western cultures, there are all kinds of barriers to creating the kind of community we're talking about here. A community in which your, your faith overcomes racial barriers very hard in non-Western cultures. The idea of faith overcoming racial barriers in a multi-ethnic community, kind of, the average New Yorker thinks it's a great idea. So, a non-Christian New Yorker coming in and seeing a multi-ethnic group says, wonderful, this is a good church, look at all these different, but if you, if you, I don't know how people would say in some of these other non-Western cultures, they look in, they see a whole lot of, you know, a multi-ethnic Christian church, they look in and say, I don't want my young, you know, I don't want my son or daughter to go in there because they may marry somebody of a different race. Even if they're Christians, they're going to say that. So, I'm just saying individualistic Western culture has got all kinds of barriers to the kind of gospel-based community that God wants us to have, and so do non-Western cultures. You know, the sin is just shaped differently. One is not better than another. I'm just, I'm ragging on you because we're here. So, I don't want you to get the impression, I think, that, can I give you one more example? Okay. Let me show you why the Bible doesn't really throw its lot in with any one culture, and it critiques all cultures. I'll just tell you it was a Korean church, so some of you can just say, okay, probably a Korean church, okay. I know of a guy, I know of a guy, Westminster Seminary graduate some years ago told me that he was trying to get a job, he was applying for a job as what, you non-Koreans need to know, there's a lot of interesting positions in Korean churches that we have no particular translation for. He is a junior pastor or a youth pastor, basically, it's a, the word is cheongdosa, which is, there's no real, there's no real translation for it, right? What does it mean? Junior pastor, whatever. So, the guy was applying, and he was talking to the Asian, the Korean elders, who were all first-generation Koreans, about the job, and they kind of liked him, they kind of liked him, and at one point, they, he felt like things were going pretty well. That was it. They said, well, sorry, we don't need to be talking to you anymore. And they just dismissed him. That was it. Because they said, you know, and he realized, basically, he was an Asian American, so he understood a little bit about it. But he realized what they were really saying was, if you won't take this job until you find out what the salary is, that shows you're just a selfish individualist. You know, if you really are, you know, if you're really committed to the church and all that, you'll just do what anything we ask you to do. You know, you'll take whatever we pay you. That just showed a lack of respect. And I remember talking with him about this, and he says, you know, what's interesting is, on the one hand, he says, I do see that Western individualism does create a remarkable lack of loyalty in most Americans. Even inside the church, we're so career-oriented that, you know, we're out of here as soon as we're not being paid enough. I mean, we're talking about in the church. On the other hand, they looked at the Korean church, which says, well, that's a great recipe for exploitation, is it not? You know, if you're really committed to us, you wouldn't have this individualistic problem and ask for what the salary is. And so we sat around and said, guess what? There isn't a wonderful culture out there that's sinless and perfect, and all we need to do is just be Christians in it. Every culture has got idols in it. To make an idol of individuality or to make an idol of the tribe is a recipe. I mean, only God is God. And unfortunately, in some cultures, the tribe and the family is God, or even the father is God. I don't mean the father God, I mean the father is God. And in American society, you know, the individual is God. You know, my individual rights and my individual feelings and my happiness. So there is no quick way out of this. I'm glad, and the reason I took a little longer is because I realized that I may have given the impression I thought that non-Western cultures were better. They're not particularly. Somebody else? Yeah, go ahead. You're next. Go ahead. I'll get you both. Go ahead. One of the ways that a lot of churches, I think, end up interacting with their communities most often are through weddings and funerals. It doesn't seem like Redeemer, I haven't seen Redeemer do a lot of that. Is that by design to some extent, or is that just because of how transient the congregation is? No, it's more transient. I would like to buck that trend. See, there's four things. In the average church, everybody comes together around four things, baptism, Lord's Supper, weddings, and funerals. And these are major change. In other words, everybody comes together. One of the problems is we don't have a building. And because we don't have a building, everybody who gets married here has to essentially sort of, it's a sort of a do-it-yourself thing. You piece it together. You find a spot. You know, you find a pastor who's got the time. And frankly, your friends come. But it's rare that a wedding is much of a community building event. I would love to get past that. One of the problems we may have when we get our very first building is we're going to have to face that. You know, there's 5,000 people come to Redeemer and 4,999.5 are single. And so you see the problem? Even if we get a building, I just can't imagine. There's all kinds of things. You know, a lot of people are going to need to use that building. And you can't tie it up with weddings either. So it's a problem. So it's partly transient. It's partly not having a building. And yet I'd love to buck that trend. We haven't done much around weddings and funerals to really build community like we could. Yes, sir. Oh, there we go. Go ahead. Tim, in here you make a reference to Wall Street imploding. And this was written in the middle of September. And of course, since then, it's just gotten worse. Everything's gotten better, right? Yeah, right. Quite the opposite. It's gone the other way. And it could go the other way with the vengeance even more so. If you're looking out a year from now, we're meeting here. What's the promise in terms of community building for Redeemer? What's the promise and what's the peril of the next year? Okay, good. Tell me when I have to stop. Five more minutes? Right, all the way to eight. Good. I don't want you to think that I'm, well, again, this is, after 9-11, everybody, but the day after 9-11, you know, every single person here who wasn't married had gotten a call from their parents saying, please come home, we don't want you to New York anymore. I mean, like, everybody. And, you know, it was a bad... because here you're talking about, at the time I expected there would be more terrorist attacks. I think most people did. And so what you were actually, by saying, please stay in the city, please stay part of this community, build a community that can help the hurting. You know, we're here now to help the people, we're here now to create a community that's open to a lot of hurting people who need community more than ever. There was, it was, I really, I thought about it because I realized I might be, I gulped because I might be looking at people saying, please don't move home, please stay right here. Those of you who have got jobs still, you know, a lot of people lost their jobs. Those of you who got jobs have got to give more to help the people who lost their jobs. Those of you who are not emotionally scarred have got to be willing to open your, you know, it's, it's always, it's so draining to open your arms to an emotionally scarred person because, you know, it's just more comfortable just to stay away from them, you know, send them flowers, not, not sit and listen to them. And what we said was, please stay and be a community that is going to, those of you who still got resources, still got jobs, still got, you know, some, some emotional metabolism left and margin left, you've got to open up to the people who are, who are, have lost it. It was scary at that time was I realized I might be saying this to somebody and next week because they don't leave or next month because they don't leave, they're killed. Because the pastor, you know, I could, I could just see somebody calling back to Michigan or Ohio saying, my pastor said, we ought to stay, I'm going to stay and then next month they're dead. And then, and then having somebody come after me with a knife, you know, some mother and father from Ohio, I can't imagine that people from Ohio know how to use a knife, but anyway. But actually, I think that's basically the same message. I don't know how bad it's going to be. The question is, will it be bad or will it be bad, bad, or will it be bad, bad, bad? It'll be bad, but we'll, how bad? But probably the, the message is the same, is that you need a community. I mean, there's all kinds of people who've been so self-sufficient and they didn't need community, they just sort of dropped in to get inspired by the music and by the preaching and by all the bright young things, you know, just as, isn't it nice that there's so many people in New York that, there's people who come just to walk in to feel better about, they're inspired, but they're too busy for community. They felt too impervious to, they didn't feel very needy, and now they're needy and they're going to need community. They're going to need practical help, they're going to need people, they're going to need a shoulder to cry on. There's going to be a lot of people like that. A lot of people are like that right now. So I would say it's the same, you know, that's what the community, the community is a city and a city has got poor people in it, as well as well-off people, and the well-off people have got to be on boards and give money to charities to take care of the poor. I mean, we've got to be a whole city and we've got to be willing to reach out to hurting people. So, and you know, I don't know how long it'll last, but it doesn't, it doesn't matter. And I also would have to say one other thing is, in spite of the fact that it's very painful for a church too, the church lives in the world. And therefore, you know, if there's a major economic meltdown, people don't have as much money to give, we don't get as much money, you know. Nevertheless, I would still say it's during the hard times that I've seen the most evangelism happen, the most people come to faith in Christ, the most. You know, 1990 to 1991, it was a really bad recession. It's the last time real estate prices went down in New York City. And I know a number of people who had never been out of work for a year and they were desperate. And it's one of the reasons why they not only had time to come to Redeemer, but became Christians. Dozens of them that wouldn't have become Christians otherwise. So, community is very important at bad times. Really important. Right here first, I haven't... Go ahead. You and then I'll get you. Go ahead. You're saying because you would like it to be permanent, how do you lead them to want it to be permanent? No, no, no, no. I'm saying, how do you... I'm saying, I would like to make it to be permanent and that would be lovely, but they committed to seven weeks, so I have seven weeks. That should be my priority to... How do you... I think... You have to trust... Give them... Well, you know, you've been given some guidelines as to how to make every particular experience a good experience. I would actually say, for you to offer to give them time, personal time outside of the meeting, you... You... the same thing, if they can, is probably the best single thing from turning a, best single way to turn a class into a community. Because if they only connect during the time, even if it's a great experience for you, I'm sure it is, it's still a little bit more like a class. Only one little part of their life is connected to the others. So the most important thing for you to do would be to actually offer to spend time with every single one of them. That's a lot of time. If you can get to them all, if you can get to two a week, that's a lot. And then, you know, encourage them to get together outside. At the end of the time, you'll find some of them will probably want to stay. I mean, we found, yeah. Or maybe, well, anyway, that's probably the best single thing to do to turn a class into a community is time outside the meeting. Yes, sir? It seems that the community is an essential tenant of the making of our creative people. Yeah. Mm-hmm. Where does solitude come into it? Well, you know, there's always the other shoe to drop. Now, for example, if you never pray except in a group or at church, your prayer in a group in a church will be awful. I mean, I can tell, I can't, I mean, I don't want to make you self-conscious. But you can tell, I think, a person who's pretty experienced at praying to God one-on-one when he or she opens his or her mouth in a group. You can tell people that obviously do a lot of praying. And people who are actually just imitating what the other folks said or, you know, it's halting or something like that. So the spirituality of your group, of your community, is going to be enormously enhanced by your personal spiritual walk and vice versa. They are symbiotic. They're like two wings of an airplane. I mean, you don't have a – you will never see things in the Word of God, no matter how long you meditate, that the guy next to you or the woman next to you in your group will see. And you'll – just like that. You know, you may have read that verse, you know, 20 times in the last year, and then that person sees something that was really there but you just missed. On the other hand, that – you have to bring something. I mean, every morning when I pray, I just say, give me some stuff right now that I can share with people all day. Give me a joy that I can share all day. Give me some insights I can share with people all day. You know, give me some gold that I can then distribute all day. So how do they relate to each other? They're just – they're two wings of an airplane. They're symbiotically related to each other. You can't have one really without the other. Or at least you can't have one thrive without the other. I think I can do one more. Smack in the middle. Yes, go ahead. There are some individuals that have been exploited by the stream of a community. Right. That's right. There's a cult. Yeah, that's right. Yeah. They found a way out of these cults that are damaged and they are fearful of returning to a community. That's right. Because they were initially attracted to a community, but then once they delved deeper into it, it was controlling and manipulative and exploited them. How do you minister to people and attract them to the community? That's a great question. However, now think about this. I've talked to an awful lot of people who were part of a church and then they found out that the – and they really loved the minister and they really loved the church and they found out that the minister was sleeping with the organist and hasn't been back to church since. It's the same thing. In other words, when you've been abused by a – when you've been a victim of malpractice, how can you trust a doctor? Guess what? You've still got to trust a doctor. I'm sorry. You know, acupuncture is not everything. You know, even though you've been the victim of malpractice, you're going to have to go back. But actually, I do know plenty of people. I know people who have died because they didn't trust doctors. They just didn't trust them. And they, you know, they only went at the very last minute, only at the very end, only when the symptoms were so bad it was too late. to look people in the eye and, and, and be very gentle. I mean, a doctor who is trying to help a person trust doctors again should not be imperious, right? Okay. A minister who, you know, is trying to win a person back to trusting ministers, again, needs to be gentle and yet still insistent. And I think in your case, a person who's afraid of community would say, take your time. Just take your time. Be part of the community. Don't join. Don't do the membership vows. I know you're afraid, but just get to know us and see how the community works. And if they see the community with a balance, which we'll get to later, okay, a balance of accountability and at the same time, gentleness, holding people accountable, but at the same time, being very gentle and gracious in the way we do it, then there'll be won over. But it's very, it is, I hate to go this far, it is a little rare. Churches either never call people on the carpet about anything. They let you do anything you want. In other words, they're not a community. They're just an audience. Or else they just, they are very heavy handed about saying, why aren't you doing this and why aren't you doing that? So it's, I actually feel like when people who are afraid of community, we ought to be really very gentle with them. It reminds me, it's not the same thing. It reminds me, there's a place in Jude, the book of Jude. Does any of you know there's a book of Jude in the Bible? There's a place in the book of Jude where it says, be merciful to them that doubt. All right. Now, on the one hand, look at Jesus. Thomas doubts. And so Jesus shows up and says, here's the, you know, the nail prints in my hands and my feet. Stop doubting and believe. Now, there's a kind of balance there, isn't there? On the one hand, Jesus didn't show up and say, how dare you doubt? On the other hand, he said, let's try to get past the doubt. Now, he didn't say, he didn't say, oh, doubting, how sophisticated, you must be a New Yorker, that's great. You know, in other words, he didn't say doubt was okay. And he didn't say, how dare you doubt? How dare you doubt? He was merciful to those who doubted. He came, he gave them what he wanted. He said, you want more evidence? Here's some more evidence. But now let's move on. Perfect on this, on any kind of fear. Be merciful to people who are afraid of community, you know, which is the main thing they haven't seen in the past, which is mercy. But still keep saying, not, oh, it's okay, you're not in community. You know, say, let's get past your fear. Because you really need community, you know you do. Now can I close in prayer? Or do you just come up? Okay. Let's pray. Our Father, I certainly feel, as a leader and as pastor of this church, more, I feel more inadequate in this area. I feel less accomplished, my accomplished in this area. I have not led my people into the kind of community that I wish they have. I wish them to have. I have, we have not done the jobs that we need to do in creating this kind of community. Help us not to beat each other up or beat up ourselves with guilt, but at the same time, help us not to just shrug. And we pray that because we've spent this whole year thinking about this together, we will be more like what your son says we should be, which is a city on a hill filled with radiant light. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
