TITLE: The New Jerusalem
SCRIPTURE: Revelation 21:1-22:5
TOPICS: Death Restoration
SERIES: Revelation: The Final Word
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-new-jerusalem/

============================================================

Verse 1 to verse 8 of chapter 21. Read with me. Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea. I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride, beautifully dressed for her husband. And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, Now the dwelling of God is with men, and he will live with them. They will be his people, and God himself will be with them and be their God. He will wipe every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain for the old order of things. As passed away, he who was seated on the throne said, I am making everything new. Then he said, Write this down, for these words are trustworthy and true. He said to me, It is done. I am the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. To him who is thirsty, I will give to drink without cost from the spring of the water of life. He who overcomes will inherit all this, and I will be his God, and he will be my son. But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters, and the all liars, their place will be in the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death, and this is God's word. Well, what do we learn? First, we learn that God makes everything he touches new. Verse 5, He who is seated on the throne says, I am making everything new. Everything he touches becomes new. Now, a lot of us, I would say modern people, are absolutely fascinated with the new. There has never been a time, there has never been a place, where we were more afraid of being traditional, we more were afraid of being out of date. But I propose to you, that underneath our fascination, and maybe I should say our obsession with the new, there has never been a culture more more sure that the traditional and the old is irrelevant. Underneath our obsession with the new is actually a hunger for eternity. Under our obsession for the new, there's a hunger for eternity. We sit watching ourselves fading, decaying, aging, and we know that we're not built for this, and so we have an obsession with the new. You know, you read the grief management literature, it's very clinically correct, and if you read the literature that tries to help people face death, their own death or the death of others, again and again you will see, in the last 20 years, embedded in the so-called scientific literature, is the old pagan notion of the eternal wheel of fate, the eternal wheel of time, in which you are alive, then you die, and you go back into the ground, and you become fertilizer for something else to live off of, which then of course dies and becomes fertilizer for something else, and this is the eternal wheel. It goes on and on and on. Death, it says, is just a natural part of life. When you die, you actually go into making something else alive, and then it becomes alive, and then it goes back, and it's just natural, they say. Death is a natural part of life. It's a part of the cycle of life. Then the poet says, we rage against the dying of the light. Now, who's right? The clinically correct grief management manual, or Dylan Thomas, half drunk, saying, we rage against the dying of the light. We look at things fading, we look at things decaying, we look at things dying, and we say, I am not built for a place like this. I'm built for a place where everything stays fresh, and bright, and new. There's nothing very, if you think about it, there's nothing very comforting at all about saying, ah, death is just natural. We're all destined to be fertilizer bags. There's nothing good about that, nothing good news compared to what the gospel says. Underneath, we are afraid of that. And that fear actually shows you something about what you were designed for. Underneath, all of our fear of the old, and our obsession with the new, is a hunger for eternity. The Bible says that God is characterized by newness. And we know that. And we look at it. Testament, there are two different Greek words that can be translated new. The word neos means young, new in terms of duration. But there's another word, now this is very different than the English, but in the English we can't make a distinction like this. There's another word, the word kynos, which happens every time the word new appears in this passage four times, which means new in terms of quality. Now that's a very difficult distinction for us to make, because for us in this time and this world, the young and the new are the same thing. To be new is to be young. But the Bible shows us that they are not the same. You see, neos is to be new in terms of duration. It's just a period. But kynos means new in terms of quality, freshness, brightness, strength. All we know is that when things endure, as time goes on, the brightness becomes faded. The strength becomes weakness and then eventually disintegration. The coherence becomes incoherence. The brightness becomes boredom. And so for us, as far as we're concerned, to be young and to be new are the same thing. But the Bible insists that newness is something that exists apart from youth. Who is the ancient of ancients, he is more ancient than ancient, is characterized by a complete newness. Behold, he says, I am making everything new. Everything that he comes into contact with participates in that newness. What do I mean? It's as simple as this. The Bible says that in God, every second, things become newer and newer, every second. Now think about that. Things get fresher every second, and fresher and fresher, ten times fresher. And the next second, ten times over the last second. Can you imagine? That's what the Bible's saying. In God, things become fresher and fresher, newer and newer every moment, brighter and brighter, stronger and stronger, more absorbing than they were a second ago, more vivid, more coherent, more coherent, more whole, more beautiful. Every second, ten times more than the last second, and on and on and on forever. And that's what the Bible says God is like. Now we're going to get to this as we proceed. Christians understand that this is possible, as we'll get back to it in a minute, because when Christians receive the truth through the Holy Spirit, when Christian, a Christian is not someone who simply believes in a general way, in the truth of God in general in an abstract way. Christians are people who've received the truth as a living principle into their heart, and they know what it's like to have a truth that they've known for years, and it's continually dawning on them. If you've been a Christian, if you're a real Christian, and if you've been a Christian for any length of time, you know how astonishing it is that something that you've known, you've known, you've known. You've known it inside out, you've memorized it. A verse that you've memorized that you know inside out, that you studied. And a year later, you read it, and it comes to you as if for the first time. It dawns on you all over. It's like you've never seen it before, and yet it's ancient. That's just a foretaste of what it's like to live in the presence of God. Behold, it will make everything new. Underneath all of your diets, underneath the cosmetics, underneath the new clothes, behind all your midlife crises, and you will all have one, underneath this fear of decay, underneath this fear of the old, is a knowledge that you're not built for this, and is a passion for the newness of God. It's the only place you'll find it. We can use refrigeration. We can use cosmetics. We can use formaldehyde. We can use an awful lot of things to try to hide and even to retard the inevitable. Outside of God, there is nothing but oldness, eternal oldness. No matter how young you are, you're in oldness. No matter how beautiful you are, you're in decay. And if you're in God, and to the degree that you're in God, you're participating in his newness. And no matter how old you are, you're getting newer. Do you understand that? Underneath the desires, the diets, underneath all the new cars, underneath the new houses, underneath the new clothes, underneath this plastic surgery, underneath all the things that we do. That we do. That we do. this life. All those things can never do much except briefly give you some kind of relief from the grayness of this life. You want this. You want the newness of God. Do you have it? Is it marching through your life? Is it flowing through your life? Do you understand it? That's the first thing we see. God is characterized by newness even though he's ancient because in God, youth and newness are not the same. Newness is a quality of its own. It flows right out of his heart. It flows out of him. Second, so the first thing we're taught is God is characterized by that. He makes everything new. Everything he touches turns new. Secondly, God will touch the world and give us a new heavens and a new earth. In the future, at some point, God will touch the world and everything will become new. You see, verse 2, I saw the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven beautifully and he will wipe away every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death, no more mourning, no more pain for the old order of things has passed away. That's the vision. The Bible tells us in Romans 8 that all this world is subject to decay because of the rebellion of men and women. You know, in the very beginning of the bulletin, there's a little quote by Carl Jung saying, the only trouble with the world is us. A machine that's perfectly crafted that have cogs and wheels all intermeshed with each other. If a cog up here comes off of its axle and falls down into the lower house, the lower mechanism, the machine begins to grind itself into dust. Nothing from the outside has to come to destroy the machine. It's killing itself. Unless everything inside the machine is in place, it grinds itself into pieces. It grinds itself into dust. It experiences bit by bit. The more it turns, the more it turns. There's more incoherence. There's more disintegration. There's more brokenness. And the Bible tells us that's why nature is the way it is. The reason why things decay. The reason why everything is falling apart. Everything. The reason why the second law of thermodynamics, everything is going to disorder. No matter what you are, you will be in pieces eventually. Every relationship will be in pieces eventually because you will be in pieces eventually. Till death do us part, but we do part. Everything is falling apart. Everything. And that's why Romans 8 says it's because men and women decided to be, instead of under God, to be their own gods, to be their own masters. We came off of our axle, you see. We're not where we're supposed to be. We don't love God with all our heart, soul, strength, and mind, even though he built us. We don't let him determine what we do. So we're off our axle. And as a result, everything is working wrong. Everything is going bad. Everything is grinding. We use refrigeration. We use formaldehyde to hide it. We use cosmetics so people can't see that we're shriveling up, but eventually we do. But the Bible tells us that this is not going to be the way things always are. It's temporary. We're told in Psalm 96, let the heavens be glad. Let the earth rejoice. Let the sea roar and all that fills it. Let the trees of the woods exult and all that's within it. Then shall the trees of the woods sing for joy before the Lord because he comes to rule the earth. The Bible tells us there will be a moment in which the king comes back. Now, the king is the one who built the machine. And when the king puts everything back where it belongs, when he puts us all back on our axles, you see, everything will be renewed. Where the king comes, look, see what it says? There will be no more death, no more mourning, no more pain. Everything will be wiped clean. Everything. We don't exactly know what it means, but it means at least this. I'm saying this for Jeff. We will blossom in places we don't even know we have buds. Deep inside every single created thing, men, women, even the mountains and the hills, deep inside everything God has created are reservoirs of glory and power that are not only untapped, they're completely hidden. And to the degree that we come under the lordship of the king, to the degree we come under his lordship, to that degree those hidden reservoirs explode with all their potentiality. We're going to run and not be weary. What does that mean? We're not going to, we're going to walk and not faint. What does it mean to say we're going to have glorified bodies? What does it mean to say that the world will be a new heavens and a new earth? Beautiful. Coming down beautifully. It's we are in brokenness because we're out from under the Lordship of Christ, and we will go into wholeness as he comes back and takes over. And the Bible says that's what's going to happen. I saw a new heaven and a new earth, you see? From the throne of the universe, from the throne, he who sits on the throne, from the throne of the universe flows a newness, and no decay and no poverty and no death and no oppression and no brokenness will be able to stand before it. Eventually it's going to take it over completely. Nothing will be able to stand before it. So the second point we make here is not just that God makes things new, but God will make everything new at some future time in which he will renew the whole heavens and the whole earth and all of humanity. All of humanity, as we will see, that looks toward the throne. I'll get to that in a minute. But first, before we move on to the next point, I'd just like you to think for a minute. Some people would say, that's very interesting. So you're telling us about a future that's glorious. You're telling us about heaven. You're telling us about the fact that in the end, God will come back and make everything new. That's wonderful, but that's not very practical. It doesn't help me right now. That's pie in the sky. That's the trouble with Christians. See, Christianity is the opiate of the people, says some people. Because what you're telling people is, oh, things are real bad here, but eventually everything will be fine in the future, in heaven. And so people don't have any incentive because they think that there's this greater, higher world. They don't think there's no incentive to make the world a better place now. They have no incentive to live in a great way with a sense of greatness now. That's nonsense. Now, two ways. One way, which I'm not going to explore, and that's the more theoretical way. If there is no God, if there is no righteous judge that at the end of the world is going to put everything right, if you don't know whether that's true or not, we've talked about this before, if this life is all there is, how the heck do you know what's right and wrong? How do you know that compassion and justice is a good thing? You've got no standards. In the end, you're going to be fertilizer, remember? And that means no matter how I live, in the end, it's going to make no difference at all. Nothing. Take away the idea of a judge. Take away the idea of heaven. And you don't have any ability. You have no motivation. You don't even have a standard by which you can work for a better world here. That's a theoretical one. I'd like to be practical for a second. People say, how does this help me right now? Look, for the last time, because we've mentioned this a number of times as we've looked through the book of Revelation, this book is written to people who are facing enormous persecution. This book was written to people who were about to experience all these things. They were about to experience death and mourning and crying and pain in degrees that, as far as I can tell, probably nobody in this room ever has or ever will face. And through this book, they got a truth. And by using this truth, they faced it. It's a simple fact of history that taking what they learned in this book, what's right in front of you, what's right in your hands, they were able to go off to the lions and they go off to the arena and to go off to their executions singing and praising God and startling the Romans who watched them. What I'm trying to tell you is don't you tell me that this isn't practical. They faced something far greater than what you're trying to face and they had the same resources that you've got right in front of them. Well, what is it? How does it work? Here's how it works. Christianity is not a spirit to catch. You know, most all modern, the marketable modern philosophies and religions all talk about getting power, but they always get it through a ritual, a rite, or a meditation technique. Let me show you what Jesus gave them. And I'm telling you, you know, I can prove that this works. I can prove that what he's telling us about the new heavens and new earth is practical because it fortified the early Christians in a way that is absolutely remarkable. And we have no excuse if we look at this and then walk out of here saying, how can I face my boss? How can I face my divorce? How can I face the problems of my life? You've got no excuse. It's a simple fact of history. These people picked it up. They walked out. They faced their life. There's no reason why you can't. But how does it work? The Christian comfort works on the basis of truth. Now, this doesn't go down very well with modern people. They want techniques. They want mystical effusions of power through some kind of meditation. says is, I am making everything new. And then what does he say? Write it down. For these words are trustworthy and true. The Bible says, you take truth and you think about the truth and you consider the truth. Look how Paul dealt with his sufferings. He says, I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed to us. There we have it. Right there. Look. How did Paul face the fact that he was lashed? How did Paul face the fact that he was stoned? How did Paul face the fact that his life was in danger all the time? How did he put up with it? It's simple. He considered. Considering is not just an intellectual thing, exactly. What does it mean to consider? He said, I considered that the sufferings of this present time were nothing compared to the glory which is to be revealed. Consider means you weigh it. Yeah, it starts with thinking, but you weigh a truth. You let it get to you. You let it come after you. You let it have its way with you. You let it overwhelm you. Have you ever been in the ocean and a wave comes along and it's so powerful, you lose your feet, it just washes you in. Jesus says, have no anxiety, but consider what I just told you. Are you worried? It's because you're not considering. Can you not face the problems of your life? It's because you're not considering. Christianity works on the basis of truth, which you consider. You screw it into your heart. Write it down, says God. It's trustworthy and true. Look at the truth of it, you see. A Christian reasons things out. He thinks about it, she thinks about it, until the glory of it overwhelms. There is no magic. There is no sit here and wait, oh, Lord, just infuse me with some power so I have the guts to go out there and face my life tomorrow. You've got what you need. Use it. If you're not sure whether you're a Christian or not, let me just say something. If you don't know what you believe about this, just look. Does this look like the opiate of the people? There's nothing more no-nonsense than this. Here's how Christians get comfort. Somebody comes and says, I wish you would give me some breezy words of cheer, some inspiration that make me feel better about life. Look, Christianity is very no-nonsense. Do you believe that Jesus is God? Do you believe that he was born in a manger? Do you believe that he died for your sins? Do you believe he rose triumphant over the grave? That he passed through the heavens? That he defeated death? That now he's sitting at the right hand of the Father, representing us, governing all things for us. Do you believe that he's going to come back and he's going to take us to be his own and he's going to give us a new heavens and new earth? Do you believe that? Is it true? Then you've got something there that can enable you to face anything if you use it, if you think about it. But if it's not true and you have no idea whether there's a judge that will put all things right and you have no idea whether any of these things are true and as far as you know you're going to be fertilized or then you've got no hope. Breezy words of cheer aren't going to cover that over. What do you want? Cosmetics? If the gospel isn't true, if there is no afterlife, if there is no heaven, if there is no God, if there's no new heavens and new earth, you're trapped here. You've got 70, 80 years at best and if anything comes in and hurts your wealth or hurts your health or hurts your happiness, you're done for because you're trapped in this little 60, 70, 80 years. All the happiness you're ever going to have you're going to have to get here. You're trapped in this little lifespan. See, Christianity says are these things true? If so, use the truth and you can face anything. If these things are not true, then what in the world is the use of being a kind of general optimist? What do you want? Breezy? Words of cheer? Paul says the reason I can face tomorrow is I'm considering that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which should be revealed to us. And here, let me say one more thing. before we go to our last point. Christian friends, how do you deal with your troubles? How do you deal with discouragement? Do you jog? I do. It helps. Do you listen to music? I do. That helps. Do you go shopping? If only we could. And those things are ways of getting your mind off of things. But friends, if that's the way, Christians, if that's the main way in which you deal with your troubles, you are squandering your inheritance. You are stamping on it. You've got something here that has enabled your brothers and sisters throughout the centuries a living hope of the glory which shall be revealed that when they compared it, when they considered it, it enabled them to face anything. What is your excuse? Do you see what I'm saying? Do you have this whistling in the dark? Lastly, now the first thing we saw is that God, by nature, is new, and he makes everything new that he touches. Secondly, we see that there's a specific promise that at some time in the future, he's going to renew everything. Give us a new heavens and new earth, and there'll be a new humanity and new bodies and new souls and everything will be wiped clean. And that's the second teaching. The third teaching is this. You know, just to show you the relevance of the third teaching that we get out of the passage, let me ask a question on the basis of what we just saw. Many people say, great, God is new and he's going to make all things new, and on the basis of that you can face everything, but how do you know? How do you know? Many people come to me and say, look, it makes sense. If I could believe that God, at the end of time, is going to make all things new, of course it would be easier for me to face life, but how can you be sure? And the answer is, because the newness of God can begin to flow into your life right now. You can experience it. And because you're experiencing it, it gives you a certainty that what has begun now, you know, you're Christians now drink from the fountain of newness, but it's sort of the lower reaches of the stream. But it tells us something about what the fountainhead is going to be like. See, Jesus says, or the one on the throne says in verse 5, I am making all things new. You see that? But it's not just that he says, I'm going to make things new. He says, I am making things new. And the Bible insists because, I mean, behind this little present progressive verb, behind the present progressive verb, what you've got, is a deep teaching of the scripture that the newness of God is not something that you wait until the future. In other words, put it another way, yes, Christianity promises you pie in the sky by and by, but it's a pie you can start slicing right now. The newness of God can begin to march into your life this very minute. 2 Corinthians 5, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old is gone, the new has come. Now, it begins now, but to who? Look where the person who says, I'm making all things new is sitting, on a throne. You see, there's a lot of ways of characterizing God. God is a shepherd. God is a creator. God is a redeemer. There's lots of ways to characterize God. But it's God as enthroned that says, I'm making all things new. It's from the throne that the newness comes, which means, we've already alluded to this, the newness of God flows into your life now to the degree that you're willing to submit to the lordship of the one who sits on the throne. It's from the throne that it comes. It's from the throne. But it starts now. Look at the characteristics of the new Jerusalem. They actually are characteristics of the Christian life now. Partially, yes. Only, you only get a slice of the pie, but it's here. Say, for example, in the new Jerusalem, verse 3, God will live with us. The new heavens and new earth will have God's dwelling in the middle. But see, John 14, 21 says, Those who obey, those who keep my words and obey them, to them my Father and I will come and will manifest ourselves to them. John 14 says, If you start to obey God now, you don't get just an abstract... Being a Christian is not just an abstract body of ethics and doctrines that you believe. We're told that through our relationship with Jesus Christ, we get a certain newness now, which means we sense the presence of God in us. The difference between a Christian and a religious person is a Christian senses that there is a presence in the center of his or her life. Haven't you seen that? If you're a real Christian, you have a sense that there's a presence in your life. Because just as the new Jerusalem, the total newness of the future is characterized by the dwelling and the presence of God in the center, so the partial newness that's available to a Christian now is a sense of the presence of God. This is very, very practical, very specific. Have you sensed a presence in the middle of your life coming in and turning your life upside down? Do you sense that? Something has come in. Something is remaking you from the inside out. You're surprised at what you're learning. You're surprised at what's happening to you. You're surprised at the way you're changing. You're surprised at the way you're growing. It's turning you upside down. Or is your Christianity characterized by it? Well, of course, I was raised in it, and I've always learned about it. completely predictable? Then you're not experiencing the newness of God at all. You might not be a Christian at all. You might just be a very nice person, a very religious person. I am making all things new. I am making all things new. It happens now. Or look at another characteristic of the New Jerusalem. It says, then there's the sonship. Verse three, God will be theirs. See, they will be my people. I will be their God. That's family talk. In the future, in that new place, we will have a new last name. We'll be members of the family. And yet, of course, John 1.12 says, to those who believe on his name, he gives power to become sons of God now. A Christian is somebody who is loved, knows, has a new identity, a new self-image, a sensation of being adopted into the family. We talk about that all the time. So even though it's total in the future, there's a sense of newness now. Do you have that? Let me close with just two signs of this newness. Two signs. This shows us, this last point shows us that what C.S. Lewis says in his classic, Mere Christianity is right. That Christianity is not so much a matter of niceness, but newness. There's a lot of nice people who are not new. And frankly, there's quite a few renewed people who are not yet very nice. Plenty of people think that Christianity means nice. If you're a Christian, you're nice. If you become a Christian, that means becoming nice. Lewis was right when he says that's not true. God is not after reformation. He's after transformation. He's not after niceness. He's after newness. Let me give you a quick example of the difference. In your attitude toward truth, you can tell the difference between nice and new people. Nice people. To nice people, the truth is something very predictable. They applaud it. They say, of course I believe that. I've always believed these things. I've always believed these doctrines. I've always believed these principles. I've always believed these things. That's the truth. But to new people, the truth is alive. There's a newness about it. I talked about this in the very beginning. Christians, when they start to read the Bible, find to their amazement the things that they've seen for years start to dawn on them as if they've never seen them before. There's a continual newness and it goes on. If you're a Christian for 40 years, every year you can read a verse. If you give it 12 months and come back to that verse, you might know it. You might have taken a test on it. You might have memorized it. You might have learned it in Greek or Hebrew. And a year from now, it will strike you through the heart as if you'd never seen it before. And yet you've seen it many, many times before. How do you explain that? The difference between being a nice person and a new person. Does the Bible do that to you? Does the truth do that to you? There's a philosophy professor at Princeton University. I think he's passed away now. And named Emile Callier, who became a Christian in his college years, or I think in his graduate school years. And he tells a fascinating story about his conversion in a little article called The Book That Understands Me. And he says how, before he was a Christian, he so desperately wanted to create a book that was so full of truth that it would, anytime he opened it up, it would just blast him and inspire him and convict him and so on. And whenever he read a passage anywhere, whether it was in a play or a book of philosophy, he would cut it out and he would copy it into this book. And he said, all the best things, all the things that have most moved me, I've put in this book and now I have a book that understands me. And after he'd been doing this for about a year, he sat down one day to decide he was going to read it all the way through and really get a tremendous, you know, charge. And it was amazing. He was absolutely demoralized as he read through and found that the passages that used to really hit him don't hit him anymore. They'd become old. He changed. And it wasn't until years later when he became a Christian that he suddenly realized the Bible blazed with light. And he said, finally, I found what I'd always looked for, a book that understands me. It's alive. I change and it changes with me. I move, you see. Other human books are sort of like stationary cannons that can only shoot there. And if you just happen to be in front of them, they'll get you. But the Bible moves. The Bible never stops because the truth of God, when it comes into your life through the Holy Spirit, participates in the newness of God. Do you have that newness? One last thing. You can tell the difference between nice and new people, not only in their attitude toward the word of God and truth, but also in their attitude toward the word of God. Thank you. who is thirsty, I will give to drink without cost from the spring of the water of life. He who overcomes will inherit all this, and I will be his God, and he will be my son. But the cowardly, the unbelieving, the vile, the murderers, the sexually immoral, those who practice magic arts, the idolaters, and all liars, their place will be in the fiery lake of burning sulfur. This is the second death. Nice people completely miss the point of that passage. They say, oh, look who's being thrown into the lake of fire. Okay, look at the murderers. Okay, then who will go to heaven? The compassionate. The sexually immoral. Okay, well, who goes to heaven? The moral. Those who practice magic arts, idolaters, then, you know, heretics. So who goes to heaven? The orthodox. The liars. Who goes to heaven? The honest. Well, I'm honest. I'm orthodox. I'm compassionate. Doesn't it make sense? But I missed the whole point. It does say that the people who get thrown into the lake of fire are dishonest and are immoral and are violent. But who is it that gets to heaven? Not the compassionate. Not the honest. No. The thirsty. The thirsty. The people who go to heaven are the ones who say, I am thirsty. Give me to drink from the spring of the water of life without cost. The difference between the nice and the new. The nice people believe in Jesus many times. Or they may not. But the one thing they know is they know that they're good people. The difference between the nice and the new is new people understand that they have not loved their neighbor as themselves. They have not loved God with all their heart, soul, strength, and mind. And so they don't come in pointing to themselves at all. Nice people are never arrogant or they wouldn't be nice. But underneath, nice people believe God owes them something. And as a result, there's an irritability underneath them. They look nice on the outside, but underneath, they're always feeling like God's not being fair to me. He owes me a good life. They're always kind of grumpy. They're always touchy. They're always irritable. They're always afraid that they're not being recognized. Because nice people, whether they believe in Jesus or not, are their own saviors. Don't you see what this is saying? Jesus says, all you need is need. All you need is nothing. But the nice people come with something. The way you can tell the difference between the nice and the new is when things don't go right in their life, nice people get mad at God because they believe God owes them something. They're self-satisfied. New people have had done with it. They've said, the only way that I can possibly be saved is if you give me the water of life without cost. Don't you see the difference in their self-image? Nice people look confident, but underneath, they're very insecure. New people sometimes look unconfident, but underneath, they know that this week they had a bad performance. They don't get down. This week they had a good performance. They know they are what they are by the grace of God alone. Nice people have a completely different attitude toward themselves. They don't get grumpy. They don't get irritable at God all the time. They know that everything that they experience in this life, which is better in hell, is all of his mercy. Don't you see? There's a gratitude that goes through their life. Are you nice or are you new? Is there a reality in the middle of your life that's turning you upside down? Is the presence of God in there? Is the truth of God renovating you? Do you sense his life? Have you come to see that you can only be saved through thirst? All you need is need. All you need is nothing, but most people don't have it. Christians, do you want more newness than you have? Go to the throne. I don't want to insult your intelligence, but you know what it means to go to the throne? That's where the person is who says, I'm making everything new. Going to the throne means obey. Look at areas of your life where you're not obeying. And it also means seek his face and say, Lord, I want more of your presence than I have. Do you see his newness marching through your life? Go to the throne. And if there's anybody here who says, hey, I'm nice. I'm a pretty nice person. Most people think they're pretty nice. Beware. Do you sense God really at work in your life? If not, then you might be a very cold-hearted person. Very hard. And you know, I wouldn't want you to be like the trolls of old, who when the sun came up, they turned to stone. And if you've never prayed the prayer of thirst. Erst. And if not, then you can address it. Stay late. Jesus Christ, I don't know what's going to happen to you. Pray the prayer of thirst now. All you need is need. All you need is nothing. Behold, I am making everything new. Let's pray. Our Father, we want to have your newness, and we also want to know that we're your children. I pray that everybody in this room will live in the new heavens and the new earth by turning toward your throne now and bowing, bowing low, and saying, make me new. Pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen. Amen.
