TITLE: The Beauty of God
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 27:1-14
TOPICS: Art and Beauty Prayer & Meditation Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-beauty-of-god/

============================================================

Right there in your bulletin, you've got printed Psalm 27. Next week, we're going to start a series on the book of Galatians. We're going to tackle it. We're going to go right through it. Tonight, we're going to do a—oh, in some ways, tonight is a very pedestrian sermon. It's pedestrian because it's kind of down-to-earth and practical in spite of the topic, in spite of the title. And there's some things that I just felt like I wanted to say that I didn't think I was going to get to say in the course of the other teaching and preaching for the next few weeks and months. So would you read this with me? Psalm 27. The Lord is my light and my salvation. Whom shall I fear? The Lord is the stronghold of my life. Of whom shall I be afraid? When evil men advance against me to devour my flesh, when my enemies and my foes attack me, they will stumble and fall. Though an army besiege me, my heart will not fear. Though war break out against me, even then I will be confident. One thing I ask of the Lord, this is what I seek, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to gaze upon the beauty of the Lord and to seek him in his temple. For in the day of trouble he will keep me safe in his dwelling. He will hide me in the shelter of his tabernacle and set me high upon a rock. Then my head will be exalted above the enemies who surround me. At his tabernacle will I sacrifice with shouts of joy. I will sing and make music to the Lord. Hear my voice when I call, O Lord. Be merciful to me and answer me. My heart says of you, seek his face. Your face, Lord, I will seek. Do not hide your face from me. Do not turn your servant away in anger. You have been my helper. Do not reject me or forsake me, God, my Savior. Though my mother and father, my father and mother forsake me, the Lord will receive me. Teach me your way, O Lord. Lord, lead me in a straight path because of my oppressors. Do not turn me over to the desire of my foes. For false witnesses rise up against me, breathing out violence. I am still confident of this. I will see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Wait for the Lord. Be strong and take heart. And wait for the Lord. Now, I really wish I hadn't named this sermon The Beauty of God because how in the world could I possibly do justice to the beauty of God? It was stupid. I should have thought of it. There's a lot of other things I could have done to take pressure off myself. Yet, at the heart of this psalm, there is a wonderful verse. This verse, very famous, verse 4. Miles Coverdale, in 1535, made one of the most beautiful translations, wrote one of the most beautiful translations of the psalms into English. It was incorporated into the original Book of Common Prayer in 1549. And, of course, it's antique. But this is the way he puts verse 4. He says, This one thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to seek him in his temple. Now, that's the heart of this psalm, to behold, to gaze on the fair beauty of the Lord. But it's like a jewel in a setting. And we have to look at the setting. Because, actually, if you... Probably, though, that's a beautiful little verse. If you're reading through the psalm, you wouldn't think that the psalm is about the beauty of God. What you would really think the psalm is about is the issue of safety, of the issue of whether or not you will be safe, whether you can have confidence, whether you can trust God to really run your life properly and keep you safe in life. And so, there's a promise here. And it's really an astonishing promise. There's a promise. So, we want to first see what that promise is. Then we want to see how that promise is realized in your life and why it can be realized in your life. What the promise is, how it can be realized in your life, why it can be realized in your life. Number one, what the promise is. The promise is basically given to us. It's embodied for us. It's expressed in verses 1, 2, and 3. And it's really astounding. David says, The Lord is my light of my salvation. Whom shall I fear? Boy. The Lord is the stronghold of my life. Of whom shall I be afraid? Though an army besiege me, my heart will not fear. One of the great things about the psalms is they're so doggone realistic. This is a psalm of David. Someone says, Well, That's the moment. Is that why? And I'm sorry. David's life would this have been a part of? You know, when was this? When did this happen? And the answer is it could have been any time because David is continually in trouble. If you read his life, he's always struggling. He's always wrestling. When he's a young man, before he becomes king, what is he doing? Why? He's out in the wilderness running for his life. He's on the lamb, you know? And as soon as he becomes king, when he's a young king, where do we see him? His enemies, when he becomes king, his enemies come in and they decide they're going to attack him before he gets established. And next thing you know, he has to flee the capital and he's out in the wilderness running for his life. And then he's an old man. Now it's different now. He's an old king. And what do we see? We see his son Absalom doing a coup d'etat. And there's David out in the wilderness running for his life. I mean, he's just like us. He's always in trouble. He's always struggling. It's so amazingly realistic because the Psalms are very surprising in that on the one hand, the Psalms are incredibly pessimistic about life. You know, Ernest Becker, who was a Pulitzer Prize-winning author, died some years ago. He's got this great line in one of his books. He says, I think taking life seriously means that whatever you do must be done in the lived truth of the evil and terror of life, of the rumble of panic underneath everything. Otherwise, it's phony. He must have loved the Psalms because there's always a rumble. The Psalms are... When you read through them, and this summer I had a chance to read through them all, the whole thing, at least once. I got them all once. They're always talking about enemies, always talking about troubles, always calling for help. It's almost tedious. And yet, in spite of the fact that the Psalms have a very realistic view of life, you have a promise here, and that is that God is such a stronghold, that God will keep you so safe if you trust in him, that you should be able to live a life without any kind of fear. You shouldn't be afraid if an army besiege you. David talks about this courage and this confidence and this sense of safety in the most amazing terms in the first three verses. Absolutely amazing. And that's the promise. Now, let's go a little more carefully and ask ourselves, what is that promise exactly? And the reason why we have to be very careful is because when you first read it, it looks like it's saying, if you really trust in the Lord, he will keep you safe. What does that mean? Well, it means that... Look at verse 2. This is the suggestion of verse 2. When my enemies and my foes attack me, they will stumble and fall. Now, there's a number of places. Oh, my goodness. There's a number of places in the Psalms where David is expressing this confidence. This is a psalm of confidence. And he says, God will take care of me. I can trust him. I can live life without any fear at all because he is my stronghold. He is my refuge. He is my light and my salvation. I have nothing to be afraid of. And there are some verses that seem to indicate what that means is nothing really, really bad will happen to you. If you trust in God, nothing really, really, really bad will happen to you. Maybe some bad things, but nothing really, really, really bad. That's how people read it. There are places, of course, where in the Psalms it talks about the fact that a thousand may fall at your right hand, ten thousand may fall at your other hand. It will not come nigh thee. And you take hold of those verses and say yes. Now, it's like the promise in the New Testament version. Romans 8, 28. In Romans 8, 28, you have this great verse people have held on to for years, and that is, all things work together for good to them that love God. And you say, great. If I trust God, all things work together for good. But what you do at that moment, just like we're doing, we have a tendency to do with places like verse 2 and elsewhere, is we tend to read our idea of good, our agenda for our lives, into that. What's your agenda for your life? Well, you don't mind being sick, but you don't want to be crippled. You don't want to be permanently damaged. You don't mind, you know, sort of being alone for a while, but you don't want to be permanently alone. You don't mind being sort of, you know, not happy in your job right now, or unemployed, but you don't want to permanently be, never find a job in which you can express your gifts. See, you don't mind. These are, this is good. I want to be, you know, I want to have a place, I got to have a fulfilled job. I want to have people around me. I want to be alone. I want to be healthy, and so on. So you read, Romans 8, 28, all things work together for good. And you say, aha, good. This means that if I trust in God, nothing permanently bad, nothing really, really, really, That's not what the Bible teaches. That's not what Romans 8, that's not what Paul's teaching, and it's not even what David's teaching. Now, when you read Psalms, you have to remember a very important thing, and that is, you have to remember the principle of progressive revelation. You have to remember that Isaiah and David and Moses and these great saints, these great leaders, these great revealers and teachers of the Old Testament had grip on the same truths as those in the New Testament, but the truths they had, they had them in a more general form. They had them in a more partial form. They had them in a more one-dimensional form. And there are some indications, some places, where it does seem to be talking like that, that David's saying, I have confidence that I will never really, nothing really bad will ever happen. I will never really be defeated, you see. I will never really be brought down. But if you look more carefully, not only at this, other Psalms especially, but even here, look very, very carefully what he means by safety. One place is very simple. Verse 5, for in the day of trouble, he will keep me safe. Notice, it does not say, it's partly because of the way the translation puts it. It'd be clearer if they juxtapose the clauses. It doesn't say, he will keep me safe from the day of trouble. It doesn't say that. It says, he will keep me safe in the day of trouble. It assumes that there's trouble. Not only that, look down a little further. My head will be exalted, or what? Around the enemies who surround me. Now listen, when you're surrounded, you're in trouble. We're not talking about enemies out there. You know, there's enemies and they're plotting, but he will break their teeth. He says, my head will be lifted up. When? Because my enemies are routed. Look at, there they go. And see, in verse 2 kind of gives you that impression. My enemies are stumbling and will fall, then my head will be exalted. But here it says, God will keep me safe. So that when my enemies are all around me, when the trouble is all around me, in the day of trouble, not from the day of trouble, in the midst of my enemies. Even Psalm 23 says that. He prepares a table before me. Where? You know, not after he's made those stupid enemies run off. He's whacked them. They're on the run. No, it's in the presence of my enemies. Have you ever thought about that? There's no promise in Psalm 23 that he will take those enemies and run them away. The promise is that he will prepare a table for you in the presence of the enemies. He doesn't promise the absence of enemies. And even if you go to Romans 8, in Romans 8, 28, it says, all things work together for good to them that love God. You say, well, that means nothing really bad can happen to me. But you see, Romans 8, 29, now we covered this this summer in a morning service. Romans 8, 29, immediately after Romans 8, 28, it says, for we're destined to be conformed into the image of his son. And what that means is, here's the promise, nothing will come into your life but that which realizes the greatness and the nearness and the likeness of Jesus Christ in your life. It doesn't say nothing will come into your life that's really bad. It says nothing will come into your life but that which will realize the greatness, the likeness, and the nearness of Jesus Christ. And the reason why we shouldn't be surprised, we shouldn't say what, is because there was a person who lived on earth who was very, very great and who loved God with all his heart, soul, strength, and mind and who was very used by God and God brought things that were really, really, really, really bad. He never had any friends that understood him. He never got married and had children. He was beaten. He was tortured. He was destroyed. He was killed. He was rejected. Those are really, really bad things. And that was the end of his life. And Jesus says, a servant's not above his master. Safety does not mean safety from trouble. It means safety in trouble. It means that, this is the promise, in the midst of your trouble, all the important parts of you will be utterly safe. All the greatest joys, all the important things, all the things you really care about, all of your highest interests, all of your, all of the things that are the most valuable to you will be absolutely safe. And nothing can be touched in any of the vicissitudes of life but those things which are secondary, those things which are not of the essence of your joy or who you are. That's the promise. Now, if that's the promise, what that means is, it still comes back to the same thing. It means that there is a condition you can be in so that you can move out into the world trusting God and being absolutely fearless, absolutely fearless. about to happen, not afraid of an army comes and besiege me. I will not fear. See, that's the possibility. That's the promise. The promise is you can live in that condition. See, most of us think when you read that, ah, the promise therefore is if I trust God, I really won't have to suffer. That's not it. If I trust God, I will become a great heart. My heart will be strong. I will be afraid of nothing. My heart, my head will be exalted above my enemies who are surrounding me. That's what it promises, okay? Now that's the promise. That's what the promise is. Confidence, utter trust, complete safety in trouble. Well, then of course, you're glad that the sermon's not ending yet, right? You're saying, how could that be? And the second point was, David doesn't just tell us what the promise is, but how it's realized. And here's how it's realized. It's very simple. Right after verses one, two, and three, he explains how it's realized. He says, I'll be safe if I get one thing, not health, not wealth, not friends, not loved ones, not success, not achievement, one thing. Now, see, the secret to this is he has cultivated his heart, so only one thing is important. He has cultivated his heart, so only one thing is important, and he works at that. He says, the one thing I ask of the Lord, this is what I seek, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to gaze upon the beauty, to gaze upon the fair beauty of the Lord, and to seek him in his temple. Now, let's first of all take a look at the fact of this statement, and then we also ought to take a look more at how you do this. How do you gaze on the beauty? He's saying, if you have this, and if you increasingly desire this, you will be utterly safe. Do you know what David's doing here? David was always in trouble. David is one of the most famous leaders in the history of the world, isn't he not? How did he do it? When you think of David, you think of a man, in spite of the most incredible struggles and the most incredible failures, a leader, a courageous leader. He is giving you the structure of courage, the structure of his courage. The structure of his courage, first of all, we looked at in the first point. Basically, you wipe out expectations of an easy life. Wipe them out, or you're going to be continually down in the dumps. Refine your understanding of safety. Yet, realize that it's possible to live a life of this kind of confidence and trust and fearlessness. But then secondly, you've got to learn to gaze on the beauty of the Lord. Now, one thing I should say, first of all, and that is, it's hard for me not to mention this, but you know, over the last three or four years, and those of you who have come to Redeemer a lot know something like about this. It pops up in my teaching. I've been reading more of Jonathan Edwards, who's a great American theologian, and the one thing that he continually brings up, and it's emerging, it strikes me over and over again, and I see it more and more in the scripture. And that is, he says, the difference between a real Christian and just a religious person, the difference between a real regenerate, he would say, a Christian with a regenerated, a renewed heart by the Holy Spirit, the difference between a real regenerated Christian and just a religious person, is that the religious person finds God useful, but the real Christian finds God beautiful. And that's the essence of the difference. In other words, he would say, verse 4 is the very essence of the cry of a real Christian heart. This is the essence. He would say, a Christian and a religious person, you put them together, and they would, they may both be obedient to God. I'm going to go further. They may both be very committed to God, really, really committed to God. I go further. They may both be bowing to God and submitted to God. One step further, they may even be both desperately seeking God. The religious is driven, and the Christian is attracted. That's the difference. Because you see, the religious person may be desperate for God, but the religious person wants what God can give. The religious person, the eye of your heart, has found something so beautiful, and you're going to God to get it. And if God doesn't give it to you, you walk away. Because the thing that is truly beautiful to you, you may be very committed, you may be giving yourself, but the thing that's most beautiful to you in the whole world isn't God himself. And therefore, you see, religious people want God to do things for them. Very upset if he doesn't. But a Christian has been a 21st century. And that's why it's so important to you because Islam got the role of faith in democracy that is such an evil person, and it's something that relationships with a human relationship that exists with Claudia on the earth at all, and in practice is super important to you describe it. And she worries to the un cuidado social event, she wishes that God wantseth for you to communicate what he is and loving you on the earth at all. You see, religious people want God to do things for them, very upset if he doesn't. But a Christian, above everything else, wants only one thing, and that is God himself. When God comes to Abraham, he says, Abraham, I am thy shield, we all want that, but get this, and thy exceedingly great reward. The religious person says, you're my reward. That's it? He says, you're my reward? Well, you know, how about physical safety? How about, you know, just a use for my gifts in my work? How about a happy family? I mean, and God says, I am thy reward. A religious person doesn't get that. He says, no, that's it? You see, a Christian is somebody who says, one thing, the thing I want is you. The thing I find beautiful is you. And you see, to find something beautiful is to say, this isn't a means to anything. This is the thing. If you've ever experienced an incredibly beautiful piece of music, now, you know, it's different for all of us. Is that not true? You know, a certain piece of music will just overwhelm you. You put it on, and you sit, and you listen to it, and what happens? You weep. You're overwhelmed. It washes over you, and you forget everything else. And you, and you sort of like, your beauty sensors just can't take anymore. They just, they're overflowing, you know, they're backed up into the rest of your system. There's nothing else you can do. And, and this isn't a means to anything. This is the thing itself. This is what you live for, to experience the beauty. You don't say, gee, this will be really useful. No. Useful for what? See, there's got to be a bottom line somewhere. There's got to be a bottom line. Everything is useful for something. But at some point, you've got to rest and say, this is it. I'm doing this. I'm doing this to get to what? And for the Christian, God is the ultimate beauty. You know, Edwards, I was just reading one of his sermons, the sermon he wrote when he was 20. In 1 Corinthians 2, 14, which the name of the sermon was on that text, and the name of the sermon is, a spiritual understanding of divine things denied the unregenerate. That's the name of the sermon. Aren't you glad that you've got a minister whose titles are different? A spiritual understanding of divine things denied the unregenerate. And this is a typical passage. He says, he says, the regenerate soul, now the real Christian, sees a beauty and an amiableness and tastes an incomparable sweetness that is altogether hidden from the unregenerate. Unbelievers may know about spiritual beauty by hearsay. They may even be able to make fine speeches about spiritual beauty. But to the regenerate, God has given a glance, and there breaks in upon the soul a heavenly sweetness, such a sense of the amiableness and holiness, and an excellency in God, and a sweet loveliness in Christ, he sees by a new light that was never before let into his mind. That's the difference. A Christian is somebody who actually says, not, I'm in this, I want to pray. You see, here's the difference. A religious person prays and says, I get nothing out of it. God never answers my prayer. But a Christian is somebody who finds praise, far and away, praise and contemplation of God, the far and away, the deepest and most satisfying part of prayer. Do you find that when you repent because you feel so guilty and you want to believe that God has forgiven you, that when you repent or when you petition God, you've got all these things that you're worried about and you need God, you need the sense that God's doing something about them. Do you find that your heart gets real exercised when you petition God and when you repent to God? But praise and thanksgiving is very mechanical. In fact, you know, you might give just a little bit to it. You don't know what it's like. You can't. You never have. Gone on and on and on. It's never happened. You'll never be safe. You'll never be safe. You see what David's doing here? David's saying, I can be safe because by gazing on the beauty and finding God more and more beautiful as my life goes on and finding him to be my reward, enemies can't touch that. They can touch everything else. They can touch my body. They can touch my wealth. They can touch everything else. They can't touch this. And if I have this, I am safe. My head is exalted above mine enemies. Now, I want to just meditate for a second before I go to the very end. And that is the last point is why can we do this? It'll be a brief point. But first of all, let me just say something practical. Gazing on the beauty of the Lord, you say, how do I do that? And if you reflect for a second, this term, by the way, is part of a family of Hebrew verbs that sometimes are translated meditate, sometimes contemplate. But the one thing you have to see is this is not talking just about prayer. You're sitting on the right side. Thank you. we're talking here about a desire to spiritually see God. And David is not talking about a vision. No, he's not saying, I'm going to the temple and I'm hoping to get a vision. What he's really talking about is not less than prayer, but more than prayer. And my suggestion to you would be this. You have to, if you want to gaze on the Lord and see his fair beauty, is you have to, first of all, take information about the Lord. You've got to go to the scripture. You've got to go to truth about the Lord. You don't just sit down and start to pray, oh Lord, you know, do this and do that for me and I praise you for this. You have to, first of all, see, we're out of, after a sight. And a sight is what? When I open my eyes and I see something, it's because there's a reflection that's come to me. It's actually light. I don't really see this exit sign up there. I'm seeing light reflected from the exit sign to my eyes, but that light is bearing information about the size and the shape and the color and all sorts of things. Now, if you want to see God, what you have to do is, first of all, you sit down and you start with the truth. Psalm 1 talks about it and it's not just studying the Bible. It's meditating. Psalm 1 has a great place where it says, the godly man delights in the law of the Lord and it is his meditation day and night. Now, you know, the word meditation used there is a word that is the same as the word for a cow chewing its cud. Isn't that a wonderful metaphor? But that's exactly what meditation is. A cow chews, swallows, and says, I don't know, says, hmm. That was pretty good. And you know, unlike the rest of us, can bring it up and chew it again. Now, the reason that this is a perfectly right metaphor for meditation, first of all, when you meditate on the word of God, you're trying to get the sweetness out of it. You're not just trying to get information. When you meditate on the word of God, you go over and over and over and over and over again and assume that there's all kinds of stuff in there you're not seeing. And when you meditate on the word of God, you are trying to get it into your heart and make it part of you. That's the reason why there is a major difference between informative reading of the scripture and formative reading. In informative reading, you're reading the scripture informatively for information. And when you read the scripture for information, and by the way, you have to do this first, you're reading it to try to understand it. So you, in a sense, you're in control. You get the text, you read the passage, and you ask questions of it. And you say, what does that mean? What does that mean? And you look up things, and you look in a commentary, maybe, or you look in a dictionary, you ask people, and you, you know, and you do cross references, and so on. In other words, you're in charge. You're asking questions of the text. And you have to do that first, because you have to know what the text means. Intellectually, you've got to know. What does it mean? But in formative reading, everything turns around. In formative reading, the Bible text is in charge. The Bible text is examining you. The Bible text is asking you questions. Now, do you know what I'm talking about? You read it slowly. You read it repeatedly. But most of all, you read it in God's presence. This is not prayer, and it's not Bible study. It's something in the middle. I read somebody who said, it's actually the midsection of the pendulum swing of your heart between Bible study and prayer. And what you're doing is you are reading and studying and meditating and thinking very personally about the Scripture in God's presence. What do I mean? When you're reading it, you're saying, I love that about you. Have you ever looked at a really good painting in the presence of the artist? You don't just look at it. You talk about it, and you talk about it to the artist, and you say, what does that mean? Or, I love that. And you see, that's what it means to meditate on the Scripture. Now, when you've meditated on the Scripture, there's a great place in Psalm 39 where it says, I meditated until my heart grew hot within me. Now, the whole purpose of meditation, if you're willing to move away from just Bible study into meditation, if you're willing to do formative reading, if you're willing to get the sweetness, if you're willing to talk to God as you're studying and as you're reading a text very, very slowly, eventually what begins to happen is your heart begins to get hot, and then you turn and you pray. But here's what I suggest. can't show you all the verses on this, but at least three different people have read this in the last two years, that there's really three forms of beauty. There's three ways in which God is beautiful. There's the beauty of His majesty, His power, His might, His greatness, His sovereignty, His splendor. There's the beauty of His wisdom, His artistry, His balance, His design. And there's the beauty of His grace, His delicacy, His patience, His mercy, His loveliness. Look at that text and read that text and say, in what way am I seeing the beauty of the Lord here? And after you've meditated on it until your heart is hot, turn to Him and start telling Him what He's like. Haven't you ever been in love? Haven't you ever been in love? You tell the other person what's so great about them. And the irony of it is, or the paradox of it, or the beauty of it, is the more you tell, the more you express the beauty, the more you actually see it. The more you say it, the more you taste it. And this is something that David actually says he dwells in the Lord. He dwells in the temple to do that. He's doing it all the time, continually. He's working at it and pushing at it. And actually, he's also doing another thing. If you look carefully, in some ways, if you want to know something about the meditation, I would say verse 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 is a lot of meditation in it. And I'll give you a perfect example of this. If you fear, are you being afraid? Are you feeling afraid? Are you feeling uncourageous? Are you feeling a lack of confidence? Gaze on the beauty of the Lord, and here's how he does it. Look at verse 10. Here's one example. He says, though my mother and father forsake me, the Lord will receive me. What is he doing? You remember what verse 1 says? The Lord is my light and my salvation. Whom shall I fear? If you're afraid, there's something more beautiful than Jesus. Simple as that. There's something, there's more light coming from something else. There's something else more beautiful to you. There's something else that your soul is gazing on. If you think what I've just said sounds very, very weird to contemplate and to sort of gaze at and to think about the beauty and then tell him about the beauty, I want you to know that you're doing it about something, you are definitely doing it. Archibald, not Archibald, Archbishop William Temple had a great little statement where he said, if you want to know what your real God is, see where your mind goes when you don't have anything else to think about. That's why he said, well, that's a paraphrase. What he really said is, your real religion is what you do with your solitude. What do you do with your solitude? Do you think of that little house you hope to have sometime on the beach, on the mountains? Is that what you think? Don't you know what you're doing? You're adoring. You're gazing on the beauty. You're doing it already. That's the reason why you're afraid. You're afraid because something besides Jesus is your light and your salvation. And what does he do? He takes the bull by the horns and he says, my mother and father may forsake me, but I'm getting ready for that. I'm not going to sit around saying, oh my gosh, my mother and father forsake me. I'm a victim. I'm screwed up now. The rest of my life, I'll never be able to, I can't, I won't be able to love myself anymore. What does he say? I'm getting ready. I'm getting ready because I am contemplating the reception of the Lord, the welcome of the Lord, the love of the Lord. Until I can handle anything at all, I will be utterly safe. You notice he's, he struggles. He's a human being. Haven't you seen this? Verse seven down to verse 14. It doesn't seem at all his confidence, the first six verses. You ever notice that? The first six verses, he's really doing well. The last eight verses, he's, he's got to get back on. He's fallen off the horse and he's trying to get back on. You see that? My heart says of you, seek his face. I am seeking. Don't turn your face from me. What's he doing? I'm after you, but where are you? You see, he's not having a good day at gazing. He's done, he's spent a lot of time and God's just not there. You see, don't turn me over to the desire of my foes. Well, I am still confident in this. I will see the goodness of the Lord. Wait for the Lord. Be strong. He's getting, you know, he struggles. You're going to struggle. Why does this work? Why is this work? I'll tell you why. God does not promise that you will not suffer, but he does promise one thing. There's only one thing he will never take from you. He will never take himself from you. He will never turn his back on you. He will never say, whoops, you finally sinned one time. How many times have you done that? That's it. How many times have you promised me? That's that. he'll never do it? You know why you can be confident that whether you feel him today or you don't feel him, even though you're seeking him, that he will never cast you off, that he will receive you, that he will eventually, that he will not turn his face from you. Because Jesus lost the one thing. You realize that? Jesus lost the one thing. Jesus wanted only one thing in his life because he was a perfect man of God, and he only wanted one thing. And on the cross, even in the Garden of Gethsemane, he turned and he said, I seek your face, and he got, what did he get? He got the back of God's hand. He's the only person who has ever happened to and ever will happen again. Somebody who said, I seek your face, and God gave him the back of his hand. Why? So that when we seek his face, we'll never get the back of his hand, even though we fall down, even though we fail. That's the reason why you can say, though an army besiege me, I will not fear because I know I've got the one thing. I'll have the one thing. I'm getting the one thing that will never be taken from me. Because Jesus lost it, you got it. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for showing us the structure of courage, and we pray that you'd help us to gaze on the fair beauty of the Lord, which is more than just reading the Bible and saying your prayers. And we pray that you would help us to see this. Lord, a lot of us get nervous. I get nervous when I talk about the fact that a delight in the beauty of God is the real hallmark, unique hallmark of a real Christian. I worry, because so often I wonder, do I find you beautiful for who you are in yourself? And yet I know that even the desire I have, the desire that so many of us felt tonight as we talked about the beauty of God, the dryness and the pain that we feel about the absence of your face proves that we passionately desire that face. We ask that you would speak to our hearts. Our hearts say, we seek your face as the one thing, and we know that you will show us your face. Because you turned your face from your son, so that you could turn your face toward us. You made him sin, who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. So thank you that we can come to you confidently asking for this one thing, and we know that everyone who makes that request will get it. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
