TITLE: The God Who Reconciles Sinners
SCRIPTURE: Hebrews 9:11-14, 22-26
TOPICS: Sin Atonement Redemption
SERIES: To Know the Living God; The God Who Makes Alive
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-god-who-reconciles-sinners/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture comes from the book of Hebrews, chapter 9, only 11 through 14, only verses 11 through 14. But when Christ appeared as a high priest of the good things that have come, then through the greater and more perfect tent, not made with hands, that is, not of this creation, he entered once for all into the holy places, not by means of the blood of goats and calves, but by means of his own blood, thus securing an eternal redemption. For if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of defiled persons with the ashes of a heifer sanctify for the purification of the flesh, how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify our conscience from dead works to serve the living God. This is the word of the Lord. Each week we're looking at one of the attributes of God, but this week, the week of Good Friday and Maundy Thursday, this is a week that we should look at the cross of Jesus and ask, what does that tell us about God? And the answer is, he's a God who reconciles sinners. Verses 11 to 14 is a very simple, it's an a fortiori argument. See, in verse 13, it says, if this is true, in verse 14, how much more would that be true? That's the argument, a very simple argument. And yet the message is deeper than the universe. Take a look at this, these four verses, working backwards from 14 up to 11, and we'll notice first, the more visible, but lesser problem, the less visible, but greater problem, and the great solution to them all. First of all, in verse 14, we see a more visible, but lesser problem. Well, it says, it talks about the fact that we need to have our consciences purified. It says purified from dead works, and it's a term that could mean either sins, works that lead to death, or it could mean religious works by which we're trying to deal with our guilt. But either way, the point is that we have a problem with our conscience. Our consciences are bad. They're dirty. They need to be purified. They need to be cleansed. Now, where does guilt and shame come from? And you might be surprised when I turn to Sigmund Freud on that. Because in Freud's book, Civilization and Its Discontents, he actually makes a point that as far as it goes, very much fits in with what the Bible says. Freud says in that book that human nature is naturally egocentric. And that if human nature was unchecked, if we simply did what our egos wanted, we'd all be out there wanting things, and we'd want the same things. We'd be fighting, and we'd be killing each other. And Freud then says, conscience is guilt over selfish and aggressive behavior. Conscience, guilt restrains egocentric behavior, without which you couldn't have a civilization at all. Guilt, he says, is the price you pay to have civilization. If it wasn't for that, human nature would just run rampant. But then, he says, and he's still right here. I wouldn't be telling you about it. He says, this creates an enormous problem for human beings. And what is that? And that is that guilt is very, very deep, and it permeates everything. The title of his book, Civilization and its Discontents, the word discontents doesn't get across in English the power of the German word, which is unbehagen. And it means a malaise. It means a hard to define, but very real and strong uneasiness. It means dissatisfaction with yourself and with everything. It means anxiousness, maybe even boredom. And he goes on and says, people try to explain this, this malaise that modern people have. And if things aren't right, I don't like things. Why am I not more, why am I not different? Why isn't life better? He says, some people say it's politics. The problem is we live in oppressive societies. We've got to do something about it. Some people think it's my parents, they didn't love me right. But Freud says, even though most of the time it's not conscious, what's really eating us is guilt. And he says, sometimes it's very overt. There's something you feel bad about. You've done something wrong. guilt is covert. It just, it shows itself as a kind of uneasiness about yourself. Like, I'm not right or I haven't been what I should be. It's much more covert. And he says, people who say, you can't make me feel guilty. Nobody makes me feel guilty. I decide what is right or wrong for me. You can't make me feel guilty. But he says, if you think you can deal with guilt like that, you're a fool. Because guilt pervades our lives. Guilt is over and under around us. Guilt hides itself. Guilt shifts its shape. It changes its shape. It's everywhere in your life. Now, some of you may say, whoa, gee. That's Freud and that was years ago. And life is very different now. He was dealing with people who lived in a traditional society. We're in traditional societies. And they were filled with guilt because they had, you know, they had all this put on them. But we live more and more in a society that says truth and right and wrong is culturally relative. And you have to decide what is right or wrong for you. And we are more and more guilt free. No, we're not. He was right. Franz Kafka, for example, again, another famous name, in his diary says this. The state in which we find ourselves is sinful, independent of guilt. Sinful, independent of guilt. What's that mean? What he's saying is we live in a world in which everybody says we're not guilty. Everybody says nobody can say who's, what is right or wrong. We don't believe in sin anymore. We don't believe in moral law anymore. We don't believe in a God who punishes anymore. So we're relativistic, you might say. And we don't believe in these things. And yet we still feel there's something wrong with us. We still feel that we're not what we should be. We still have a sense of condemnation. See, the overt guilt, where you're like Lady Macbeth, walking around, out damn spot. I've done something wrong in my past and I can't forget. I can't live with it. And, you know, she couldn't get what she looked to her like. She had blood on her hands and she couldn't get it off. That's overt guilt. But here's covert guilt. So, why is it that some of you, many of you, work too hard? You work and work and work and work. And you always say, if I can just get to this level, then I'll lay off. Then I'll finally cut back. And you never do. Why is it that some of you are exhausted helping everybody? Exhausted and you do not set up boundaries for yourself. And you can't. Why is it that some of you can never confront, even though you should? And why is it that some of you are always confronting, even though you shouldn't? Because of your self-righteousness. Why is it that some of you are so afraid of letting anybody see what you're really like that you can't commit? Why is it that some of you are so concerned about your looks that even gaining a little weight and you're devastated? This is covert guilt. This is a sense that there's something wrong with me and I've got to do something about it. You call it complexes. You call it psychology. You call it sociology. We don't believe in God. We don't believe in morality. We don't believe in sin and judgment. And yet there's a voice in us that says, you're wrong. You're bad. Something's wrong with you. We still have a sense of condemnation. We need, more than anything else, consciences that are good, that are not defiled. We need a pure conscience. Now, having said that, and having said this is an enormous problem for human beings, both the covert and the overt, people who really walk around feeling guilty and people who just walk around with covert guilt just feeling like I'm not what I ought to be. And it's shaping our lives. Believe it or not, didn't I just say, this was the more visible and lesser problem. This is the lesser problem. There's a greater problem here. Where's that? You say, what could be greater than that? Well, it's in verse 13. Working ourself back up. Let me read that to you. For if the blood of goats and bulls and the sprinkling of defiled persons with the ashes of a heifer sanctify for the purification of the flesh. Now, some of you are feeling very uncomfortable. You know why? Many of you decided over the years, I'm going to read the Bible all the way through. And you start off maybe January 1, reading up chapter a day, resolute to read the Bible through. But I can tell you where it stopped. You died in Leviticus. It would have been about the 60th or 61st day. Maybe you got to Leviticus 6 or 7. You always die by the time you get to 8. And oh my goodness, this is all Leviticus. It is. Why? And I'll tell you. Let me tell you why you die in Leviticus. It's, it's. all about being cleansed. It's all about defiled persons that need to be sprinkled and need to be cleansed in various ways. And it has to do with the flesh, the purification of the flesh, which is the body. The thing that is so strange about Old Testament worship, the tabernacle worship, where there was all these incredible rules, uh, uh, without which you could not go in and worship because if you broke any of the rules, you were defiled, but they were mainly physical. I mean, the Mosaic law, for example, says you couldn't worship if you touched anything dead. You know, you could go worship later. You had to be cleansed and purified. You couldn't go into worship if you had any infectious skin diseases like boils or sores or rashes. You couldn't go into worship if you'd had contact with mildew. If, if there was mildew found on your clothing or in your home on the side of the wall, or, uh, if it was in the, uh, your, the articles that you cooked with or something like that, you couldn't go into worship. You couldn't go into worship. If, um, you, uh, had any bodily discharge, diarrhea, hemorrhage, anything like that. And of course there were all the unclean foods. What was all that about in the Old Testament? Everything was about ceremonial cleanliness. You had to be utterly clean, no dirt, no discharge, no infection. You had to be utterly clean or you physically, or you couldn't go into worship. Why? Well, it was a symbol, of course. Symbol of what? Symbol of something very important. And let me, let's, let's just talk about this for a second. Why is cleanliness so important? Why is it that if you find feces or pus on your clothes, you change? You don't go out. You know, what if you go in the office? Oh, there's feces and pus on your clothes. Well, yeah, but I didn't think I had a change. Why is it if you're going to, uh, any kind of important appointment, you do all the mouthwash and deodorant. In fact, you go up to people, you know, and you breathe and you go, am I all right? You know why? Because you know what it's like to have somebody standing and talking to you who smells horrible, utterly horrible. What's the problem? Dirt, stench, you know, body odor, feces, infections, pus, all this stuff is relationally repugnant. You, if you're talking with somebody who looks or smells horrible, you might smile weakly and you just, you're viscerally just wanting to run away. And you do as soon as you possibly can. You see the symbolism when we are sinful and self-centered, radically egocentric, as Freud says, how does God see that? He's repulsed by it. Just like you are repulsed by physical uncleanness. And that means that we do not have just one problem. We've got two problems. We don't just have subjective guilt. We have objective guilt. Sin in your life doesn't just mean that you feel guilty. It means you are guilty. And it means not only that we have to be reconciled to God, but God has to be reconciled to us because we're unfit for the presence of a holy God. That he is repulsed by us because of what he can see and what he can smell. It's all spiritual, of course. But if you think there's something wrong with God, then there's something wrong with you because this is the way you are when it comes to the physical uncleanness. The physical uncleanness in the Old Testament worship was trying to get across the fact that there's a spiritual uncleanness that we have to deal with. And now, how does modern, how does modern culture deal with the fact that we don't just have subjective guilt? We have objective guilt. That's what the Bible says. It's not just that we feel guilty. We are guilty. How does modern culture deal with that? Well, here's where Freud and the Bible part ways. And actually, where Freud, in spite of being very passe in many ways in the therapy world today, he actually, though, in this one regard, brought about a revolution. And the whole culture has pretty much followed him. And this is what he did. One person who was summarizing Freud's approach says this, as the commentator on Freud says, Freud remained, pardon me, Freud renamed conscience super ego. And he refrained from rendering any judgment as to whether the guilty feelings ordained by those super egos had any moral justification. In other words, he sought to release the patient from guilt's crushing hold by setting aside guilt's moral significance and designating it as just another psychological phenomenon. Now, this is something now that completely permeates our entire culture. What Freud said is you may have feelings of guilt, but you're not actually guilty. Guilt is a psychological phenomenon. actually guilty or not, of course, you're not judgmental. See, Freud says, oh, I'm not going to judge you on this. I'm just going to talk with you about this. You may feel guilty, but you have to decide what is right or wrong for you. See, what the commentator was saying is Freud tried to detach the conscience from any moral justification. You feel guilty, but that doesn't mean you are guilty. We're going to help you work through your feelings. And the whole culture believes that. You may feel guilty, but you are not guilty. There's subjective guilt, but there's not objective guilt. But I want to tell you right now that it doesn't work to do that. It doesn't work at all. Let me show you two ways it doesn't work. First of all, it doesn't work for the people around you. If you're on the couch, and you're feeling guilty about things you've done, and you're told, well, you know, you might feel guilty, but you have to decide what is right or wrong for you. You have subjective guilt, but there's not really objective guilt. You have to decide what is right or wrong for you. What about the people you wronged? That's great for you. But what about the spouse you may have lied to and betrayed? What about the business partner you may have exploited and ruined? What about the parents of the teenager you may have killed because of your drunk driving? Tell them that there's subjective guilt but not objective guilt. You may feel guilty, but it doesn't mean he really is guilty. And they're going to smack you. And they're going to say, what kind of world? I don't want to live in a world like that, where all guilt is subjective and not objective. He says, no, he's really guilty for what he did. The idea that there's subjective guilt, not objective guilt, doesn't work at all for the people around you. But I want you to see for a second, it doesn't even work inside your own heart. It doesn't even work for you. Because if you're struggling either with a covert guilt, which is just a general feeling like I'm not living like I should, I'm not being the person I should, or, you know, overt guilt. But unless you can make a very important distinction, you're cooked. And let me tell you what that distinction is. Let me give you my definition of a conscience. A conscience is a little internal law and order apparatus. Have you ever seen the TV shows, Law and Order? You've got, you know, you always have the police and you have the judiciary. The police and the judiciary. Now, every society has some version of those two things. You know, you've got the law enforcement and then you've got the judiciary and so on. And lawyers and judges, et cetera. But now, what is the law and order apparatus? The law and order apparatus in every society, once you're accused of something, chases you and punishes you until one of two things happens. They chase you, it chases you and punishes you until one of two things happen. One is, either you are found not guilty. It's the charges are found to be false. Or, you complete your punishment. It will chase you, it will punish you until you are either found not guilty or you complete your punishment. And a conscience is a little internal law and order apparatus that chases you and punishes you until either the thing you're feeling guilty about is judged of false guilt or it's true guilt, in which case you have to repent and make amends. And I want you to know that your little internal conscience will only, only respond to a ruling. See, if you try to tell yourself, and this is where Freud was right, if you just try to say, Oh, look, look, you know, don't feel guilty. You know, I'm feeling guilty, but I have to decide what is right or wrong for me. But you know that if somebody wronged you, and they talked to themselves like that, you'd smack them. And you know that. And therefore, you're waiting for somebody from the outside to tell you whether you're truly guilty or not. And you know what our problem is? Franz Kafka said, we live in a world that says, oh, you have to decide what is right or wrong for you. So we don't live with any moral absolutes anymore. We live in a relativistic culture, and yet our consciences are waiting to know, is the guilt I feel true or false? And so we're stuck. But now let's bring God in. And I know you've heard that when you bring God in, oh, that makes guilt worse. No. When you bring God in, you've got a way forward. It's liberating. Let me show you. Let's bring God in. The God of the Bible. The God who reveals himself in the Bible. And now let's say you've got guilt. Well, let's judge whether or not your guilt is true or false. Let's just say you were raised by parents who said you... And you have not been successful, and you have not made money. And you feel guilty. You feel like a failure. All right? Now, this is New York City. I'm sure there's nobody here like that. But I just thought I'd use the illustration anyway. So let's go to God. Let's go to the God of the Bible. In the Bible, are men and women judged by how successful they are? No, they're judged by their character. And once you see that, you can turn to your conscience. And with all the authority of the Word of God, you can tell it to shut up. Shut up. With all the authority of the Word of God, you're able to come and say, this is a false accusation. The conscience is out of whack. And you can correct it. You can say, shut up. But what if you're feeling guilty because you did double dealing on your business partner, and you said you were going to do one thing, and you did this, and you exploited your business partner, and your partner's really angry? Let's go to the Word of God. Is robbery and embezzling and lying wrong? Yes. This is true guilt. And you must bear the burden before you can get rid of it. It's just like a log. It's just like a burden. In other words, if you pick up a log and you put half of it on your shoulder, and then you try to throw it off, it'll probably just whack you. You got to lift the whole thing up and bear the whole burden before you can get rid of it. And what you have to do is you have to assume this is true guilt, and you have to take responsibility for it, and then repent, make amends, and get forgiveness, which you'll get to in one second. But don't you see, when you bring God in, and only when you bring God in, you can make the distinction between false guilt and true guilt, and it's the only way you're ever going to deal with that little internal law and order apparatus, your conscience. And so we see we've got two problems, not one. We don't just have feelings of guilt. We have actual guilt. We don't just have the subjective guilt. We feel bad about ourselves, but we have objects of guilt. God is offended. God is repulsed by our sin, just like we are repulsed by uncleanness. And therefore, we not only need to deal with the conscience, our own consciences, but we also have to deal with our actual guilt. Something has to be done to pay for that. Something has to be done to make amends for that. And I've already showed you what you can do if you find with God that your guilt is false. But you say, what happens if the guilt's true? Now, what are we supposed to do about that? Point three, the great solution to all of this, to both our objective and subjective problem, to the fact that we have to be reconciled to God, and God has to be reconciled to us, and that's in verses 11 and 12. And what we have here, this great solution to the big problem that human beings have, conscience, overt and covert guilt, is in verse 11 and 12. And I want to show you two things, that this solution is massively theological and powerfully personal. Massively theological, powerfully personal. First of all, massively theological. What do I mean by that? Well, first, verse 11, but when Christ appeared, he was a great high priest. Right away, we see something. We got a problem, we said, both on God's side and our side, right? Subject of guilt, that's our side. Object of guilt, that's God's side. So we're going to need somebody who's both God and human. And we do. The high priest is a mediator. And of course, every other high priest before now was fully human and close to God. But here's the first mediator, the first high priest, who is fully human and fully God. But what we're told here is that when Christ appeared as a high priest, he went into not the earthly tent, but what the earthly tent pointed to. And he entered once for all into the holy place, not the holy place on earth, but what the holy place pointed to, which is the presence of God. And not by means of the blood of goats and calves, but by means of his own blood, he secured an eternal redemption. Now, what that is, when it says goats and calves, it's talking about Yom Kippur. It's talking about Leviticus 16, that chapter you never got to. It's talking about the day of atonement. And when you talk about the high priest on the day of atonement, let me tell you what happened. According to the book of Leviticus, it happened every year, every year, every year until Jesus came. The high priest was the only person that could go before God. The only one who could stand before God, go into the holy of holies and make atonement once a year with a blood sacrifice for the sins of the people. One week before Yom Kippur, the high priest just went into seclusion. He went into seclusion because it was important that he not touch anybody who touched anything wrong. And that entire week he fasted and prayed to purify his heart. he prayed all night stayed up all night to pray and the people were praying for him and during that time that last day he washes three times and they dress him over and over again clean white linen beautiful costly and completely clean garments and when he finally walks back with all the prayers of the people cleansed over and over and over again praying all night praying and fasting completely beautifully dressed he goes back and he makes atonement for the sins of the people that's what happened on yom kippur that's what the high priest did on the day that he took the blood of goats and calves and atoned for the sins of the people now you know why zechariah the prophet in chapter 3 of zechariah was so shocked by the vision he had in zechariah chapter 3 he has a vision and it's the vision of his high priest at the time joshua and the chapter 3 verse 1 of zechariah says and i he showed me joshua the high priest standing before the lord that's the high priest on the day of yom kippur because he's standing before the lord but then zechariah was thunderstruck to see this he says but joshua was dressed in garments covered in excrement and zechariah is appalled how could any high priest get on the day of yom kippur into the presence of god with any dirt on it even you know even lint for crying out loud how in the world was it possible that he would get back in there with excrement how could he have gone through all that all the washings all the ablutions you know all the praying all the the dressing and redressing how could that have happened and the only possible answer is that god is giving zechariah a vision of what you and i look like in his eyes no matter how hard we wash no matter how hard we try to atone for our past no matter how hard we try to get the damn spot out we still look like that our egocentrism our self-centeredness our sinfulness and so zechariah was sure that of course fire would come out from the lord and joshua would be would be you know completely uh uh uh demolished and and consumed which by the way happened at other points in history but that's not what happens in the vision he's just as shocked to hear the lord say this and but the lord said take off his filthy clothes see i will take your sin off you so i can clothe you in costly garments and then god went on and said i am going to bring my servant the branch and he will remove the sin of this land in a single day what well of course it's a prophecy prophecy and zechariah is a prophet and it was a prophecy what kind of prophecy is very crazy it's god saying listen you know how every year you have to go back over and over and over and over again and you have to keep on doing these sacrifices over and over and over again in the future i will bring my servant whoever that is the branch whoever that is and he is going to clothe you and he is going to make you clean and he's going to take away your sin in a single day in a stroke when did that happen centuries after zechariah's vision there was another yeshua who came you know joshua yeshua jesus same word jesus came and he was standing as our high priest on the night before he died but nobody knew it he prayed the night before he was betrayed before he went and god turned his back on him he remember we talked about this last week jesus sanctified himself for our sake he set himself apart to die for us and everybody betrayed him and everybody abandoned him nobody prayed for him nobody supported him and he wasn't clothed in beautiful garments and linen he was stripped naked and he wasn't bathed except in human spit what was he doing on the cross he was getting our filth so that we could get his righteousness he was securing for us an eternal redemption how he didn't bring in the blood of calves and goats but rather the blood of christ who through the eternal spirit offered himself without blemish to god purifies our conscience from dead works to serve the living god this is the reason why all through the bible you've got metaphors like this in the very end revelation 19 it's talking about the marriage of jesus to his church that's us and here's what it says let us rejoice and be glad it's revelation 19 for the wedding has come and his bride is to be made ready and his bride is to be made ready and his bride is to be made ready and his bride is to be made ready and his bride is to be made ready and his bride is to be made ready to his church. That's us. And here's what it says. Let us rejoice and be glad. It's Revelation 19. For the wedding has come, and his bride is to be made ready. Fine linen, bright and clean, is given to her to wear. That's us. And Paul says in Philippians 3, that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but the righteousness that comes from God and is by faith. Your heart may condemn you, but Jesus Christ, our high priest, is greater than your hearts. Listen, all of our lives are being distorted by either overt or covert guilt, and this is the only solution. This is the great solution. This is the infinite solution. Let me finish by just pressing home how personally powerful this is, if you grasp it. Do you remember Peter and Judas? During this week, Good Friday, Maundy, Thursday, you're probably going to read personally or hear read to you the stories of how Jesus died and was betrayed. Judas betrayed Jesus. Peter denied, betrayed Jesus, right? Because Peter and what Judas did, Jesus died. They abandoned him. He betrayed him. And therefore, their consciences were horrible. Their consciences were roaring like lions. What happened to Judas? He killed himself. Couldn't take it. What happened to Peter? Oh, he became one of the greatest leaders in the history of the world. Hmm. Why the difference? Weren't they both just wracked with guilt? Overt and covert guilt was made overt. Yes, but the secret is in Luke 22, before Peter even did his denial, Jesus looked at him and says, Simon, Simon, Satan wanted to have you. He wanted to sift you like wheat. But I have prayed for you. And when you turn, strengthen the brethren. I've prayed for you. What's that mean? I'm your high priest. I'm your intercessor. Peter had a high priest. That's why he got through it. That's why he became greater, because he got through that. The guilt was put aside. That's why Jesus says, I'm your high priest. You're really, Satan's going to want to put you through the thresher, put you through the shedder, but I'm your high priest. And not if you turn, but when you turn, strengthen the brethren. Paul knew he was killing people. You know, he was a religious zealot, but at some point it came home how horrible he'd been. And in Romans 7, it says, the law came and I died. He fell under great conviction of sin. His consciousness was killing him. Yet by the time you get to Romans 8, 1, he says, but now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Where does he get that? I was just thinking in the last couple of weeks, if you go online and you put in Cate Blanchett, Heaven, 2002, there's a clip in there of a woman who thinks she's killed a terrorist, thinks she's killed a drug dealer with a bomb, finding out that she's killed children. And one of the great acting moments I've ever seen on screen, she collapses. When she hears about it, you look at that thing. What an amazing job. She collapses. She disintegrates. Her conscience starts to roar. And all during the rest of the movie, it never stops. She says over and over again, I can't live with what I've done. I can't live with what I've done. Okay. Here's Paul did the same stuff. And he says, there's no condemnation. What's the difference? You go to Romans eight, a little further in that chapter. And he says, who shall bring a charge against me? God justifies Jesus Christ died. Rather he's risen and he's standing at the right hand of God, interceding for us. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? I've got a high priest. He says, I've got a high priest. The black bull of Norway is a Scottish fairy tale. And it's about a handsome prince in a kingdom who does battle and does some things wrong. And he gets some blood on his shirt and the stain won't come out. You know what that represents. And so what he says to all the young women in his kingdom, the woman who can get this stain out of this shirt is my true love and should be my bride and my queen. And so all the, the story is all about how all the women in the, in the kingdom, all the young women in the kingdom try and try and they can't get the blood out. And there's one little poor servant girl who does. And the story is a fascinating story. And you can look it up online, the black bull of Norway. But here's the point. Jesus is a lover of your soul and he can redeem your past. And he can take, he can, he can cleanse your heart of any stain, all those spots. Everybody in this room is changed, is, is being affected by overt or covert guilt. And Jesus Christ, our great high priest is greater than any sense of condemnation you have. and let it change you. Let us pray. Our Father, we thank you that you've given us this wonderful antidote for this horrible problem that we have, overt and covert guilt. And we thank you that Jesus did not only secure a remedy for our subject of guilt, but he turned aside and satisfied our object of guilt. He paid the penalty. He took the punishment we deserve. And so now you are reconciled to us and we can be reconciled to you. Make us people who no longer are working too hard, opening up too much, opening up too little, deeply anxious about who we are. Give us the confidence and the humility and the strength to be not Judas's, but Peter's, because we have our great high priest, Jesus Christ. It's in his name we pray. Amen.
