TITLE: The Secret Self
SCRIPTURE: John 2:18-25
TOPICS: Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-secret-self/

============================================================

Now, while he was in Jerusalem at the Passover feast, many people saw the miraculous signs he was doing and believed in his name. But Jesus would not entrust himself to them, for he knew all men. He did not need man's testimony about man, for he knew what was in a man. Here ends the reading of God's holy word. Now, this passage is about trust. It's about who we do trust, what we do trust, who we should trust. Now, the main thing you learn and strikes you from this passage right away is that Jesus Christ trusted nobody. Now, is that the kind of thing you would think about Jesus if somebody asked you about him? And you say, what was this Jesus Christ like? Would you say, well, one thing is he trusted nobody. Is that what you'd say? It says here, of course, that he didn't trust these particular people in front of him, but he says that he couldn't trust those people because he knew what was in every human heart. He knew what was in all men. And that means Jesus trusted no one. And here we go again. What is it with him? You see, on the other hand, you see him being so tender and affirming to people, to children, to women and men who are considered outcasts. He was so affirming. He took people who felt worthless and he made them feel valuable, treasured, cherished, honored. He made people, when he talked with them, he made people feel expensive. And they were. They were costly. What it would cost Jesus to have them, he was willing to pay. So, of course, he treats them valuable, just like you would treat something that was extremely expensive, that it cost you so much. He would treat people like this, and yet, how in the world could it be said he trusted no one? And what we have, again, is a case, Jesus Christ is not schizophrenic, just like we said last week. Jesus Christ is perfect, like we said last week. He's not like anybody you know. He's not like you. He's not like me. He's not like anyone we've ever seen before. And that's the reason he's always surprising us. These are the surprises of perfection. What we have here is, he's a man who is all made of love. He's made of it. Deeply affirming, and yet without one shred of unrealistic sentimentality. This is love without any sentimentality. No way, when Jesus is in love, is the wool pulled over his eyes. You know, Shirley MacLaine says, everybody is God, everybody. We all have a spark of God in each one of us. Down deep, we have to find out how wonderful we are. And this is the exact opposite kind of contrast here. You have Jesus Christ saying, on the outside, he looked at the people at Passover, all the people that believed in him because of his miraculous signs. And on the outside, it looked like they were very pleasant and open to him. But he looked inside, and instead of seeing a little bit of spark of God, he saw something that was rotten. And as a result, he trusted no one. You see how utterly different that is? Than to say, down deep, we're all pretty good. And he says, down deep, no. He says, I look into the heart of every human being. I know what's down there, and I don't trust it. You see, a house might look good on the outside. First time I bought a house, God was just very gracious to me. I bought a house, and I didn't know how to check a house out. Unfortunately, it was structurally sound. But a person who's trying to assess a house needs to go downstairs. Go down in the basement. That's where you can see whether the structure is all right. Whether the framework is all right. You can see whether there's stuff growing down there. You can see there's a lot of smells in the basement. Things can look great on the outside, but underneath there could be some real trouble. You might get water in the basement, like in the houses in the area of Philadelphia that we bought a house. It looked great until it rained. There's problems down there. Jesus says, on the outside I see a lot of good things, but I know what your basement is like. Now, he comes to us, and he's telling us this, not because he just likes to prick our balloons, but instead he says, I love you, and therefore I want you to know that I don't trust you. And if you are as wise as I am, in fact, he says here, if you want to be saved, you better not trust you either. That's the message. Now, there's a couple ways in which we can divide our text up. You see, the text basically is teaching this. One, that on the outside people can look... the Passover feast who believed in him because of the miracles. But two, Jesus Christ knows that down deep inside the heart, there's some rotten things, some bad things in the basement. And number three, as a result, we shouldn't trust our own hearts. And Jesus doesn't trust our hearts. And number four, Jesus says, this is the message, I don't trust you, he says, but I love you. And I've come to make you trustworthy. I don't trust you, but I died. My body, my temple will be torn down, he says. We read this this morning, and it'll be built up in three days. I have come to be killed, to die for you, and then to be raised up to save you. So, you see, you look fine on the outside, but on the inside, you're not trustworthy. Stop trusting yourself and trust instead in what I have done. I didn't trust you, but I loved you, and I died. I died to take away the punishment for your sins so that I could come into your life and make you trustworthy. That's the message. But actually, I would like to do a little more of a psychological outline to what we're going to say out of this text. Jesus Christ is saying, I smell something in your basement. Okay? First of all, there's a smell. Then secondly, we need to go downstairs and see what it really is. And number three, if you let me come down with you, I can clean it out. That's what Jesus is saying. It's more of a psychological than an actual structural approach to the passage, but I think it's fun. Look, let's do it this way. First of all, Jesus is saying, I smell something in your basement. There's a sign of something that shows that where I was on the outside, things look fine. Underneath, it's not so fine. In Jesus' case, the sign was this faith based on miracles. He knew that was something down inside the hearts of these folks that wasn't right, and the sign of it was what it says right here in verse 23. Many people saw the miraculous signs he was doing, and therefore believed in his name. We know that the crowd at Jerusalem in the Passover was huge. When it says they believed in his name because of the miracles, we're talking about thousands of people. Some estimates are that 320,000 people crammed in to Jerusalem during the feast times. We also know that after Jesus died, how many real disciples, real true believers there were? How many were there? 120. 120 in the upper room in Acts chapter 1. Thousands of people saying, we believe in your name, but when Jesus was all gone, only 120 true believers. This means that the faith that these folks had wasn't real faith. The belief that they had wasn't real belief. It means that though they said they accepted Christ, Christ didn't accept them. And this should make us all gulp a little bit. Shouldn't it? If it doesn't, do you realize the situation? I mean, you know, some people, some people, you should be worried about this. Thousands of people saying we believe, and only 120 that really do. This teaches us that the human heart loves personal power, but not truth. We want help for our problems. We see the miraculous signs. We want power to reach our goals. But when it comes to reorienting our lives so that we actually can live for him, uh-uh. Another way to put it is these people wanted him to be king of the world, but they just didn't want him to be king of their lives. Two different things. We want you to be king, Jesus. We would like you to be in charge of things. We'd like you to throw down the Roman oppressors. We would like you to put in wage and price controls to stop spiraling inflation. We would like you to come and heal people. Set up a medical clinic. It's incredible what you can do. We want you to be king of the world, but we don't want you to be king of our lives. When it was all over, they didn't believe. Jesus, of course, always does miracles, but he's not here just to give you power to reach your goals. The test, the thing that shows that this faith isn't real faith, is the fact that when the miracles are gone, the faith is gone. Look at yourself. Look at your own life. Is it possible that though you've got some belief that you're kind of seeking Jesus or you've been seeking Jesus, but you really want, you've got problems and, oh, if I can just get him to deal with my problems. And if the miracles come, you come. And if the miracles go, what happens to your so-called faith? Look, it's when the miracles aren't there that you can tell what you're really like. How do you know what's really in your basement? If somebody says, you know, you need an exterminator. Your basement is full of vermin. You say, of course it's not. All right? So you're going to show. If you want to know what's really in your basement, you don't make a lot of noise. You don't say, well, I'm coming walk down very slowly and you make a lot of noise. And then you take out your flashlight and you look around and you say, there's nothing here. See, I told you, everything is fine. If you want to know what's really in your basement, you sneak up to the door, see, slowly turn the knob, then you whisk the door open and you jump to the bottom and you whip out your flashlight and then all the little roaches and all the mice and the rats and all the vermin, then they see you and then they scurry away and you say, time to call orkin or whatever. See, then you know, the way you know what you really are like, what the essential you is, what the real basement is. Like, is when you're surprised. See, a lot of you like to think, well, when I got that job, when I got that promotion, the way I was then, how I treated people that night, that was the essential me. That's not how you find out what's in your basement. It's when the miracles are gone. It's when you're surprised. It's when you're under strain and stress. It's when you can't put the face on that you want the world to see. That's when you see who you really are. The weakness, the fear, the anger, the self-centeredness, the grasping, all of that. That's you. And therefore, it's miraculous faith looks fine on the outside as long as things are breaking your way. Ah, that's the real me? No, it isn't. Miracle-based faith. Faith saying, oh, Lord, as long as you give me stuff, as long as things are coming in, I can believe in you. That's not actually faith in Jesus at all. It's an expression of the very thing Jesus warns about here, and that's self-trust. It's bowing down and worshiping the things God gives you, but not bowing down and worshiping God himself, so that when the things are gone, you're gone. Look at Mary. Mary is an example. We looked at her in the first part of chapter two, three weeks ago, two weeks ago. Mary asked Jesus for something. We have a problem, she said, and Jesus snapped at her. Remember that? Or at least gave her a very abrupt answer and said, don't talk to me about this. And so Mary thought that Jesus was just brushing her off. What does she do? Look at her. She turns to the other servants and she says, whatever he says, let's do it. I don't understand what he's doing. I don't know what's going on, but whatever he says, do it. She proved she has real faith because she trusted in him and his wisdom, not her own. When the miracles were gone, that's when you have to choose. That's when you find out who you really trust. There's a kind of faith, miracle-based faith, which is selfish and it's conditional. And it won't transform you because it's not faith in him at all. It's still a kind of faith in yourself. It's only when the miracles are gone. It's only when you see who you really, that's when you see who you really are. And what are you really? Who do you trust really? And that brings us to the second point. There's a bad smell in the basement. Jesus says, I want to show you what it really is. You know what it is? We've already actually tipped our hand. Do you know what's down there? Do you know what the root of our problems is? It's actually the very thing that Jesus refuses to do. And Mary, who's a great woman, refused to do. It's self-trust. And let me put it this way. It's what the Bible calls a God complex. In the Bible, the Bible talks often about the flesh and the spirit. A lot of people mistakenly think that the Bible is talking about the body versus the soul. That's not what it's talking about. The flesh is what the Bible says. The flesh is the inclination of the whole person to want to be God instead of be under God. What does it mean to be God? Well, imagine if you built a car. Suppose you designed a car. It's patented. You have the patent and you build it in your garage. Well, how do you relate to it? You relate to it as God. In other words, you can do what you want with it. It exists for you. You run it the way you want. You run it on the standards that you want to run it on. It exists for you. All right? Now, how do you treat yourself? How do you relate to your own life? Same way. You relate to yourself as if you built yourself in the garage. One, we want to run our own lives. Two, we want to set our own standards. Nobody else can tell us how to live. Three, we want to live for our own honor and our own pleasure. Our own glory. If somebody says, well, I would rather you did this and you say, that doesn't look like it's in my best interest. So I'm out of here. You live running your own life, setting your own standards, living for your own glory. You are acting as if you are your own creator. Only the creator thing like that. And you know you're not your own creator, and therefore it's an illusion. Underneath, in the basement, underneath all of our problems, is the desire to be our own God. To run our own lives, set our own standards, live for our own glory. For example, I know of a man, and he's not from around here, and it's not somebody you would know, but he was the head of an evangelical, a great evangelical social service organization. A great leader, and yet underneath, a very insecure person. Always needing strokes, always needing praise, never being able to take criticism. And over the years, he continually burned himself out by being overcommitted. The reason he was overcommitted, he said, in his own heart, I just care so much for people. But actually, he needed to stay in control. Finally, he was so burnt out, he was so tired, it got to him. Even though he was married, he took up a relationship with a woman who made him feel powerful. And when the affair became public, he had to resign. It was a big scandal. And when he resigned, you should have heard the resignation speech. He blamed, he blamed, what? Overworking. He blamed himself. He said, I overworked. I overcommitted. I, and as a result of that, I was terribly tired. My self-esteem went down through the floor. And people put too much on me. And so I made a mistake, and I'm sorry. And that was it. And there's never going to be any healing in that man's life, because he wouldn't go into the basement. What's in the basement? The low self-esteem, of course. Sexual infidelity, yes. And sexual temptation, yeah. Overwork, absolutely. Those aren't the causes. Those are the effects. The cause. Underneath it all, the Bible would say, there was a pride that made it impossible for him to take criticism without being destroyed. There was a pride that made it impossible for him to take people disagreeing with him without looking at it like it was a betrayal of loyalty. There was a pride down there that meant he had to stay in control, so he couldn't delegate, so he burned himself out. And until he was able to say, I want to live for my own honor and glory, I trust myself. I don't trust anybody else. Until he would admit that, until he would see underneath it all, he's never going to get healed. You know, what's funny is it's self-trust that destroys your confidence. It creates the insecurity. It's the very thing we think we have to have. The Bible says, doubt yourself and for the first time you will have poise and confidence and courage. And everybody else says, that's crazy. If you doubt yourself, what have you got? And the Bible says, doubt yourself and transfer your trust over to the only one who can go into the basement with you. All right, look. We see the smell and we see what's down there. Jesus Christ says, I don't trust you. You shouldn't trust yourself. What's down underneath, the thing that's in the basement beneath the basement, in some of your cases you've got a wine cellar underneath the basement. You know, you've got a lot of problems, but down underneath it all, down underneath it all is a desire to live as if you are your own creator. That's what the Bible says. That's underneath it all. What are we going to do about it? Jesus says this. Here's my suggestion. First of all, don't go down there alone. You know, one of the things that you all, you know, there's so many B-grade horror movies that always start out with a 16-year-old girl, and she's out in some house and it's miles from anywhere and there's a thunderstorm going on and she's all alone in the house and she hears something in the basement and smells something in the basement and so what does she do? This is how they all start. She goes downstairs. Now, you know, no sane person would do that, but if she didn't do that, there'd be no movie, you see. And you know she's expendable. You know she's some lady who just really, really wants to break into movies somehow and she was willing to take this three-minute or three-second, you know, shot. And so she walks down and... And yet, there's a lot of you who are trying to do the same thing. You're just as stupid as she is. You're going down in the basement alone. You can't do it. My family and I saw a cute movie this week and it was cute as far as it goes about a little eight-year-old boy who's left at home alone by accident. Now, here's what's interesting. He's a scaredy-cat type. That's how the plot goes. And he's especially scared of the basement. And that, in the end, he has to defend the building. He has to defend his home from these cat burglars who are trying to break in through the basement. And, of course, he faces his fears. And there's one place in which he gives you the message of the movie. He preaches, in a sense, at one place, in a church. And he says, if you go down into the basement and if you face your fears, you can lick them. If you face your fears, then you can... he says. And, you know, that's the typical modern parable that comes up constantly in our popular culture today. Whatever it is, face it and you can lick it. If you try hard enough, you can do anything. Do you believe that? I mean, what if they're really, what if the thing coming in the basement isn't a couple of comic actors whose job it is to do pratfalls? What if it's what we really suspect? And that is there's things down in our basement of our lives that will destroy us if we handle them alone. God comes to Cain at one point like that. Back in Genesis 4, Cain is just being devoured by jealousy against his brother Abel, who has always outshone him. And God comes to him and he tells him about his basement. He says, Cain, do you see how depressed your face has fallen? Sin, do you remember this? Sin is crouching at the door. Very vivid language. You see it in Genesis chapter 4. God says to Cain, Cain, he says, sin is crouching at the door. Its desire is for you. You must master it. It wants to devour you. Cain, there's a jealousy in there, but underneath, you know what's down at the bottom in the wine cellar? This need to be number one, this desire for attention, this feeling of competition, and it's going to destroy you, Cain. It is devouring you. Look at it. Do you see it crouching in the shadows? It's going to get you. If you let me come with you, we can get it. But Cain doesn't do it. Now, what does that mean? You know, going into the basement with Jesus is a real sweet little thing to say, you know, typical sermononic kind of thing to say. But what does it mean? I mean, how do you do that? Jesus actually gives you an extremely specific and a completely explicit, doctrinally and practically explicit explanation of what to do. Jesus says the problem with the rest of you, in a sense, is that you look at all of my miracles and you say, yes, if I just had that power, then I could finally get to that which I aspire to. That's why you believe because of the miracles. Jesus says there's only one sign that you should be believing in. There's only one sign that you should be basing your faith in. Not in the miracles, but you should be basing your faith on this. The leaders come to him and say, how do we know you're the Messiah? And Jesus turns around and says, tear down this, what? This temple and I will build it up again in three days. And he's referring to his death, how his body of the temple will be torn down and I'll be raised up again in three days. Here's what he's saying. At this point, Jesus Christ shows that he is completely unique amongst the founders of all other religions. If there's anybody here that says, you know, Christianity is nice, but basically it's getting at the same thing that other religions are getting at, you're wrong. Maybe all the other religions are, but Christianity directly contradicts them at this point. Jesus Christ does not say, here's the principles. Believe them and you're saved. Here's the rules. Apply them and you're in. Instead, Jesus says, I'm not coming to tell you how to save yourself. I have come here to accomplish your salvation. He doesn't say, here it is, do it. He says, here it is, I've done it. Two different things. And you have to receive me as your Savior. Two completely different things. When Jesus died, he was paying the debt that we owe God, the punishment, the penalty due us for living as our own creators and masters all of our lives. And when he paid that debt then and only then do the lights come on. It's only when you finally paid your water bill that the water comes on. And it's only when Jesus Christ finally paid the debt that we owed that the power of death is broken. It's broken legally because the minute we believe in what he has done, not try to apply it, not try to practice it, not try real hard to become a Christian by being as good as we possibly can. But the minute we, because Jesus is saying, don't do it that way. The minute we say, I see you've accomplished it in the tearing down of your temple, your body, and your resurrection, at that moment that we believe in it, the power of death is legally broken. We're pardoned. We're adopted into the family of God. And the power of death is actually broken because the Holy Spirit comes into us to start to renew us. And that's why Jesus' religion is altogether utterly entirely different than every other religion. Because every other religion, listen, plays into your inordinate desire of self-trust. Every other religion panders to your self-trust. Every other religion says, here's how you can do it. whether the Buddhists say the Eightfold Path or the Muslims say the Five Pillars or whatever, if you just take these principles, you can do it. You can match it. You can accomplish it. And we all say, that's for me. And Jesus says, I take your salvation completely out of your hands. Your problem all along has been self-trust. Your problem all along, that's the root of all your other problems. It's a desire to be your own God. And here, am I going to give you a religion like the other religions that say, here, be your own God, save yourself? No. I take your salvation completely out of your hands. You're going to have to trust me or you. There's no in-between. There's no 80%, 20%, 99%, 1%. You have got to see that you can't add a stroke to what you need to do in order to be accepted into the family of God. Receive me as your Savior. Believe in my death and my resurrection, not in what I can do in you with all the miracles. Of course I can do that, but that's not the start. Believe what I've done for you in my death and resurrection. And when you say that, when you say, okay, Lord, I see finally what it means to be a Christian. I transfer my trust over to you. Now, where do you see what happens when you go into the basement? Up to now, my dear friends, when you've gone into the basement and you've looked to see the junk that's down there, it really upsets you because up to now, you've had to base everything on this idea that I can do it. I can live up to standards. And when you see what failures you are, it traumatizes you. You have to repress the knowledge. But now, you understand the gospel? You're building your life on the death and resurrection of Christ. Do you understand that? You're building your life on that. And that means now there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus. Or Paul says, To him who worketh not, but who believeth in him who justifieth the ungodly, to him his faith is accredited, his righteousness. When you go into the basement like that, knowing that he will not desert you, that you have been accepted at your worst, you finally, finally have got the power to look your sins in the face. And until you do that, Jesus says, until you finally abandon your self-trust and are willing to trust in me, you can't be honest about yourself. Listen, for years, I was told, you've got to be honest and just admit, I'm helpless, I'm helpless, I've got problems and I need some help. And I thought that was about as, that was about as honest as I could be. There's something a lot harder that's being required of you here. It's impossible without Jesus' help. And that is, it's one thing to say I'm helpless and I need help. It's another one to say, the reason I'm helpless and the reason I'm such a mess is because of my inordinate self-trust and my need to be in control of my life and my desire to live as my own God and creator. That is the basement under the basement. Don't you see that in yourself? Basically, what you're saying is, I want to justify myself. I want to achieve my own worthiness. I want to do it all myself. And if I can't do it, I'll hate me and I'll hate you and I'll hate everything around me. See, some of you say, well, I'm not like that egotistical guy that had the affair. I don't trust myself at all. I've got low self-esteem. But you want to trust yourself. Why do you think you're so depressed? And therefore, you haven't transferred it. Look, two kinds of people here. There always are. And thank goodness, only God can tell who's who, not me. Some of you realize, I hope now, that you have never transferred your trust over to him at all. That you've been religious, you've been moral at different times, but you've always basically been doing miracle-based faith. Do you see that? All along, what you really said is, Lord, can you help me out of this? Can you help me out of that? And the idea of going flat out and a full-fledged Christianity scares you because then you'd be losing control. And who knows what he might do? Friends, trust him. When he was visible on earth, what did you see? Do you see him pushing his weight around? Do you see him throwing his weight around? No. You see him humble. You see him washing your feet. You see him healing you. You see him serving you. You see him sitting with you at the well and speaking to you with utmost sweetness in spite of your terrible past. All of Jesus' power is never there to crush. It's always there under tremendous control. All of the weight of his omnipotence is channeled to lift you up and to complete you and to fill you. You know, Esther in the Old Testament, she says that the only right thing to do is to go ask for my people's lives and so she said, I'm going to go to the feet of the king and I'm going to do what I ought to do and if I perish there, if he kills me, I perish. And she went and she was right. And you must do the same thing, but you're not going to a human king. Nobody ever perished at Jesus. I will obey you in every way I know. I will trust in you and only you, and I'll wait. And I know that you'll help me. And I put my trust completely in what you have done on the cross. Your death and resurrection. And not in my own accomplishments. And friends, there are some people here who say, oh, I've done that. But you know what? You do need to go into the basement every so often. Have you noticed that? Every so often. Oh, yeah. If you read the little funny quote in the beginning of the J.I. Packer's quote, he talks about an old comedy short, Max Sennett, in which an escaped lion takes the place of a shaggy dog beside the armchair. And there's a comic. I'm not sure if it's Charlie Chaplin or not. And he's affectionately running his fingers through the mane thinking that, you know, before realizing he's got a problem, thinking it's a dog. And suddenly looks down and sees it's a lion. And Packer goes on and says, Just because you're not willing to go into the basement, calmly measure out the depth of your sin, and take it to him and ask for cleansing, you need to do it repeatedly with the confidence that he will not reject you. And only then do you have the strength to see who he is. We don't know what it's really like to, until you do that, we don't know what it's like to be alive in our relationship with God. Just as children born with crippled legs never know what it is to run around as distinct from hobbling. Are you ready to go down for the first time or the nth time? He'll go with you. Let's pray. Now we give ourselves to you, and we ask, Lord, for some of us, that you would show us what it means to finally die to self-trust for the first time, to make the big change, to say, I transfer my trust from my own efforts and self to you, and I trust and receive you as my Savior. That's all it takes. Father, for many of the rest of us, we have to ask, could you please go down again? Because we need to repent and believe the gospel until we find those habits being killed rather than them killing us. We ask, Father, finally, that you will enable us to have the final victory over the self-trust that hurts us so much. It's only as we doubt ourselves that we get our confidence. It's only as we serve that we rule. It's only as we submit that we find our power. It's only as we die to ourselves that we really live. And now we pray these things in Jesus' name. Amen.
