TITLE: The Love of the World (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 1 John 2:15-17
TOPICS: God the Father God's Love
SERIES: Knowing that We Know God; 1 John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-love-of-the-world-part-2/

============================================================

There will be the text for tonight on which the teaching is based. It's 1 John chapter 2, verse 15 to 17. We began looking at it two weeks ago. We continue it tonight. 1 John chapter 2, verse 15 to 17. 1 John chapter 2, verse 15. This is God's word. It's sort of a shame, and the same thing happened to me this morning, and it's rather rare. We always print in the bulletin a particular translation of the biblical text each week. It's the New International Version, and I still think it's a great translation, but we're going to be again tonight noticing what I would consider unfortunate translations, and I'm going to make a couple of changes. The old authorized version, the old King James Version ends, The world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but the one who doeth the will of the Father, the will of God abideth forever. I think that's better. The world passes away, and the lusts thereof, but the one who doeth the will of God liveth forever. However, we're looking at a subject which is perhaps one of the most misunderstood things that the Bible has to say, and that is, do not love the world. Love not the world, or anything in the world. What does that mean? Now, we started looking at it last week. We're going to finish it up, pardon me, two weeks ago, and we're going to finish it up this week, and we're looking at this under three headings. What worldliness is, okay? What worldliness is not, then secondly, what worldliness is, and thirdly, how to escape and avoid worldliness. What worldliness is not, what it is, and how to escape it. And what we did two weeks ago was we looked mainly at what it is not, and I just basically touched on the other two points, what it is and how to escape it. Tonight, we're going to just remind you of what it is not, and then move on to what it is and how to escape it. And the reason we said we had to look at the first point, and let me just recap this, is the word world can mean two different things in the Bible. And we have a lot of words like this. It's not just in the Bible. Lots of words can have different meanings, and unless you understand the right meaning in the particular instance, it can be devastating. One of my favorite Calvin and Hobbes cartoons is all based on not understanding a term that can be used in two different ways. And I like Calvin and Hobbes because Calvin is a little boy who's always imagining himself in these incredible and fantastic situations, and he's imagining himself in a fighter plane, and he's the tail gunner, and there's a pilot up front, and the tail gunner, I mean, pardon me, the pilot says to Calvin, the tail gunner, enemy plane's at two o'clock. Enemy plane's at two o'clock. And Calvin says, okay, got it. What do we do till then? Now, you see, the word two o'clock has two different meanings, and if you don't understand what the right meaning is in the particular context, it can be devastating. Now, the same thing happens here. The word world can mean the physical material world, the visible, the tangible. And, of course, if that's what it means, in this situation, what John is saying is, don't have anything to do with the physical world. The physical is bad. The material is bad. Stay away from people. Stay away from the world. Get out of the world and get into little enclaves and ghettos. And, of course, there's plenty of people who think that's exactly what John's saying. And we said last week that that's not right. That's an ascetic understanding of worldliness. The technical term for it is dualism. Dualism is not Christian. Dualism is a very ancient philosophy that saw the spirit and the immaterial as good and matter and the tangible and the physical as bad. And people who have bought into dualism and read it into Christianity and read it into this text, the way you know these kinds of things, four of them. Number one, these are people who are very prudish about sex. They see it as demeaning and defiling. Number two, these are people who tend to say that Christians should have nothing to do with social action, with community involvement, or with politics. Number three, these are people who tend to say, or at least hint, but sometimes they come right out and say it, that the way to really serve God is to leave your secular job and go into full-time Christian ministry. You really, that's the way to really serve God. Another form of dualism is just a negativity toward the arts, negativity toward culture, unless the literature or the music or the art has been written very specifically, very directly, very overtly by and for Christians. Otherwise, we have nothing to do with it. We talked about that two weeks ago. And we said this is all based on this idea that the physical is bad, the material is bad. We ought to get out of the world if we can in that sense. But here you've got passages in the Bible like Colossians 2.20, where Paul says, Why do you submit to the rules, do not handle, do not taste, do not touch? Such regulations have an appearance of wisdom with their self-imposed worship and their false humility and their harsh treatment of the body, but they lack any value in really restraining sinful passions. And in 1 Timothy 4, Paul says, No created thing, this is as clear as it can be, No created thing is wrong or bad or defiling in itself, but it is our use of things that defiles us. And so there you have it. So anyway, that's what worldliness is not. The world here does not mean the physical, and we can see that because of the way in which John actually describes it. The other way to understand the term world in the Bible is a value system or a mindset that makes this world all we have. A value system or a mindset that looks at the material world and acts as if this is the only world there is. See, Christians understand that this world, the material world, time and space and history, is one part of reality. Then there's a supernatural world, and there's eternity beyond. And only when you see the world, as Martin Luther put it, subspecie eternity. In other words, only when you see this world from the perspective of eternity do you see the world aright. When you see the world from the perspective of eternity, realizing that the world is good. God loved it enough to create it, and he loves it enough to redeem it. That God created soul and body, and when we're redeemed, we're going to have both souls and bodies because God loves the body and the physical as much as the spiritual. But we see that from the perspective of eternity. Then this world, this body, this material world doesn't become ultimate. It becomes penultimate. Money, your body, sex, work, the visible, the world, become good but penultimate. And if they're good but penultimate, you have a grasp on it. If on the one hand you look at them as evil and wicked, you really don't understand biblical approach. But on the other hand, if you see them as the whole shebang, if you live for these things, you're into worldliness. Worldliness is a mindset. Now how do we see that? It's because of what John actually says here. He defines what's in the world. He says, for everything in the world. See, in verse 16, he tells you what worldliness is. For everything in the world. And then he goes on and tells you what's in the world. Now he doesn't say rocks and streams and mountains and people and cities. He doesn't say that. He doesn't say, love not the world, get away. Go away from New York City. An awful lot of the world there, and there is. I mean, it's packed in, you know, quite a few people here. So let's get away. Let's go out. Let's get into the desert, you know, somewhere else. Let's start a monastery someplace. That's not what he says. He doesn't say, for everything in the world. And then he talks about people and cities. No, he says, for everything in the world. Now, this is where the translation gets unfortunate. Let me tell you what he says. He says, the lusts of the body, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. And he describes the world. Now, look at how he describes the world here. First of all, the first three, there's three phrases he uses. And they're translated in, I think, an unfortunate way. It's particularly the first one. He says there's three things. He gives you three categories of worldliness. Three ways in which you can be worldly. And, of course, as we'll see, they're all interlocking anyway. But, three categories. The first one is literally, the first two times, he says, the lusts of the body and the lusts of the body. is where I mean it's unfortunate, the NIV the first time calls it the cravings and the second time uses the word lust. It's the same Greek word. And it's this very important and very fundamental word to understanding sin and understanding yourself and understanding New Testament theology. And it's the word epithumia, which means literally an over-desire. Epi, you know, it's a Greek word that has to do with intensity. An epicenter, of course, you know, is the heart of the heart of the, you know, the epicenter of the earthquake. This is not just the center, but the center of the center. And epi means intensity and it has to do with the word over and a lust or a craving. That's how they translate it here. Literally, what John is saying is the over-desires of the body. Now, you know, it translates it sinful man, but you see the word there is body. And this is where the NIV decided that the word flesh here means the sinful flesh, the sinful heart. But that's not what I think it means at all. Because if you look at all three of these things, I'm sorry if this is a little bit more detailed than I usually go into, but I've got to explain why I deviate from the translation. The body, the eye, and the pride of life. In all cases, John is talking about that which is seen, what this eye sees, that which is felt. In fact, the word life here, which they translate, they translate what he has and does. You know, from which we get our word biology. There was two Greek words for life, two Greek words that can be translated life, bios and zoe. Zoe has to do with quality, you know, living in the sense of joy and having a great time. Bios had to do with the physical life. And so what John is saying here is there's nothing wrong with bios, there's nothing wrong with the eye, there's nothing wrong with the body. It's the over-desires of the body, the over-desires of the eye, what you see, appearances, image, and the over-desires of the ego. That's worldliness. In other words, it'll become clear as we look at each of the three. It's not, there's nothing wrong with the body, but when the body's desires become epi-desires. It is nothing wrong with the eye. There's nothing wrong with, for example, what does the eye see? Beauty. There's nothing wrong with enjoying beauty, but when there's an epi-desire for beauty. And life, what's wrong with life? Nothing. But literally, you see the word, it translates boasting. It's the word, the pride, the epi-desires of the ego, the lusts of the body, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life. Let me just show you what these are. The over-desires of the body, the over-desires of the eye, and the over-desires of the ego. That's worldliness. When these normal things become elevated to the place where they become ultimate instead of penultimate, they lose their place. Now, let me show you what we mean here. Let's take a look at what, what does he mean when he talks about the cravings or the lusts of the body, the over-desires of the body. Well, let me give you three of them. There might be more, but let me just talk about three. Let me talk about food and drink. Let me talk about rest and leisure. And let me talk about sex. What's wrong with food and drink? Nothing. It's okay to eat to live, but you mustn't live to eat. What's wrong with play and leisure? There's nothing wrong with it, as long as you're playing to live, but when you live to play, it's an epi-desire. What's wrong with sex? Nothing. It's a good thing. God made it. When he made male and female, he looked at it, it says in Genesis, and it was good. It's one thing to live, to have sex in order to live, but it's another thing to live for sex. In each case, you have a drive. Something that's good becomes a drive. Worldliness is when these things become things you live for. Pseudo-salvation. Strategies for life. Let me give, for example, let's take a look at these three just for a second. Food and drink. Now, you know, it's interesting because even though the Bible talks about this, it's only been, I would say, in the last couple of decades that anybody has figured out what eating disorders are. You know what eating disorders are? There's nothing wrong with food, but when you use food to control your life, when you use food as a strategy for coping with life. food to handle life, or obviously drink, which is something we've known about even longer than that, which is alcoholism, when you use drink as a way of dealing with life, what you got here, is there anything wrong with eating and drinking? No, but what happens when you don't eat and drink to live, but you live to eat and drink? It's the thing you live for. It's the thing by which you're actually living. It's the thing by which you're actually controlling your life and mastering your life. You see, there's pseudo-salvations. That's an epidesire of the body, a good thing that's become ultimate. Secondly, take a look here for a moment at rest and leisure. Now, at this point, I get a chance to show you the difference between world-loving and worldliness. People are much, much more frantically, I think, driven to have fun than they ever have been. Sociologists will talk about this. There's a leisure industry, the likes of which, 50 years ago, nobody could have imagined. People are spending money on leisure, are spending money on fun, are spending time and energy on leisure and fun and travel and hobbies and athletics and all that in a way that people would never have thought of doing. And here's the reason why. If you understand the difference between world-loving and worldly, it makes sense. More and more people are addicted to play, rest and leisure, because their jobs are so unfulfilling. And there may be a number of reasons why their jobs are unfulfilling. One of the reasons is because of sin. All work is somewhat unfulfilling because of sin. But you see, if you understand what it means to love the world, you can choose a job in a world-loving way or you can choose a job in a worldly way. If you choose a job in a world-loving way, what you do is you sit down and say, what kind of work helps people, what kind of work produces things that people need, what kind of work makes me useful to others. And another world-loving way to choose a job is you say, God made me with certain capacities to make other people, to meet the needs of other people in work. So what fits me? What do I find fits my talents and fits my capacities? Now, when you choose a job on the basis of what you think God has given you the capacities to do, and when you choose a job on the basis of what you think makes you the most useful to the people around you and the most productive, you find your job is more fulfilling. But if you choose your work in a worldly way, you choose a job that will make you the most money and give you the most status in society. That's a lust of the eye. In other words, you're worried about the visible, you're worried about image, you're worried about how it looks, that's the most important thing. And because people tend to choose work in a worldly way instead of a world-loving way, in other words, a selfish way, as a result, more people have jobs that really make them the money, but they're not very fulfilling. They can see that they're not really doing a whole lot for anybody, and they can see it doesn't really fit. The important thing is that they're making money, but they're unfulfilled, and therefore they're desperate when it comes to leisure. They've got to fill up the emptiness. They're almost addicted to it. There's a kind of desperation. I've got to. I'm being paid well, so I've got to fill up my life. I live for the weekend. That's a joke. Live for the weekend. Live for it. No. You can play to live, but when you live to play, it's an epidesire. It's penultimate. It's just, and it will never satisfy. The world passes away, and the lust thereof. You see, whenever you let one of these bodily desires become the way you live, the thing you live for, you'll find it's like eating pretzels. The more, spiritually speaking, I mean, the more you take in, the more hungry and thirsty you seem to get. Or look at sex. Let's look at the last of the three examples of what I'm calling here the epidesires of the flesh, the epidesires of the body. If a Christian looks at sex from the perspective of eternity, it's got such a different look to it than if you look at it in a worldly way. Here's how Christians look at sex. The Bible tells us that sex is a signpost. The Bible tells us sex is a pointer. It's an analogy of the ultimate closure that will happen when we get to heaven. And we find ourselves brought into complete oneness with the God of love and all the people who love him as well. See, what happens when sex is done right? There's two things that happen. One is, you're naked. But the physical nakedness is just a kind of image. It's just, it's just, it's just. nakedness that should go along. You make yourself totally vulnerable into somebody else who sees you literally, not just physically, but in every way, warts and all, and who looks at you and says, I love you. I understand you. And I make myself vulnerable to you too. And there's a closure that happens that we fundamentally deeply want. Now the Bible says that in sex, you have the closest earthly analogy to what's going to happen when we get to heaven. And of course, sex will never actually satisfy the real need for closure. Sex just kind of gets at it. It scratches, but it really can't complete, it can't really fulfill. It can't get rid of that deep itch, that deep relentless desire for closure that only complete union with God will give you when we get to heaven. Now look at how intimacy with God works. Does intimacy, here's what's so wonderful. When you look at sex from the, from the perspective of eternity, instead of just in time, two things happen. Number one, you know how to use it. Why do you think the Bible says sex only works in a context of marriage? Because think of intimacy with God. God would never say, I'll pour my love into your heart. But you don't have to be completely and exclusively committed to me. You can worship anybody you want. He would never do that. Makes no sense. Because you see, when you say, I'm going to pour myself into you, you pour yourself into me, that's supposed to be a token of complete oneness in every way. And that's the reason why God says you must not pour your love into somebody who's not permanently and completely exclusively committed to you. Intimacy with me doesn't work that way. And my, the earthly analogy won't work that way. And you'll dehumanize yourself if you use it any other way. So on the one hand, looking at sex from this perspective of eternity shows us how to use it right. But here's what's so wonderful. It also demotes it. If you're a Christian and you're not having sex, you say, well, okay, it's not the end of the world. Even great earthly sex is nothing compared to what I'm going to have eventually. You don't gnaw at yourself saying, I'm not having a fulfilled life. I have no sex. You see, what happens is, if you see work, sex, money, anything from the perspective of eternity, you see, hey, this is a good thing. But it's not the ultimate thing. But if you lose the eternal perspective, it becomes the thing. Maybe. It depends. Food and drink, rest and leisure, sexuality, you're driven. You've got to have it. You're addicted. There's some terrible addictions, of course, in every one of these areas. But there's things that are short of that. And what's the problem? What is it? This is worldliness. This is the penultimate becoming the ultimate. This is the over-desire of the body. Well, what are some of the over-desire? I'll be fast here. What are some of the over-desires of the eye? Now, the over-desires of the eye have to do with appearance. For example, beauty. It is worldly to look at money, at status, at name, at clothing, at figure, and say, that's what controls me. Those are the people I want to be. I mean, my family recently watched two versions, two movie versions of Cyrano de Bergerac recently. We read, we watched the French version. You have to watch it with English subtitles. And it's wonderful. 1990. It's made, it's a French movie. It was a remake, of course, of the famous play. Of course, we watched Steve Martin and Daryl Hannah and Roxanne. The trouble is with, Roxanne, is they give it a happy ending. But if you go, this is what the story is. The story is, here is a beautiful guy with a shallow soul, beautiful body, the shallow soul. And here is a, an incredibly beautiful soul with an ugly body. And here's the lovely Roxanne. And she sees these two men right in front of her. And she's attracted, completely attracted to the gorgeous body with a shallow soul. And of course, you know how it works is the, the, the man with a shallow soul says, I, I need to, you know, write letters to her. That was the way it was done, but I don't know what to say. And so Cyrano, the ugly man with the beautiful soul writes the letters to Roxanne. And she is so incredibly enraptured with the wisdom and the character and the insight and the depths of this man that at one point before her beloved dies, the wrong beloved, the one she marries, not knowing that she's in love with this, with the soul over here, marries the body, totally misses the soul. And at one point, just before he dies, he says to you, you know what? I want to apologize to you. In the beginning, attracted to your soul. In fact, if you were ugly, I would still love you. And of course, when he hears that, the man, knowing that it's all a sham, he's in absolute despair. In fact, he throws himself into battle and dies because he realizes that she doesn't love him really at all. Of course, Cyril, no, never tells her the truth until the very end, until he's about to die. And she looks at him and she suddenly realizes at the very end, you know, that she's missed. She's missed the love of her life. She's missed it all. Why? The lust of the eye. The epidesire of the eye. Christians are people who are fiercely anti-glitz. Christians are people who look beneath the surface of things. They see people that the world says, never. Nah, this is nobody. And they see greatness in there. And they look at people who the world says, wow, what a resume. What a body. What connections. And you see ugliness inside. Christians have x-ray vision. The lust of the eye means you're so concerned about how you look. You go berserk over not looking good. You can't handle people. You can't fall in love with people. You can't be real good friends with people who also don't look good. Lust of the eye also has to do with materialism. It has to do with money. The need for money. The desire for money. A worldly person, you know, one of the great acid tests of worldliness is this. Do you see the world as penultimate part of the whole, but eternity, you see, is the frame? Do you see eternity and time on the whole? If you do, here's the acid test. You will spend a lot of your money on God's work. You'll give an awful lot of your money away. Why? That's the way you know whether you really believe this world is all there is or not. If you spend all of your money on this world, all of your money on your leisure, all of your money on your clothing, all of your money on yourself, then you may say in your mind, you may say, I know I'm a Christian. I know there's a heaven. I know there's an eternity, but you're a worldly person. Okay, lastly, the pride of life. Pride of life. Do you notice, and this is very important when you read these old Semitic writers, the order is critical. There's the lust of the body, the over desires of the body, then there's the over desires of the eye, and then there's the pride of life. Don't you know what's going on? There's an ascending order. Each one is worse. That's not the way it is in most churches. In most churches, it's the lust of the body. They're the scandalous things. They're the awful things. A person is an alcoholic. Oh, how awful. A person is caught in some kind of sexual immorality. Oh, how awful. But gossip and jealousy and party spirit and trying to grab the spotlight and backbiting and always having your feelings hurt, that's pride. And according to John, that's much worse. How could that be much worse? Jesus himself said it. Jesus looked at the Pharisees, the proud ones, the ones that paraded around, the ones who always wanted their opinions taken seriously, the ones who were always touchy and irritable, very moral, very decent, but proud. And what did he say? He says, the prostitutes and the whoremongers get into heaven before you. Why? Because they know they're sinners and you don't. Listen, friends, if you think you've got these scandalous, awful things in your past, scandalous, awful things in your life, and you even wonder, boy, if the other people in this church knew what I have done or what I am doing now, they wouldn't want anything to do with me. You're probably thinking of the first category, maybe the second, not the third. My friends, you're closer to the kingdom of God than proud people. Proud people are people, what is pride? Well, I'll give you three kinds. There's the pride of applause. I want recognition. I want thanks. I want people to notice who I am. I want people to see who I am. Boasting. Lots of that in the church. Then there's pride of power. I want to be in charge. I want my way. Nobody tells me what to do. Pride of power. And then there's the last one, I guess I'll call it pride of control. It's not quite the same as pride of power, and that is nobody treads on me. Nobody tells, nobody comes and I don't give up my needs and my rights for other people. Pride is far worse, in fact, than the others. In fact, C.S. Lewis puts it in the perfect way. He says, pride can be used to beat down the simpler vices. Teachers often appeal to a boy's pride to make him behave decently. Many a man has overcome cowardice or lust or ill temper by learning to think that they're beneath his dignity. That is by pride. become chaste and brave and self-controlled, provided he's setting up in you a dictatorship of pride. He would be just as happy to see your ingrown toenails cured if he could in return give you cancer. For pride is spiritual cancer. It eats up the possibility of love, of contentment, or even common sense. Well, what do you do about it? I only have about 60 seconds to tell you, but it's right there. It says, for everything that's in the world, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, what? If you love the world, the love of the Father is not in you. Worldliness is looking for love in all the wrong places. Worldliness is simply coming and saying, God doesn't love me. The way you cast out the love of the world is to dote on the love of the Father. Fortunately, one of our last worship songs is about that. You see, when you're adopted into the kingdom of God, when you're adopted into the family of God, when my children disobey me, it hurts far worse than when the neighbor's children disobey me. You know, if my neighbor's children disobey me, oh, well, that's a shame. If my children disobey me, I sweat over them. I tuck them in at night. I change their diapers. Do they know what I've done for them? And they disobey me. Don't they know that even when I do tell them something, it's because I think it's the best for them? How it grieves me. You know, the reason it grieves me is not because they're in trouble now. I'm going to disown them. No, no, no, no. It's because of all I've done for them. And they wouldn't disobey me if they had any idea. But how do they have it? How can they have any idea? They're kids. And there's a certain sense in which that's true of us. We can never have any idea of what it means that the Father loves you. It's love of the Father, not just God in general. You have to understand that you have a Father. Think of what He's done for you. Think of when you disobey Him and you try to make other things ultimate instead of Him. How it grieves His heart. How it turns His heart. How He feels. To the degree that you can feel that. To the degree that you can see that. That kind of love and the sense of the Father's love casts out the love of the world and you'll be free. Free from needing to live to eat. Live to have sex. Live for money. Live for a career. Live to have people notice you. That's a lust. People must notice me. Nobody notices me. When I was little and when the church was small people noticed me. Now the church is so big nobody even notices me anymore. Maybe I'll go someplace else. Pride of life. Don't you see how they jerk you around? Don't you see how they have you by the neck? The love of the Father will cast them out. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have shown us in such detail here what it means to be worldly. Now, Lord, let the love of the Father, let the sense of our Father, your fatherly love, let our reflection upon what you have done for us to save us, let our reflection of how much you love us as a Father cast out the love of these other things so that they no longer, they no longer can harm us because they pass away and if we have anchored ourselves to them we will pass away too. We want to abide for the one who does the will of the Father abides forever. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
