TITLE: The Freedom of Service – 2 (1st)
SCRIPTURE: Acts 4:7-20; Exodus 20:3
TOPICS: Church Planting and Missions Salvation Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: Ten Commandments 1994
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-freedom-of-service-2-1st/

============================================================

In preacher's lingo, when you preach a sermon, you always raise questions by addressing any issue. And a good preacher always knows that when you preach on a message, in a sense you're sort of throwing a stone into the bushes, and a lot of questions, a lot of little snakes will be flushed from the bushes, and a good sermon kills all the snakes that the sermon raises. But this one won't. This sermon will not kill all the snakes it raises. And that's why we have the four o'clock service afterwards, where you can pull out the little snakes and say, you didn't get this one, and what do you do about this, or what about this, or what about that? So please, follow me afterwards, down into the East Lounge afterwards, and we can continue the discussion. For now, let me read to you from Acts 4. Now, Acts 4 starts at verse 7, but the story that precedes it is a very famous one. Not long after the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, when the early church was in its infancy, Jesus has gone now, and the apostles are in charge of the church, and John and Peter go to the temple one day to pray, and on the way in, in the gate, they meet a man who is begging, who is crippled, and he's been crippled from birth. And he asks them for money, and Peter, in a very, very, very famous phrase, says to him, Silver and gold have I none, but what I have, I give you. In the name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up and walk. Now, because he did get up and walk, and because of the great miracle, it created a great stir in the city, and Peter and John are brought before the religious authorities. And this is what we see as we get to verse 7. They had Peter and John brought before them and began to question, them, By what power, or what name, did you do this? Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers and elders of the people, if we are being called to account today for an act of kindness shown to a cripple, and are asked how he was healed, then know this, you and all the people of Israel, it is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, but whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you healed. He is the stone you builders rejected, which has become the capstone. Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved. When they saw the courage of Peter and John and realized they were unschooled, ordinary men, they were astonished, and they took note that these men had been with Jesus. But since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say. So they ordered them to withdraw from the Sanhedrin and then conferred together. What are we going to do with these men, they asked. Everyone and everybody living in Jerusalem knows that they have done an outstanding miracle, and we cannot deny it. But to stop this thing from spreading any further among the people, we must warn these men to speak no longer to anyone in this name. Then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. But Peter and John replied, Judge for yourselves whether it is right in God's sight to obey you rather than God. For we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard. This is God's Word. Now, you know, this month and next month, we're looking at the Ten Commandments, and last week we began looking at the first of the Ten Commandments, you shall have no other gods before me. So what are we doing in the book of Acts? We're still looking at the first commandment. You shall have no other gods before me. The first commandment is an implicit missionary mandate. Because when God says, you shall have no other gods, what he's actually saying is, not all gods are the true God. Not all religions, not all faiths, all gods are not just different faces and different versions of me. They're not. You must let people know they must worship the true God. Now, that is an implicit missionary mandate. But here in the book of Acts, the implicit becomes explicit. And here in Acts chapter 4, we see those same two little words said again. Do you see what they are? No other. Do you see what they are? Do you see what they are? Do you see what they are? implicit becomes explicit, and here in Acts chapter 4 we see those same two little words said again. You see what they are? No other. Only this time, he doesn't say you shall have no other gods before me, this time Peter says we cannot, but we cannot help speaking about what we see and hear because there is no other name under heaven. I mean, in all the world there's no other name by which we must be saved. In other words, the early church was a vibrant, ardent missionary church. We cannot help but speak about what we've seen and heard. Why? Because there's no other name. No other. Now, a lot of people say, rats. Gee, you know, there's so many things I like about Christianity, and here we're going to hear a sermon on the one part that I gag on. Yeah, I love the stuff about the grace. I love the stuff about how you're saved by grace, and I love the stuff about the love of God. I love the hope for the future. I love the way in which Christianity gives you a framework for understanding all of life. I like all these things. There's one part I never like. The one part that troubles me is this missionary part. The one part that troubles me is this idea that you've got to go to people and convince them to leave their faith or their religion and convert to Christianity. That's the one part I hate. The missionary part. The one that says there's no other way to be saved. That's, if you could just get rid of that, you know. I'd really like Christianity. That's just the one part I'd like to get rid of. Well, there's a problem with that. Because, you see, when you say, just that one part, friends, you know what the one part is that you want to take out? It's the heart. If you take the heart out, you've got nothing left. If you pull out the heart, all the other parts extend from it. All the other parts flow out of it. You take out the heart of something and you've just, and everything falls apart. And I would like to show you, by looking at this passage, that if you take out the mission out of Christianity, if you take out the missionary part, if you take out the idea that we must speak about what we've seen and heard because there is no other name by which we must be saved. If you take that out, all of Christianity falls apart because the heart of Christianity is this message called the gospel. And I'd like to show you that when you pull out the missionary part, it all falls apart. So let me show it to you this way. Let me show you that mission happens for three reasons. Mission happens because of Christianity's uniqueness. Mission happens because of Christ's uniqueness. And mission happens because of the Christian's uniqueness. Okay? Mission happens because of Christianity's uniqueness, Christ's uniqueness, and the Christian's uniqueness. And if mission is not happening, it's because you pull the heart out, that which makes Christianity Christianity. Let me show you. First, number one, mission happens because of the uniqueness of Christianity. See verse 20? We cannot help but speak about what? What we've seen and heard. Peter does not say we can't help but speak about these wonderful principles of living. He says we cannot help but speak about what we've seen and heard. Let Christianity is primarily, in its essence, a phenomenon. Now, I'm choosing that word very carefully. Christianity is a phenomenon. Well, what's a phenomenon? You think, well, the word phenomenon means, you know, anything really cool, anything neat, anything amazing. That's not what the word means. Entomologically, the word phenomenon means that which appears to the senses. Phenomenon. You know, Immanuel Kant, the great philosopher, talked about the phenomenal realm. That's the place where you can see touch, taste, hear, and smell. Peter begins preaching all the early, the Christian gospel, the Christian message is about what we've seen, what we've heard. Christianity is, first of all, an announcement of certain historical events that have changed everything. Now, that's a tremendous contrast. Let me show you. It's a complete contrast from other religions because other religions are essentially, they're essentially philosophies. That means they tell you principles of life, how to live, how to get along with God, how to find God, how to get along with your neighbor. Perspectives on life, you see. Philosophies. says, now wait a minute, all the religions, if you read their sacred books, you see that there's historical events, there's miracle stories, and there's great things that Muhammad did and that Buddha did and things that they did. There's lots of historical events mentioned in the sacred writings. Ah, but look, in all the other religions, the events simply, the miracles simply accredit the teaching, and the teaching is what saves you, the philosophy is what saves you. The events accredit the teaching, which is what saves you, but Christianity is absolutely the opposite. In Christianity, the teaching is about the events which save you. In other religions, the events focus on the teaching. In Christianity, the teaching focuses on the events and says the teaching doesn't save you. It's the events themselves, the happenings themselves. In the sacred writings of other religions, it really doesn't matter whether Muhammad really spoke these words on this mountain or that mountain. It doesn't really matter whether or not he was saved because a spider, you know, wove a web over the mouth of the cave in one minute so that the people who were looking for him came to the cave and discovered the spider web and said he couldn't be in there. I mean, there's plenty of stories in the Koran with miracles, but those miracles don't actually save us. The miracles show that we can follow the teachings of the prophet, which is what saves us. Christianity is utterly different. And totally different. It's the events. It's these historical events, these phenomena, these things that have been seen and heard. They are the things which save us. The teaching flows out of it. Yes, of course, Christianity is full of principles about how to find love and how to deal with worry and how to get along with other people, but they're based on the events. Other religions, it's other way around. Christianity is first a proclamation, and other religions are first a philosophy. Well, what events am I talking about? Let me just give you a quick rundown. The three shuns, I call them. The three shuns. First, you have the incarnation. God became phenomenal. You know, in the beginning of the book of 1 John, John says, we're talking about one that we've seen, that we've touched, that we've embraced. See, Christianity is the only religion that has the audacity to say, God happened. Happened. We hugged God. We saw God cry. We saw God bleed. No other religion would even talk about that, because you see, other religions say, no, you find God through following the teachings. Christianity says, God's found us. God's come into the phenomenal. He became flesh and blood. He became a human being. God. Called the incarnation. And then a second great miracle is not the incarnation, but the crucifixion. The second shun. The crucifixion. The crucifixion. When Jesus died on the cross, when the Son of God died on the cross, that was not a normal death. The earthquake. The darkness at noon. It was a cosmic event. The wrath of God was being poured out on him. He was taking our punishment. He was taking sin upon himself. And then you have the resurrection, in which Jesus Christ is raised from the dead, not just resuscitated, but raised and translated into a new realm so that he's a living Savior now. These things, not his teachings, actually save us. As a result, Christianity is primarily a phenomenon. That's the reason why Christianity has always been a missionary religion. When you talk to somebody about a philosophy, that's debatable. You say, here's what will save you. These teachings. Let's talk about it. But the gospel literally is always the announcement of something that's been done for you. Let me just, let me wrap this point up by giving you this illustration to show you the contrast. The very word gospel, the Greek word gospel, which is used in the New Testament, was a word that had a very specific meaning before it was picked up. The word means good news, but not good news in general. The word gospel meant the announcement of some great event that was good news to everybody and would change their lives. A herald brought good news. A runner, a messenger. So, for example, if you, for example, let's just say Greece was about to be invaded by the Persians, but the Greek army met the invading army of the Persians to the north, and they fought a fierce battle for three weeks, and finally the Greek army rest of Greece, the messengers. And what do the messengers bring? They bring good news. And what is the good news? Something has happened, and you're saved. Don't you see the word good news never means a principle? Good news is not, good news, there's ways that we can live so that we can get along better. That's not what a gospel was. Good news is never, here's something to do. Good news is always, something's been done. You know, the herald doesn't come and say, good news, the Persians are on the way and you're going to have to fight for yourselves. No, the herald comes and says, good news, they've been defeated. Good news is never, you've got to save yourself. Here's the teaching. Good news is always, you've been saved. It's been done for you. Something has happened in history. Don't you see why? You have to be a missionary if you've seen the Greeks beat the Persians. If you're sitting there and you've seen, oh, the Greeks have beat the Persians, you say, well, I'm not going to tell the rest of the country about this. I've seen it and it means something to me, but who knows what it'll mean to them. I mean, why should I, why should I foist my, you know, my interpretation of reality on them? No, you don't say that. You say something has happened in objective history. Something has happened that changes everything. And when the message goes out, it changes people. You know, do you not see, you may be one of them. Do you not see how wrong it is if you do this, if you say, you know, I could handle Christianity if it didn't have all these miracles, this stuff about the resurrection, this stuff about Jesus being God. If you could just, if you could just stick with the principles of Christianity, the basic teachings of love your neighbor and the basic teachings of love and harmony and, and self-denial and good deeds, that's what's important. Don't you see? That is a bald face effort to turn Christianity into everything that the other religions are, but it is not. That's a lobotomy on the, on the, on the, on Christianity. That's a tearing the heart out. That's a heart transplant on Christianity. That's not a revision. It's a new religion. And not only that, if you really think that what's central is the teaching, oh, not all these fantastic miracles. You know, there's this great movement in the early part of the 20th century to demythologize Christianity. Take away the miraculous elements. Stick with the teaching. That's the important thing. That's what's really central to Christianity. Do you think so? That creates, that makes inexplicable the early history of the church. We know that the church spread amongst people who had the least hope. The church spread through the Roman Empire and took it over. It did not spread through the elites. It did not spread through the knowledge classes. It spread through the people who were slaves, through the poor, the oppressed. How? Why were their lives transformed? Do you think Peter, can you imagine Peter's preaching to the slaves? Ah, yes, he says, you're in chains. Your lives is nothing but agony and oppression. Well, I've got good news for you. If we could just love one another, if we could just work for a better world, if we could just stop abusing each other, life would be so much better for us all. Can you see the slaves saying, finally, I've got something that will give me meaning in life? What Peter told them was something has happened. God has broken into the world. God has become a human being. God has saved you from your sins. God does not come with teaching. He comes with himself, the way C.S. Lewis put it. Jesus Christ has opened a cleft in the pitiless walls of the universe, and he's brought the life of God into our midst. And he bids us come inside. That transforms. That's, you know, that's not a philosophy. It's a proclamation. Don't you see? If you believe the gospel's good news, if you see it as a proclamation, you're a missionary. If you believe missionary work is unnecessary, it's narrow-minded, it's not just that you're more open-minded, you have gutted Christianity. You have pulled out its brain. You have pulled out its heart. You've pulled out its genius. You've pulled out its uniqueness. You can't have a little bit of Christianity. You can't just have the teachings. If you pull the heart out, you have nothing but a carcass. Everybody knows that. Okay, secondly, we've said the other reason that mission happens is not just because of the uniqueness of Christianity, also because of the uniqueness of Christianity. this way. Verse 12, there is no other name under heaven by which we must be saved. Well, a lot of, you see, the reason that we're missionaries, all Christians are missionaries, is because there's no other name by which we must be saved. Right away, people say, how narrow? You're saying that there's no other wisdom in other religions. Oh, that's not true. I'm not saying that. That there's no other goodness in other religions. No! Listen, maybe we can talk more about this later, if you stick around for the questions and answers. The Bible certainly is willing to say that God gives goodness, God gives talent, God gives wisdom to all kinds of people, regardless of what they believe. He throws it out there. It's called common grace. Everybody, I mean, we can talk about it later. Peter, the fact is that the Bible does not, and I'm certainly not, saying that other religions don't have wisdom in them. Let me show you in a minute. There's plenty. That other religions don't do enormous good. That's not what Peter's talking about here. He's not saying that Christ is unique when it comes to wisdom. He's not. He's not saying that Christ is unique when it comes to goodness. He's not. It's saying Christ is unique when it comes to salvation. You say, well, even that's narrow-minded. Oh, no, don't you see? Christ claims to be something that nobody else does. You don't, Muhammad, Buddha, Confucius, in Hinduism, in none of these other religions, does the founder, do the prophets claim to be saviors? They don't even claim it, because the claim that Jesus is the only Savior goes hand in hand with the analysis of the profound depths of our problem. Let me show you what I mean. What is our problem? The word salvation means to be rescued from a problem, a peril, you know, a danger. What is it that we need to be saved from? What is our problem? What is wrong with the world? Why is there such misery and pain and trauma and evil? Why does the world not seem to get better? Why is it that we don't seem to get better? Why are we so often unhappy and miserable? Why do we do the things that we later on regret? Why is it that every time we try to change, we find that we really can't change very much at all? What's wrong? What's the problem? What's the problem? Well, let's see what the other religions say. They have a lot of wisdom. Plenty of wisdom. Look at Buddhism. You know what it tells you? The problems are? Buddhism tells you the problems are caused by what it calls desire. Grasping, groping, self-centeredness. The desire to enhance yourself. The desire to make yourself more than you are. The desire to take in. Buddhism is quite right about this, by the way. Self-centeredness. Always desiring, always groping, always grasping for more. Ah, Buddhism says, don't you see? Not only that problem of you, that's not only the reason you're unhappy, it's the reason why society doesn't work. It's the reason the world is unhappy. So what does Buddhism say? Buddhism says, you must overcome it. You must overcome that self-centeredness. You must overcome that grasping. It's going to be tremendous hard work, but you must overcome it. And the last words of Buddha to his disciples before he died, according to the holy books, the last words of Buddha to his followers was what? Strive without ceasing. Strive without ceasing. You can overcome the self-centeredness, which is the cause of our problems. Now, when you look at Hinduism, you find essentially the same thing being said, but it's really more pessimistic, because Hinduism teaches karma, and that is, Hinduism teaches, yes, you must overcome your sins, your self-centeredness, but if you don't overcome it in this life, we'll make you do it again. That's what karma is. Karma is, you must pay. You must strive without ceasing, and if you didn't strive without ceasing in this life, we're going to put you into another life. That's what reincarnation is about. There's an endless cycle of incarnations and reincarnations and lives and re-lives and re-lives until you finally overcome, if you ever do, that self-centeredness and that grasping, you see, and that sin, which is the problem that you have and the problems of the people around you. Strive without ceasing. Well, if you go to Islam, you'll find, in some ways, Islam is better, different than Buddhism and Hinduism, in that it at least talks about mercy. Finally, here's a religion that talks about mercy, and at the beginning of every one of the 114 surahs, or chapters of the Koran, it starts off by saying to God, to Allah, and it says he's the merciful. So the word merciful is... Thanks. chapters, you will find who He's merciful to. He's merciful to the ones who pray, the ones who give alms, the ones who obey the Koran. He's merciful to the ones who strive without ceasing. So what have they all got in common? All the religions have in common, they understand that sin is the problem, that grasping, that self-centeredness is the problem, that guilt is the problem. But as Emil Brunner says, they all share the optimism of self-salvation. Not a single one of them says, this is the name by which you must be saved. Buddha, this is the name by which you must be saved. Muhammad, they don't say that. They would never say that. This is the name by which you must be saved. You know, Krishna, this is the name by which you must be saved. Confucius, they never say that. They say, your name is the name by which you must be saved. You can do it. Strive without ceasing. And therefore, whenever people hear Christians say, Quote, whenever they hear Peter say, There is no other name. There is no other name by which we must be saved. They say, oh, isn't that terrible? How awful. Christians believe only Jesus. Jesus is the only name by which we must be saved. Instead of Buddha or Mohammed. How narrow. Friends, Buddha and Mohammed never, ever said such a thing. They never said you can be saved by us. The choice is not Jesus versus these other religions. The choice is Jesus' name or yours. That's the choice. Every other religion says, Your name is the name by which you can be saved. You can do it. Strive without ceasing. Christianity is the only other alternate system which says, Not the labor of my hands can fulfill thy law's demands. Could my zeal no respite know? Could my tears forever flow? All for sin would not atone. Thou must save and thou alone. Christianity is far and away the most realistic of all the religions about the profundity of the problem. You know the place in the Bible where it says, Can the leopard change his skin? Can the leopard change his spots? Then how can you do good who are accustomed to do evil? And the Bible says, You don't need somebody to say, Strive without ceasing. It won't be good enough. You've been striving. Look at what's going on. You need someone to save you. Here's a founder of a religion who says in his last words, Strive without ceasing. Here's a founder of a religion who says with his last words, It is finished. It has ceased. I've done it. I've satisfied it. I've fulfilled it. Believe in me. I've saved you. Utterly different. The reason there's no other name under heaven by which we must be saved is the only two alternatives that the world's religions gives you is Jesus' name or yours. That's it. Don't you see, if you take the more realistic view, if you take the more realistic view that you can overcome your self-centeredness, that you need someone to do it for you, well, first of all, you need someone who can actually pay for your sin. The other founders of other religions never give you that. They never even claim to give you that. And yet, you know, if you, boy, what a beautiful way to put this. There was a man, a Japanese Christian leader who's dead now, named Toyohiko Kagawa. And he put it this way. He says, quote, I am grateful for Shinto, for Buddhism, for Confucianism. I owe much to these faiths, yet they could not meet my heart's deepest needs. I was a pilgrim journeying on a long road that had no turning. I was weary. I was foot sore. I wandered through a dark and dismal world where tragedies were thick. Buddhism teaches great compassion. But, since the beginning of time, who has ever, ever declared, this is the blood of the covenant, which is poured out to many for remission of sins? See what he says? What he's saying is, he says, I got a lot out of Shinto. I got a lot out of Buddhism. I got a lot out of Confucianism. I got a lot out of it. I was told, strive without ceasing. And so I strived, and I strived, and I strived without ceasing. But he says, on that long road, I realized that nobody, nobody but Jesus, ever said, you can cease. It is finished. This is the blood of the covenant. sins. He says, nobody ever said that. Nobody else has ever even claimed that. And of course we need that, but not only that, you need a new nature. And let me ask you this, look at the great men and women of history. Look at the most moral men and women of history. If they're only human beings, can they give you their nature? Can they give you your morality? Can they give you your strength? That's what you need. Jesus can because he's not just a human being. He's God. He's the Son of God. He's divine and human. You see, because of who he is, he can die for our sins. Because of who he is, he can give us the new nature. He's the Savior. And nobody even tries, no other major religion even claims it. So here's why we say we're missionaries. The reason Christians are missionaries is because of the uniqueness of Jesus Christ. When you say, oh, I can't believe that Jesus is the only way to God, you know what you're saying? What you're saying is, striving is enough. So you want to be, when you say, I just can't believe Jesus is the only way to God, you sound very open-minded, but you're being very exclusive. In your desire to be more inclusive than Jesus, you become more exclusive. Because now you're saying, if you say, oh, other ways, Jesus isn't the only way, other good people can come. What you're saying is, through goodness you can come. That's the thing that Kagawa said killed me. As soon as you try to become more inclusive than Jesus, you become more exclusive because the only people who can come are the good ones. Jesus says anybody can come. As soon as you try to be more open-minded than Christ, more open-minded than the Christian gospel, you become actually exclusive. And you start, what you're really saying is, morality and goodness is enough. If you believe that you can be saved by grace alone and not by good works, you have to believe there is no other name. It has to be. It's either that or works. See, think of it. If there was any other way, what was Jesus doing in the garden? He was on the ground sweating blood. He knew he was going to have to die. He knew he was going to have to experience the wrath of the Father. And so he looked up to heaven in that final prayer and he said, Father, I can't believe what I'm about to get. This cup, the cup of God's wrath, more terrible than all the lava of all the volcanoes in the whole world, heated to the millionth power. Why, the very anticipation of this thing that I'm going to go through on the cross is making me sweat blood out through my pores. And what did he say to the Father? He said, is there no other way? He says, can this cup pass from me? Can I get out of this somehow? Is there no other way? And the answer is, what? But the cup couldn't, because there was no other way. Do you think, if there was any other way, if morality and goodness and striving, if there was any other way, that Jesus would have done what he did? If there's any other way, what in the world is Jesus doing that for? How do you explain the extreme lengths to which he went? You make absolute nonsense out of what he did on the cross. The cross is utterly unnecessary. His agony is totally unnecessary. In fact, God's answer to him is unnecessary. He says, is there no other way? And the answer is, no. Do you believe Jesus died for you? Do you have an idea about what it means that Jesus died for you? If he died for you, there couldn't be any other way. Leslie Newbigin put it this way, and it's tremendous. He says, If it is true that the Almighty God, creator of heaven and earth and all that exists, sustainer of the same, so humbled himself as to become part of our human race, to suffer and die a shameful death, to take away our sin and to rise from the dead, so that all who connect with him will get his future glory. If this is true, he says, to remain quiet about it is a treason to our fellow human beings. And listen. He goes on. If it's true that the Son of God loved me and gave himself for me, how can I agree that this amazing act of matchless love should become part of a syllabus for the comparative study of religions? Is there no other way? No. And therefore, there's no other name. There's no other name. There's no other name. There's no other name. There's no other name. of religions. Is there no other way? No. And therefore, there's no other name. Lastly, wrap up here. The reason we are missionaries is not just because of the uniqueness of Christianity and the uniqueness of Christ, but also the uniqueness of the Christian. When John and Peter said in verse 20, we cannot but help. We cannot help speaking. We cannot help speaking of what we've seen and heard. He uses an amazing word there. Literally in the Greek, he says, we are not powerful enough to keep from speaking. Literally, he uses the word dynamite, dunamis, you know, the Greek word for power. He says, we don't have the power to not speak. He says, when you understand what Jesus has done, it creates a force inside of you that drives you out. You know what that force is? It's love. Don't you remember what John and Peter said to the man in the gate? Gold and silver have I none, but what I have I give you. If your master and your Lord had given you, strive without ceasing. If that's what you got, you don't go out looking and giving it to people everywhere, do you? If you know that the answer to the meaning of the universe, the answer to finding God is strive without ceasing, you don't go out telling people, good news, strive without ceasing. You don't do it. You wait for people to come to you and if they really want to know, you say, sit down, this isn't going to be easy. I'll give you what I've got. What my Lord and master told me is strive without ceasing. That's not how Peter and John do it. There's a joy, there's a love, they're pushed out and they say, silver and gold have I none, but what I have I give you. You know what they have? Salvation. Not strive without ceasing, not save yourself. Salvation. Freedom. Out of guilt into forgiveness. Freedom. Out of meaninglessness into purpose. Freedom. Out of selfishness into self-forgetful service. Freedom. Out of decay eventually and pain into a life of glory eventually. And they have a boldness about them, even though they're unschooled and ordinary men. You know why? Because if you believe in salvation by works, there's no boldness because you figure, well, if I'm going to tell people about God, I better really have the best resume and have gotten into the best schools and really have my life together. But once you understand that you're saved by grace alone, it gives you a boldness and you become a walking example of salvation by grace. Your boldness comes from the grace of God. These guys were losers in the eyes of the authorities. These guys were hoi polloi, the unwashed, the great unwashed. These guys did not get into the good schools. These guys did not have clout. These guys did not have status. Where did they get their boldness from? What we've seen and heard. Friends, do you have that boldness? If you don't, you notice where they got it? Look at it. It says, they saw they were bold, though they were unschooled and ordinary men because they'd been with Jesus. If you don't have the boldness, you haven't been with them. You haven't been close to them. There hasn't been an intimacy. But if you're with them and you know what he's done for you, you will be able to look to other people and say, silver and gold have I none. But what I have, I give you. Rise up in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth and walk. Do you see? It's a picture of salvation. Peter and John didn't say to the guy at the gate, they didn't say, we have a six-month rehabilitation program. If you really stick with it, in six months, I have you up and around. You'll have to work very hard. You'll have to do it every single day. If you miss even one day of the program, see, that's self-salvation. No! This is a picture of what it means to become a Christian. Silver and gold have I none. And I know that you don't have the ability to get up, but in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, I say, rise up and walk. That's Christianity. Let's pray. Father, we ask simply that as we think about what it means to be a Christian and what Christianity is, we have two groups of people in the room. On the one hand, we have people who have only ever seen Christianity as a philosophy, as a program. They've never seen it as a historical fact. They've never seen it as a challenge to change their lives. They've never seen it in that way. And I pray that you would show them what it means to give themselves to you. And Father, there are many of us who do not have the boldness of these ordinary and unschooled men that we have only ever seen in real life. They just said not to give themselves to you. For the children of Nazareth, there's nothing different than their lives Jesus just said not to give themselves until they stop thinking and sometimes to you. And Father, there are many of us who do not have the boldness of these ordinary and unschooled men because we haven't been with Jesus. We ask that you would help us to be so much with him that we also can turn to others and say, in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, rise up and walk. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
