TITLE: The Lepers Are Cleansed
SCRIPTURE: 2 Kings 5:1-19
TOPICS: Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Receiving the Spirit (with Elisha)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-lepers-are-cleansed/

============================================================

Let's take a look at the passage on which the teaching is based. It's written in your bulletin. It's 2 Kings 5. I'm going to read verses 1 to 19. It's a whole story, a whole narrative. Now Naaman was commander of the army of the king of Aram. By the way, Aram is Syria. He was a great man in the sight of his master and highly regarded because through him the Lord had given victory to Aram. He was a valiant soldier, but he had leprosy. Now bands from Aram had gone out and had taken captive a young girl from Israel and she served Naaman's wife. She said to her mistress, If only my master would see the prophet who is in Samaria, he would hear him of his leprosy. Now Naaman went to his master and told him what the girl from Israel had said. By all means, go, the king of Aram replied. I will send a letter to the king of Israel. So Naaman left, taking with him 10 talents of silver, 6,000 shekels of gold, and 10 sets of clothing. The letter that he took to the king of Israel read, With this letter I am sending my servant Naaman to you so that you may cure him of his leprosy. As soon as the king of Israel read the letter, he tore his robes and says, Am I God? Can I kill and bring back to life? Why does this fellow send someone to me to be cured of his leprosy? See how he is trying to pick a quarrel with me. And when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his robes, he sent him this message. Why have you torn your robes? Have the man come to me and he will know that there is a prophet in Israel. So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and stopped at the door of Elisha's house. Elisha sent a messenger to him to say to him, Go, wash yourself seven times in the Jordan and your flesh will be restored and you will be cleansed. But Naaman went away angry and said, I thought he would surely come out to me and stand and call on the name of the Lord his God, wave his hand over the spot, cure me of my leprosy. Are not Abana and Farpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than any of the waters of Israel? Couldn't I have washed in them and been cleansed? So he turned and went off in a rage. And Naaman's servants went to him and said, My father, if the prophet had told you to do some great thing, would you not have done it? And how much more then, when he tells you, wash and be cleansed? So he went down and dipped himself in the Jordan seven times, as the man of God had told him, and his flesh was restored and became clean like that of a young boy. Now then Naaman and all of his descendants went back to the man of God. He stood before him and said, Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in Israel. Please accept now a gift from your servant. And the prophet answered, As surely as the Lord lives, whom I serve, I will not accept a thing. And even though Naaman urged him, he refused. If you will not, said Naaman, please let me, your servant, be given as much earth as a pair of mules can carry. For your servant will never again make burnt offerings and sacrifices to any other god but the Lord. But may the Lord forgive your servant for this one thing. When my master enters the temple of Rimon to bow down, and he is leaning on my arm, and I bow there also, when I bow down in the temple of Rimon, may the Lord forgive your servant for this. Go in peace, Elisha said. This is God's word. Now, when Elisha, pardon me, when Jesus Christ was asked by John the Baptist, How do we know you're really the Messiah? John the Baptist asked him that in Matthew chapter 11. How do we know you're the one? Jesus says, Look at my ministry. The blind see, the lepers are healed, the dead are raised, and the poor have good news preached to him. Now, the only place in history before Jesus came along that that happened was in the ministries of Elijah and Elisha. All those miracles happened in their time, because God especially came down and visited the people. And Jesus is saying, Look, these four things are not just miracles, as wonderful as they are. They're signs of what always happened to people when they meet the real God. And of course, they did happen in the ministry of Elisha and Elijah, but just occasionally. They happen in spades almost every day in the ministry of Jesus, because they're actually pointing to him. And so Jesus says, Take a look at these four kinds of miracles, and each one will tell you something about what it means to meet me. And therefore, we're looking during the month of October at each one of these miracles to say, Well, how does this tell us whether our experience of God is real, or whether it's spurious, or whether it's psychological, or whether it's superficial, or whether it's pathological? How do we know that we've really met the real God? And these are the ways. And we're taking a look at this particular narrative tonight, because it is just about the perfect. a life-changing encounter with God. And when we look at what happened to Naaman, we'll learn, if we look at the early part of the narrative, we learn how we come to God. The middle part of the narrative tells us how we actually meet God. And then the third part of the narrative, how we know we've met him. Okay? How we come, how we meet him, how we know we've met him. Let's take a look. First of all, two things bring him. See, how do we come to God? There's actually two things that bring Naaman to Elisha's door. It's very unusual that a Syrian general would end up at the door of a prophet in Israel, but there's two things that get him there. The first thing is friends. Friends tell him the good news. Notice if you have a little slave girl who gives him information without which he'd be dead, the little slave girl says, there's a way you can get your elspersy healed. Then secondly, you've got, well, probably, and it doesn't exactly say, but probably the reason why Naaman believed the little slave girl was because his wife told him about it. It's very likely that he wouldn't have listened to her. I mean, that's a little bit speculative, but then you have his wife there. Then, of course, at the critical moment in verse 13, when Naaman is so furious with the advice Elisha gives, and he's ready to go off, and he's ready to lose his one hope in his anger, his servants come and say, oh, my father, please go wash, do what the prophet says. Now, here's the point. Naaman would be dead without his friends. Naaman is continually going off the rails in one direction or another, and his friends keep getting him back on. So that's the first thing, the first point. What do we learn for ourselves? What we learn for ourselves is, this is not an absolute rule, but the vast majority of people who have ever really met God have met God through friends who were more spiritually wise and experienced than they are. In other words, you are much more likely to meet somebody if you're willing to do so through friends. If you have no friends, by and large, it means you're not going to meet him. You're not going to really have an encounter with him. Now, I know that's a little hard for individualistic Western people to buy. I'll put it to you this way. If you are afraid to talk about your spiritual doubts to somebody else who kind of walks with you, if you just want to slip into church, for example, and slip out, but you don't want to be involved in any other way, or you don't want to have any other friends that you're doing this with, if you don't want other people to see your doubts and your struggles and so forth, you're too proud to be healed. I'll push it a little further. Look at the kind of friends he gets. You see, one of the reasons a lot of people don't ever really meet God is because they're too proud to let their hair down and to share their spiritual doubts with somebody else who walks with them. You've got to have some friends who know more about spiritual issues than you do. But look carefully. He keeps trying to go to the top. He keeps trying to go to kings, and he keeps getting all of his messages from God through slaves. And this is the second reason why an awful lot of people never find God. The second reason people never find God is because a lot of folks look, you come into church, and they look around and they say, is everybody else as well off as me, or as sleek as me, or as cool as me? And you look around and say, a lot of these people look kind of nerdy. A lot of these people look kind of dowdy. A lot of these people look like they're sort of beneath me on the social scale. And you see, that's the problem with Naaman. Naaman was continually trying to find somebody in his class who could help him spiritually. And God kept sending him people way beneath his class. Why? Well, we're going to get to that in a second. But the point is, if you're not willing to listen to people who are off your map, if you're not willing to be friends to people who are different than you, or even maybe socially and culturally beneath you, you're too proud to be healed. So the first thing we see, friends, the first reason he comes to Elisha, he never would have come to Elisha. He never would have come to the prophet. He never would have met God. He never would have been healed without friends. But the second thing, a spot. You notice he has leprosy. But notice when he talks about it, oh, where is it? In verse 12, in verse 11, he says, I thought that he would surely come out and stand and call on the name of the Lord and wave his hand over the spot. You remember Lady Macbeth walking around with a damn spot on her hand? What are we talking about here? Well, this is what's so ironic. Verse 1 is filled with irony. Because what we have here is a man who is the ultimate insider. Here's a man who is the ultimate insider. Here's a man who is the ultimate insider. is a victor, a victorious general. Here's a man who, by the way, at the very end, when he says that every week he goes to the temple of Rimon and the king leans on his arm. That means he's the prime minister. And he says he's well highly regarded. He's a celebrity. So he has gotten into the inner ring, the inner ring of wealth, the inner ring of power, the inner ring of beauty and celebrity. But he's got leprosy. Now, what is leprosy? Leprosy in the ancient times was the ultimate disease of an outsider because leprosy had just started as a spot. But it was going to, it's incurable and it's a wasting disease. And eventually leprosy kills you literally by having you fall apart. And the reason it was the ultimate outsider's disease is because when it got advanced, first of all, the leper was so horrible to look at, so absolutely disgusting, so impossible to live with. And secondly, because of the fear of contagion, lepers were put out. They were outsiders, utter, total outsiders. They were, they were put outside the gate. They were put outside the city. They were put outside the family. Outside. The irony here is, Naaman was a complete insider, but something had shown up. I don't know where it was. Could have been on his hand. Who knows where it was? But a spot had shown up that he knew that he wasn't going to be able to deal with. So the ultimate insider underneath realizes basically he is on his way to being an outsider. He is an outsider. It's just a matter of time before it shows up. What does, what does this teach us? It teaches us just simply this. The Bible explains this to us. The Bible says, why is it that we need to be on the inside? Why do we so desperately want to be inside? Why are we so afraid of being on the outside? Why is it, by the way, C.S. Lewis writes about this so beautifully in his sermon or his address called The Inner Ring. Lewis says, everybody wants to be on the inside. We want to be smart enough to be part of the inner academic ring or beautiful enough to be part of the inner social ring or wealthy enough to be part of the inner power ring. Or if we can't get into the inner ring, then we desperately want to look down our nose at anybody who's trying. We want to say, I'm not like one of those kinds of people that tries to get on the inner ring. So the people on the inside looking at those of us on the outside saying, you losers. And people on the outside looking at the people on the inside saying, you bunch of brown noses, you bunch of snobs, you unbelievers. How desperate you must be. You seem to need to deal with your low self-esteem by being on the inside, but you're dealing with your low self-esteem by looking down your nose at them. See, C.S. Lewis is very right in saying, everybody has a desperate need to get on the inside. Why? He says, we can't write this up to just the economic motive, just the erotic motive, or even just pride. He says, there's something deeper going on here, and there is. The reason we want to be so much on the inside of the human inner rings is because deep underneath, semi-consciously or unconsciously, we know we're spiritual outsiders. We know that we've been cast out of the real power. We know that we're alienated from real wealth and real beauty. See, in the Garden of Eden, we were naked, the Bible says. In the face of God, we were with Him. We weren't ashamed of who we were. We knew Him. We were His servants. We were His children. But when we decided to be our own masters, immediately we became ashamed. We had to cover up. What does that mean? The Bible says, as soon as we realized we were on the outside of real beauty, real wealth, and real power, we were outside of God, there was something wrong with us. As soon as we experienced that shame, we have been desperately seeking by trying to get into every inner circle anywhere else to cover that from ourselves and from everybody else. The ultimate insiders, even those who are the ultimate insiders, deep down inside are driven by a knowledge that we're basically on the outside. And what will happen to us, what has to happen if we're ever going to find God, is that inner leprosy has to kind of, a spot has to show up. Something goes wrong. Something shows you that you're still empty. Something shows you that you're still weak. In spite of your killer resume, you feel like an imposter. And when you, listen, there's people here who are saying, I don't believe that Garden of Eden story. I don't even know if I believe in God. I certainly don't believe in wrath and hell and all this stuff you seem to be alluding to and talking about. Okay, maybe you don't believe it, but I want to ask you a question. Why do you have that voice deep in your heart that's always calling you a fool? Always saying how stupid you are. Always saying what a failure you are. How idiotic you look. Where does that come from? Well, you say, my therapist told me my parents didn't love me. Let me tell you something. There's a lot of us that had wonderfully loving parents and we have the voice too, which means that maybe bad. something deeper. We know there's something wrong with us. We know we're on the outside of real wealth, real power, real beauty, and that's why we're trying to get in so desperately to the inner rings of wealth, power, and beauty here. But the ultimate insider is really an outsider until a problem comes along in your life that you can't handle. You don't know it. But if you've got friends, and you've got a spot, and it's growing, that's what brings you to God. Now, that's what we see in the first. In the second, in the second part, the middle part of the narrative, we learn not just how we are brought to God, but how we actually meet Him. Now, how do we meet Him? And here again, there's two things that the narrative tells us have to happen to us, or two things we have to have, if we're going to meet God, really be healed, really be cleansed, really get rid of that spot. The first thing is, we've got to realize that religion won't work. And the second thing is, if we're going to meet God, is we've got to have a suffering servant in our lives. Okay, the first thing is, we've, look at, what's so intriguing is, and let's, I don't want to take too long on this, but it's how important it is. Here is Naaman, and he realizes he needs to go to see the God of Israel. He needs something. And as soon as he does, what does he do? He gets religious. Now, what is religion? Let me show, let me give you a summary, and then let me show you how he does it. He immediately does it all wrong. He gets religious. And God has got to break him of his understanding, and show him that religion will never get you to God. Now, what is religion? It's very simple. Religion is saying this, if I live right, if I do right, if I'm moral, if I'm good, if I'm really a together person, then God will have to bless me. Okay? If I really live right, if I'm really a great person, if I'm really a good person, then God will have to bless me. That's religion. And that immediately leads to the three things. And take a look at the three things he does, and shows you that he gets super religious. First of all, he goes only to the top, to insiders. That's the first mark of religion. Where did the little girl tell him to go? To Elisha, the prophet. Where does he go? He goes to the king of Syria to get a letter of recommendation, and then he goes to the king of Israel. Why? Because think about it now. Religion is always associated with insiders, and respectable people, and accomplished people. Because, see, if religion is, if I really do well, if I'm really great, then God will bless me. Who do you figure will help you find God? Who do you figure God is working with? Really good people. Really together people. Accomplished people. People who have risen to the top. People who have come up the ladder. People who are very good, very much under self-control. You don't go to the broken. You don't go to the slaves. You don't go to the failures. You don't go to the outsiders. Why would God have anything to do with them? If you're really good, God will bless you. Which means, if you look at the people at the top, those are the people that God is blessing, or God will bless. And so he goes to the top. And yet, God is continually, all through here, God never gives him a word, except through a slave, or a servant. The first word comes through the little servant girl, in verse 2. The second word comes through the messenger of Elisha. See, even Elisha knows that we've got to get this guy out of his religious mindset. And Elisha refuses to come out and sends him a servant, sends him a messenger. And then lastly, at the very end, the only reason he does finally go and wash is because his own servants come after him. God, over and over and over, refuses to send him anybody at the top, anybody accomplished, anybody whose life is together. Why? Because God is trying to say, you need a paradigm shift. You need a paradigm shift. Religion isn't about the good people and the accomplished people. Very often, they're the farthest from God. Okay, look at the second thing he does, which is another mark of religion. The first mark of religion is, you always go for the insiders, the respectable people. They're the people you want in your church. They're the people you want to hang out with. They're the people who know. The second mark of religion is he points to his life and his performance, and he tries to earn his healing through his great life. Notice, it says, not only does he come with this great, you know, this letter from one king to another king, but he comes along and he says, it says, he not only does that, but he also brings ten talents of silver, six thousand shekels of gold, and ten sets of clothing. And a lot of commentators really have a heyday here, and they say, look, if you knew anything about how much wealth that is, you would know that there is no one human individual could possibly have that much money. And many of the commentators say that would have represented like a quarter to a third of maybe the net worth of an entire kingdom. No way one person is that wealthy. Maybe even the king is that wealthy. But certainly no one guy like that. Therefore, this can't... would he have gotten that money? Not just his own money. He was so popular. He was so respected. His life was such a shining example. He was so loved and so great and such a good person. That the kingdom was willing, or maybe the king, or certainly the populace, was willing to just send all that money out just so he'd be healed. And so what is he doing? He's not just bringing money. He's saying, look at me. Look at my life. I deserve to be healed. I have been very good. So God has to bless me. But you see, the king of Israel tears his robe. Why? Now, the king of Israel's got some problems here. He's scared because he realizes that the Syrians don't understand. The faith in Israel operates completely different than human religion. And he's scared because the king of Syria is a lot more powerful than the king of Israel. He says, are you just trying to get me in trouble? But what does he do? What he's really upset about is this. He says, what do you think I am? In every other country, in religion, you tell God what to do. You control God. The king controls the prophets. The king controls the priests. The king essentially controls God. Because in religion, you're basically in an adversarial relationship. In religion, you're basically saying, I've lived a good life. You've got to bless me. You're making God an offer he cannot refuse. You're trying to control him. You're trying to put him on a leash. You're trying to say, you owe me. Here's no, that's not friendship. That's adversary. An adversarial relationship. It's a way of trying to get a hold of God. It's a way of trying to get leverage on God. It's a way of trying to get control of God. And the king of Israel says, don't you understand? This is the one place where the king doesn't control God. God controls the king. The king does not tell the prophets what to say. The prophets tell the king what to do. In religion, you give God. You give to God, then God owes you. But in biblical faith, God gives you everything, and then you owe him. He says, we don't have God under control here. What do you think I am? You think I have the power of God? I don't. This is different. This isn't religion. This is biblical faith. This is different. You can't earn this. And then lastly, so first of all, he goes to the top. Secondly, he points to his performance. And then thirdly, what does he do? The third thing he does is he comes all ready to do a great deed. I think it's hilarious almost if you look in verse 8 and verse 9. So Naaman, verse 9, So Naaman went with his horses and chariots and stopped at the door of Elisha's house. Isn't that hilarious? Chariots, you know? The guy comes up with his entourage and his... Chariots means he's got a whole armed crew with him. And why? Coming up to the door of Elisha's house. I doubt it was a very big house. You know, all these people come up in their finery and their armor. Why? Well, if you look in verse 13, you'll see why. Because he goes away angry. Why? Well, the servants come and say, Father, if the prophet had asked you to do some great thing... See, he understood. Look, maybe the letter is not enough. And maybe the money and the performance and the pass isn't enough. Maybe Elisha is going to say... He thought this would be perfectly okay. His understanding of religion was... Maybe Elisha would come and say, Bring me the broomstick of the wicked witch of the west. You know, slay a dragon. Rescue somebody in a castle. And he was ready to do so. But Elisha says to him, Go down to the river and just wash. And he's insulted. Any idiot could just wash. I'm powerful. Look at my biceps. But any weakling could just wash. I'm wealthy. Look at my entourage. But any poor man could just wash. Anybody can just wash. What are we talking about here? Grace? We're talking about a God who would give healing just like that? How could that be? How could it be free? And you see, that's the point. All the way through. Religion. I'm going to earn my way in. I'm going to control God. Biblical faith. God has to give it to you by grace. And then you owe him. That's the reason we don't want it. We don't believe it. We don't want it. Because we want to say, Hey, God can't just ask anything of me. I've got my rights. I've lived a good life. But if you understand, you just wash. You lose control. And that's the reason why we don't want that. We filter it out. Listen, this is so critical. God has to break him. One place after another. Message is only through the slaves. King tearing his robes. Elisha sending out a messenger. Elisha telling him just to go wash. Over and over and over again, he's trying to do it through religion. And that's what's going to happen to you. The natural instinctual instructing instinctual stud Elisha's sending out a messenger, Elisha telling him just to go wash. Over and over and over again, he's trying to do it through religion, and that's what's going to happen to you. The natural instinct, as soon as you think you're going to need God, is you get religious. You start to study your Bible, and you stop the things that you know you shouldn't have been doing, I shouldn't be doing that, I shouldn't be doing that. You clean up your life, you come to church. There's people who may be here, maybe have come here for weeks or months, or maybe even longer than that, basically doing Naaman's thing. Do I have to tear my robes? What you're saying is, I'm going to be really good, and now God's going to have to bless me. How many times have I heard people say, you know, when I was kind of sleeping all around, my life was going okay. Then I decided to really get serious and obey God, and I started coming to Redeemer, and I stopped sleeping around, and I lost my job. What's going on here? That very question is a Naaman question. That's a religious question. I've cleaned up my life. God has to bless me. What's going on? And you'll never find God that way. That's the main point of the narrative, practically, almost. That unless you break down your understanding of religion, unless you stop trying to get to God's religion, you'll never get him. But there's one more thing you have to have in order to meet him. It's not enough just to realize it's free. Because, you see, as soon as you say it's free, how could something that wonderful be free? How could it be just free? How could God just sort of give it out? Well, it is free to you, but it's not free, you see. Why is it that he is saved? I'll tell you why. Let's go back. He has a suffering servant in his life. In verse 2, little slave girl. Now, who's the little slave girl? Number one, she was taken by plunder by Syrian soldiers in a raid. That means, at the very best, her whole family was sold into slavery, so she's lost them forever. At the very worst, she saw her family killed before her eyes. And now she's a slave. She's of a hated race. She's Jewish living in Syria. So she's of a hated race. She's a slave. She's just property. She's a woman in a land when there was, in a time in which women had no rights. And she's young. She's probably 12, 13, or 14. That's what the word means, young girl. Somewhere between 12 and 14. Her life's been utterly ruined. Her life is totally broken. Her life is over. And who's responsible? Think about it. Who's responsible for this? Who killed her family? Or who captured her family? Who ruined her life? The leader of the military operations of the Syrian army, Naaman. In fact, since she was his slave, it's very possible he might have been on the raid that destroyed her village and maybe killed her family. So what does she do? She's suffering. Her life is broken. Her heart is broken. Her life is broken. What does she do? Well, if you go to somebody's house, let's just say, and you knock over one of their glasses and it falls to the ground and it's a beautiful glass and you say, oh no, I'm so sorry. Let me pay for it. And your host says, she says, no, no, no, no, no, no. I won't make you do that. Don't you dare. No, forget it. She forgives you. Now, what happens to the price of that glass? Now, if she doesn't forgive you, you pay for it. But if she forgives you, it doesn't go into thin air. She pays for it. She'll have to replace it. So to forgive is to pay the sin, to absorb the sin of the person who's wronged you. Now, suddenly, here's this little girl and her life is ruined. And he's the one who's ruined it. And now she realizes he's got leprosy and she knows, she knows how he can be saved. So she has his life in her hand. And what does she do with it? There's only two ways she can go. She can say, ha ha, the old goat has leprosy. I saw another finger fall off today. And she sits there and she says, I am going to dance on his grave. I'm going to dance on his grave the way he danced on my father and my mother's grave. I'm going to dance on his grave. In which case, she makes him pay for his sins. Or she can do what she did. She forgives him. How do I know she forgave him? How do I know? Because look at the way she says. She doesn't just say to her mistress, oh, by the way. She says, if only my master would see you would go. If only my master. Those are words of love. She's forgiven him. She looked to heaven and she said, Lord, I want justice, but you can be my judge. I don't have to be bitter. Lord, I want my father, but you can be my father. I don't have to be needy. And because she went to God like that, she forgave him. And what that means is, he would not have been saved unless she paid, unless she absorbed the price of his sins. Unless you have a suffering servant in your life, somebody who pays the debt for your sins, you'll not be saved. I don't have to be a son of God. at one level, I hope everyone here would be like her. She's sitting on her little cot at night, crying herself to sleep every night, crying for her father, crying for freedom. But what does she do? She pays the price of usefulness. In other words, if she stays bitter against him, and if she stays bitter against God, she says, God, you've ruined my life, I'm not going to obey you. She looks at him and says, I'm going to hate you. We would never have heard of her, would we? She would have never have changed anybody's life. But because she forgave him, and because she obeyed God in the dark, she obeyed God in a corner, she obeyed God in a situation that looked like there was absolutely no rhyme or reason to it. As a result, 3,000 years later, we're here studying her life. Now, is there anybody in this room that 3,000 years from now they're going to be studying your life? Anybody going to have that kind of impact? In fact, maybe. Yes, maybe. Why not? If you are willing to forgive the people who wrong you, and if you're willing to obey God, even though you have no idea why God's put you in a situation, who knows? She did. If she hadn't, we'd never have heard of her. She'd never had this incredible impact. But you see, how are you going to be like her? How are you going to become such an incredibly useful person? How are you going to become somebody who, through their friendship and love and forgiveness, really completely changes the lives of the people around you, as she did? Only if you look to the one to whom her life points. Because we can all have that suffering servant. There was one who left his father's love voluntarily. Voluntarily, he lost his father, and the way he lost his father was much more painful than the way she lost hers. It was voluntary. And because he had a love with his father that way beyond any love that she had or any of us have ever had. And not only that, he was a prince before he became a slave. He was a prince before he was humble into servanthood. He was in heaven before. And what did he do? He looked down from the cross when we were betraying him, we were denying him, and we were forsaking him, and he forgave us. But you will never be like her unless you look at him and you see what he has done. And by the way, this is one of the most wonderful things. Who is the Christ figure in this narrative? Who is the type of Christ? Is it Elisha? No. Is it Naaman? No. It's her. And this is one of the reasons why the Bible over and over and over and over again says, the place you're going to find Jesus in this world is the downtrodden and the oppressed and the poor. Those are the people the most like Christ. This is the reason why he came in a manger. This is the reason why the great, there's a Christmas hymn that puts it perfectly about Christmas. It says, Seek not in courts or palaces, nor royal curtains draw, but search the stable. See your God extended on the straw. Jesus Christ came to be a servant. Jesus Christ came to be a suffering servant, a person who died in the dark. It didn't look like anything good could come out of that. If you were willing to see that he loves you so much he would do that, you'll be able to handle it. My goodness, all she knew was that God is her judge in some general way and that God was her father in some general way. And she was able to forgive him. But you know what Jesus has done for you if you just read it, if you take it. And if you see him dying in the dark for you, you'll be able to forgive the people and you'll pay the price for usefulness and people's lives will be changed through you. Now, one last thing. How do we know Naaman's really, really met God? Three quick things. Here's three signs. And by the way, if you stick around, I'll do a question and answer tonight and you can always press me for more information on these three things. But there's three things that in his life that prove that he's really met God. Number one, extraordinary new intellectual convictions. He says, now I know that there's no God but the God of Israel. That is an astounding thing for a Syrian general to say. Now I know, what? Now I know that there is no God in all the world except in Israel. Now, I'm not going to get into that because somebody says, well, wait a minute. Here's the point. There is no way that you have spiritual experience, new spiritual experience without new beliefs, new thinking, new intellectual understanding. Your mind and your heart go together. There's no way you can have great spiritual experience unless your mind gets changed, unless you come to biblical convictions, unless there's an intellectual revolution, unless there's a passion for truth. You can have truth without spiritual experience, but you can't have spiritual experience without truth because what really creates spiritual experience is truth put into the heart by the grace of the gospel and of the Holy Spirit. So first of all, he has new, clear, biblical, intellectual convictions. Secondly, he's unbelievably generous. He comes back and he wants to give a gift. Now, Elisha's smart enough to realize that even though he's a brand new believer, it's not a very good idea for somebody who just tried to pay his way into the kingdom to take a gift. give money when the minister didn't ask, and a minister who won't take it. I've never seen this before. Have you? Here's lay people trying to give the money away, and the minister's saying no. Now, usually it's the opposite, isn't it? But here's what goes on. Before the gospel comes into your life, before you really understand that he loves you, money is security, and money is self-esteem. I need money so I feel good about myself. I need money to really feel like secure in the world. But you know what the gospel does? The gospel makes it just money. If through Jesus Christ you know you're secure, and if through Jesus Christ you know you're loved, money is just money now. And that's why you just say, oh, money. It's just money. Would you like some? See, the gospel makes it just money. And as a result, one of the ways you know you're a sinner saved by grace is you become radically generous. And thirdly, extraordinary new intellectual convictions, extraordinary generosity, and an extraordinary effort to be consistent in every part of his life with his salvation. He's going back to his job. Notice this. He's going back to being prime minister. He doesn't say, can I please stay in Israel? Can I just, you know, go into full-time Christian work? No, no. He goes back to his secular job. But, he says, the trouble is, in my secular job there's all this idolatry. So I've got to find a way to keep my job, but let everybody know that I'm a believer in the God of Israel. So he says, here's what I'm going to do. Every week I have to take the king into the temple of Rimon, which of course is, that's the Syrian God. He says, I've decided that though I must serve my country, I refuse to worship my country. So that when I go in there, doing my duty, I'm going to have my servants come along, and they're going to put dirt from Israel down, I'm going to kneel down on the dirt, and I'm going to let everybody know that though I love my country, I won't worship my country, I worship the God of Israel. Now, you want to know something? Every one of us is going to have to be as creative as that. Everyone's going to have to be as risky as that. How, on the one hand, do you keep your job, but at the same time you're not filled with, you're not controlled by the idolatries of the other people in your field? How can you be in business without worshiping money? How can you be in the media without worshiping sensation? You know, how can you be in the fashion world without worshiping beauty? How can you do that? Well, you say, just get out. No. He said to Elisha, let me go back, and this is my way of dealing with it. Elisha says, go ahead. A lot of people would say, how dare you? You can't go into that awful temple of Rimon. It's spiritually tainted. No, no, no. And there's a lot of Christians that say, get out. You're a Christian. You've got to get out of that awful secular world. He goes in, and he struggles, and it's creative, and it's weird, and it's partial, and it's a kind of interesting idea. And everybody who goes back into their profession with their faith will have all the same kind of challenge to be creative that he came up with. I think it's a pretty interesting idea. What is your way of doing this? You have to struggle for consistency in every area of your life. Religion privatizes things. If you're a religious person, you know, you go and do your thing on Sunday or Saturday or Friday. You know, you go to your temple, you go to your mosque, you go to your church, and you just do your thing. And the rest of the week, you don't even think about it that much. You know, you stay away from the big rules. You don't do any gross sins, but you don't say, how can I be utterly consistent with the God of grace who saved me? But if you're a Christian, you will. Do you have those marks in your life? Where's your passion for intellectually grasping more truth? Where's the radical generosity? Why don't you take any initiative to give more of your money away because the gospel's made it just money? How are you trying to be a witness in your work without just sticking this great big Bible up on your desk? Got to be more creative than that. Have you met God? You'll be as changed as Naaman. Have you met Jesus? You'll be as useful as that little girl. Let's pray. We thank you, Father, for giving us this story which shows us greatness is not what we think, the world thinks. Help us to follow your Son so that we may be really used, really used as he was used. And we ask all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
