TITLE: The Church’s Lightning
SCRIPTURE: Luke 9:28-36
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Worship
SERIES: The Church – How to Believe Despite Christians
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-churchs-lightning/

============================================================

What we're going to do next week is have a covenant renewal service, and if you come next week, I'll tell you what it is. I'm not sure, though, you might be motivated enough, so let me give you a hint. In the Old Testament, every so often, God insisted that people found ways of remembering the miracle through which they came to Him. So there's a place where, when the children of Israel go through the Jordan River by a miracle, God dries up the river and they go through the river, He insists that they all take stones out of the river and put a heap of stones up and say, I want you to look at those stones every so often and remember what they mean. Now, the reason that God does that is this. You think that when a miracle has happened to you and something has happened beyond your human ability, something has occurred in your life that's beyond your ability, it was a gift of God, it's a miracle. So, you figure you'll always remember that, but you don't. You don't. Within weeks sometimes, months, certainly years, you're acting as if you must only do things that are within your human ability to do. You, in a sense, you forget spiritually and emotionally that you have a God of power. Churches do that. When churches start, it's almost always a miracle. Redeemer's beginning eight, nine years ago was a miracle. But now, up until recently, we've actually just been doing things that are within our human ability to do. But what we're going to do, starting soon, is we're going to divide Redeemer into a whole series of churches. We're going to a number of strategies that we've been mailing out to you. And what we're going to do next week is we're going to have a service in which we get back to our roots and we're going to say, we're doing something that's beyond our human ability to do. We're remembering that there's a God of power and grace. We haven't been acting that way lately. Now, we're going to remember it. So, we're going to have a communion service. We're going to have testimonies of people who've had their lives changed through Redeemer. We're going to take the pledges for the fund through which we're going to do so many of the new parts of the new plan. That'll all be next week. We hope you make it. Now, that was not the sermon. That was an announcement. And it was so inspiring. Imagine what the sermon's going to be like. What a church. Okay, would you turn to Luke, the scripture reading? Actually, it might be, the sermon might be like the announcement. The announcement might be like the sermon. God is very unpredictable. Let's look at Luke 9, verses 28 to 36. It's printed in your bulletin. About eight days after Jesus said this, he took Peter, John, and James with him and went up onto a mountain to pray. And as he was praying, the appearance of his face changed and his clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning. Two men, Moses and Elijah, appeared in glorious splendor talking with Jesus. They spoke about his departure, which he was about to bring to fulfillment at Jerusalem. Peter and his companions were very sleepy, but when they became fully awake, they saw his glory and the two men standing with him. And as the men were leaving Jesus, Peter said to him, Master, it is good for us to be here. Let us put up three shelters, one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah. He did not know what he was saying. And while he was speaking, a cloud appeared and enveloped them, and they were afraid as they entered the cloud. And a voice came from the cloud saying, This is my son, whom I have chosen. Listen to him. And when the voice had spoken, they found Jesus was alone. The disciples kept this to themselves and told no one at that time what they had seen. This is God's word. Now, we're in a series of sermons, and I want to say something about the theme of the series, even before we get into the theme of the sermon today. Because as we come to the climax of the series, actually, next week, I want to talk about the theme of the series as well as the sermon. Why are we doing, over a series of weeks, why are we looking at the church? Why are we every week asking ourselves, What should the church be? And I'll tell you why. Because, for thoughtful people, the biggest question about believing in Christ has to do with the church. In other words, because the church's record has been so atrocious at times, because the church has been one of the greatest reasons for not believing in Jesus Christ, if not the greatest reason. In other words, because the record of the church is probably the greatest reason for not believing in Jesus Christ, we have to, all thoughtful people have to ask themselves the question, how can I believe in Christ despite Christians? That's the question. All thoughtful people have to deal with that. How do I believe in Jesus Christ? Can I believe in Jesus Christ? Should I believe in Jesus Christ? way most people say, gosh, I know that the church is such a problem, but I want to check out Jesus, the way they do it is they ignore the church. The studies will tell you, the polls will tell you, a very famous poll taken by some sociologists some years ago said this. Eighty percent of Americans agree to this statement. You can be a very good Christian and not go to church at all. Eighty percent of Americans say you can be a good Christian and not go to church at all. Now, listen, it's a free country. You can believe whatever you want, and you can say, I believe, but, you know, call it what you want. Call it Jack Frost. Call it whatever, but if you want to believe in Christ, you need to get, come to grips with the only records we have of his life and ministry, and when you go and look at them, you're going to see something pretty remarkable. Every week I've given you a little different example of this, but in the Gospel of John, which is one of the four lives of Jesus we have in the Bible, one of the four biographies in a sense. John gives 25 percent of his entire biography of Jesus to the final prayer that Jesus Christ did, a long, desperate, eloquent prayer to his father just before he was killed. Twenty-five percent. Chapters 13, essentially all the way through to 17. Five chapters, really, out of 20. Now, we all know, common sense tells us that whatever a person is saying for hours and hours and hours just before he dies would be the passion of his life. It would be the thing he was about, and since John wrote one of the most influential books in the history of the world, we ought to probably grant that he's a good biographer, and a good biographer would not give 25 percent of the biography of Jesus to one prayer unless it was at the very essence of what he was about. And if you go to that prayer, I want you to know what he's praying about. Do you know what he's praying about? Over and over again? Verse after verse, chapter after chapter, on and on and on. The church. He is praying to his father for what he wants his people to be like, for what he wants his people to be doing in the world. He's praying about the church. What does that mean? If you go to Picasso and you say, I would like to get to know you, and he says, well, have you seen my art? No. I don't want to look at your art. I just want an interview with you. He would say, what a niff-narf-y idea that some little shallow question and answer time is going to get to the heart of me. Oh, look at my art. I have been bleeding for this, to create this, for years. This is the essence of who I am. And if Jesus Christ, on the night before he dies, right before he dies, shows by this prayer that this is the passion of his life. This is the masterpiece of his life. To create a people, a new society, a new humanity. People transformed by his power to live in the world as people should live. If this is the passion of his life, and you say, I can be a good Christian and not go to church at all. Look, the trouble is the church is a master painting, in a sense. It's a work of art, we said, but it's like a master painting that's been painted over the years by many inferior artists. And the only way we're going to find out the genius of what Jesus actually put there is we have to scrape it away. We've got to get back to the sources. We've got to see what he said. We've got to see what his followers did when the church in its earliest days was the most vital. And without doing that, how could you ever hope to know who he is? And not only that, and we'll get back to this in a second, without not only finding that out, but without being part of the very thing that he lived and died and bled to create. How could you possibly know? See, who he is? We are products of our individualistic Western society. And we come, you come to Redeemer and you say, I want some inspiration. I want to get into my little cubicle. I would like to find God, please. And Jesus says, you can't possibly find me unless you see what I, in my passion, in my life, I died to create. And what I died to create was not an individual who has peace, love, and groovy vibes poured into his heart from me. If you push the right buttons, I created a community in which my power will live and change you. And you can't know me apart from that community. You'll never know who he is. See, when you say, maybe, possibly, when people say you can be a good Christian without going to church, maybe there are Protestants who say you can be saved without going to church. And of course that's true. But I don't think that's what they mean. I don't think that's what Americans mean at all. I think Americans don't understand who Jesus is a bit. And if you are not trying very hard to find out what the church is, and then trying to be part of a group of people who are him. He died so you'd be part of a group like that. Now, that's the theme. That's why we're doing this. Now, every week we're also looking at one trait of the church that Jesus died to create. One trait of this masterpiece. One thing on the painting. And today we come to one of those traits, in some ways the most central, worship. Now, the three disciples, Peter, James, and John, had their first worship experience on the mount. We read about it here in Luke 9. It was really the first time that they came to understand what is available, what kind of worship is available through the gospel of Jesus Christ. And one of the things that's so interesting about this account is that their memories of it was that the glory of God was like lightning. You see that? It says, Suddenly, his face began to shine. His clothes became as bright as a flash of lightning. And that has always made me smile. When I think of lightning, unfortunately... Now, see, this is the problem with popular culture. I like popular culture. I enjoy this. But, you know, here's the problem. Now, I have not been able to not think about Christopher Lloyd, Michael J. Fox. You see, in Back to the Future, that great work of art, that great trilogy, the dénouement, the climax of the first and best, I think, of the three, is, you know, they've got a time machine. And the poor kid can't get back to home. And he's got a time machine because even though it's this incredible, powerful machine, there's nothing to power it in 1955, remember? There's no power. And the only kind of power that would be great enough to take the greatness of this machine, you see, and help it realize its potential and do what it was built to do would be a bolt of lightning. And who knows where lightning will come down? But by revelation, they know where lightning is going to come down. It's going to hit the clock tower. And so, of course, they make that connection. They get to the clock tower. The lightning comes down. It comes into the car, and happy ending. Now, it's interesting. Peter, James, and John had a lot of knowledge. Peter, James, and John are made in the image of God. The gospel is that God has made you something great. He's put greatness into us. Creativity, rationality, personality. He's made us in the image of God. He's put greatness into us. But we're a shadow of what we should be and what we can be until the glory of God comes down into our lives. The lightning, that's how Peter, James, and John remembered the glory of God. It was like lightning. And only when it comes down into our lives do we find, in some ways, the greatness of what we are is realized. Worship is the lightning. Everything we've been talking about in this series, everything you know about yourself, is inoperative without the power, without the lightning coming down. It's like a machine without any power. We've talked about how deep relationships are possible and service to the world is possible. We've talked about the greatness of what God has made every human being, every man and woman in the world. There's a tremendous greatness. But it's inoperative. It's not there without the lightning, without the power. It's got to come down. And the gospel is a revelation. You know, the interesting, cute thing about the story is you don't know where lightning is coming down except there was a revelation. They knew. They knew from the, you know, from the future. The gospel is, the gospel comes to you and says, I know where the lightning comes down. I can take you there. Worship is the lightning. Let's just take a look and see what the passage tells us about the reality of worship. The reality of it, the conductor and the igniter. Let's talk about the reality of this lightning, the conductor of this lightning, and the ignition of this lightning. Reality number one. Take a look and see. In the very, very beginning it says, eight days later. Now that's very unusual in Luke. If you read the gospel, you will know that Luke almost never actually historically links any two incidents. He goes from incident to incident, but he kind of mixes them up. This is very unusual for Luke. And what he's doing is he's saying, this is the result of what came right before. And what came right before was that Peter and the disciples had come to realize that Jesus was not just a great man touched by God, but that he was the Messiah. And if you go back a few verses, you will see that we have the famous Peter's confession. And Peter says, you are the Christ of God. You are the Messiah from God. And Jesus says, I am the Son of Man, which of course, a lot of people think, Son of Man, what's that? But in the Old Testament, in the book of Daniel, the Son of Man was a divine... with, guess what? Right beliefs. They have arrived at right beliefs. They know who he is. He's not just a great guy. He's the Son of Man. He's the Son of God. He's the Messiah. Right beliefs. But it's not until this incident that those beliefs are real to them. In other words, they knew he was the Son of God, but you notice when they sit down to pray, what happens? They fall asleep. The reason they fall asleep is even though they know he's the Son of God, his greatness is not real to them. And let me give you a definition of worship. Worship is when things that you might believe become real. Can I tell you how important this is? You say, well, what's that? Let me tell you how important this is. Many times when a person becomes a Christian, they say, I didn't believe in God. I didn't believe in Christ. I didn't believe in heaven. I didn't believe the Bible. I didn't believe these things. And now I've become a Christian. And that makes sense. You say, okay, you didn't believe, now you believe. But one of the problems is, and I know this happens because people come back from New York City all the time. They come back to their parents in Iowa. They come back to Indiana. They come back to Oklahoma Avenue. They come to New York City. And they come back and say, Mom and Dad, I've just become a Christian. And they say, what do you mean you've just become a Christian? You were raised in our Baptist, our Methodist, our Presbyterian. You were raised in our church. When did you stop believing in Jesus? Oh, I've always believed. When did you stop believing in heaven? I've always believed, right? You know who you are. When did you stop believing in God? I've always believed. They say, well, what do you mean you've become a Christian? And you say, I don't know, except it became real to me. It became a central reality to me. I woke up. It began to shine. It changed my life. I guess I always believed it. I guess I thought I knew it, but I didn't really know it. That's a sign that you have become a Christian because you've begun to worship. The disciples lay down, and they said their prayers, and they fell asleep. And then they saw the glory of Christ, and they woke up. And that is a, the sleep is a perfect illustration of what worship is. Let me tell you what worship is. For many years, over and over and over again, I have almost fallen off of a cliff, down 5,000 feet to the crags below. This happens continually to me. I'm almost ready to fall. Almost ready to be killed. And suddenly, I hear this, the voice of my wife comes, and the voice says, I don't know what you're dreaming about, but will you wake up? I'm stopped twitching. I can't get to sleep. And I wake up, and I'm safe, except for the grumpy person next to me in bed. This happens to me continually. Because what happens is, I'm twitching in bed. Because I have a, I tend to have a recurring dream of falling off a cliff. And I start to twitch like this. Now, what kind of condition am I in? When you're asleep, or when you're even dozing, see, sometimes I'm not deeply asleep, that's why I'm doing this. When you're dozing, you are not alive to the reality, which is a grumpy wife. But you are alive to an unreality, which is, you see, the cliffs. So, I'm afraid of what isn't that real, and I'm not afraid of what really is real. And when I wake up, I'm safe. Worship is waking up. This has got to be one of the reasons why Luke includes the physical, actual happening of worship, of sleep at this time, because it's a perfect illustration. I'll put it to you this way. Some of you say, I've heard this many times, I believe God's forgiven me, but I can't forgive myself. So, you've got this terrible self-image, and you're going to counseling, and there's nothing wrong with going to counseling, I'm not saying anything wrong with that, but your life is ruined, you've got this awful self-image, you say, I believe God's forgiven me. Well, you know, what are you saying? You're saying, I believe God's forgiven me, but it's not real to me. His forgiveness isn't real. Somebody says, I'm just scared, I'm terribly afraid of what's happening. Do you believe in God? Well, I believe in God, but I'm still afraid. Well, what it means is his wisdom isn't real. It's conceptual, but not real. Do you realize what's going on here? The Bible says, worship. The difference between a religious person and a Christian is worship. The difference between a religious person and a Christian is somebody to whom these truths have become real. And the reason, can I put it another way? The solution to all of your problems is worship. If you're afraid, if you're despondent, if you can't forgive yourself, I'm not saying you go to counseling, I'm not saying you shouldn't think about your past, I'm not saying any of those things, but I'll tell you what your ultimate, the ultimate solution is. You need to worship. And until you worship, those things aren't going to go away. You say, I know it, but you don't really know it. You're alive to other things. And that's why, that's the whole point. The reality of worship is... them. That's what happened. Now, that's, let me just apply this for a second, just before we move on. Number one, there's two kinds of people here. Some of you are wondering whether you're a Christian or not. Okay, here's how you can tell if you're a Christian. It's not just a matter of saying, I need to believe in God. Tell me the proofs of God. Well, listen, I'd love to. I enjoy that. And we, and people here, we're not against rationality. I hope that if there's anybody here who says, I have trouble believing the Bible, I have trouble believing Jesus, the Son of God, I have trouble believing in God, we love to talk about that. We don't just say, I want to believe in spite of our minds. We don't talk, never. There's plenty of good reasons, but you've got to see it's more than that. A lot of, you need to realize, unless you've had this experience, unless you have ever said, I once believed in Jesus Christ, and then I believed in these things in general ways, but one day I woke up, and I realized I was sleepwalking. And the things that used to scare me, stopped scaring me. And the things that used to discourage me, stopped discouraging me. I woke up, and I began to say, if I have this, if he's like this, all these other things look ephemeral. All these other things look, look unreal. He looks real. He's, this is the reason why the word glory keeps coming up. You know what the word glory means. Why does it say he was glorious? Why does it say, why does it say, when they woke up, they saw his glory? It doesn't just mean luminosity. The word glory in the Bible, the biblical word glory means weight. It means matter. And this is what we're talking about. When you're worried, you're giving circumstances more weight than the wisdom of God. When you live an unadventurous life, a lot of us are living very unadventurous lives. We're not generous with our time. We're not generous with our emotions. We're afraid to get involved with people. We might get hurt. We're not generous with our money. We're afraid to be generous to good causes because we need to have so much in the bank. We're living absolutely unadventurous lives. Why? I believe in heaven. I believe in God. No, you don't. Your timidity is completely because you give more weight to these things than to God. And what is, what is worship? It's seeing his glory. It hits you. It overwhelms you. And you wake up and you feel like, I've been sleepwalking. There's courage. There's poise. There's peace. Your muscles relax. You're safe. Has that happened to you? If that hasn't happened to you at all, you're not a Christian yet. To be a Christian means these things become real and you say, I can't believe it. Now, if you are a Christian, let me just keep this in mind. Keep this in mind. Your beliefs, you believe in a wise God, you believe in a loving God, you believe in a holy God. Do you not see that it's worship? Those beliefs are an incredible, they're like the machine without lightning. Without worship, those things just lay there. If you believe in the holiness of God, if you saw it, if it was real to you, you'd have no trouble with self-control. If the love of God was real to you, you'd have no trouble with self-pity. You'd never mind rejection. You wouldn't be upset with criticism. Do you see? Your belief structure is just laying there. It's great. It's important. Reason is very important. Rationality is very important, but you need worship. And in worship, the truth shines. And you need to say, Lord, I need this more than anything else. You need to go to him and ask for it. Okay, that's the first, the reality of worship. The second thing we learn here is the conductor. Now, you see, since we're using the worship metaphor, since the metaphor we're using is the glory of God is lightning, you've got to have a conductor. How does the glory of God come into your life? How does lightning come into your life? And there are some claims here about Jesus Christ that are absolutely astounding. And there's two things that we're told here about Jesus, who is the conductor. And unless you believe these things and see these things about Jesus Christ, the glory of God does not come into your life. All the stuff I just promised you, all the stuff I said is available will not come to you. You can get inspired without these two things, understanding these two things about Jesus. You can be inspired, but you can't worship. Inspiration makes you feel kind of good, though if you think a little bit more, it makes you feel kind of bad. I'll show you. Inspiration, if you're a thoughtful person, almost always in the end is discouraging. Inspiration is, I've got a great example that makes me want to be like that. Inspiration is a kind of little pick-me-up. Inspiration doesn't finally change your life. It doesn't turn your whole personality around. It doesn't completely transform you. Worship does. And therefore, you can be inspired, but without understanding these two things about Jesus Christ, there's no connection of the glory of God into your life. Now, what are those two things? The first is, this might seem obvious, the second one's not as much, you have to see the greatness of Christ. And the reason for the three-tenths is to show us the greatness of Christ. See, Jesus and Peter says, I would like to build you three tents. Now, one of the great commentators, Earl Ellis, who's written a great commentary on Luke, says, if you look carefully, it says, as he was speaking, the glory cloud came down. See that? As Peter was speaking, he was saying something. And therefore, what the commentator says, everything that God does at this point is a response to what Peter did. Peter made three tents. Now, as Peter's speaking, he says, not make, he says he offers to make three tents. And as Peter's speaking, down comes a cloud and they're scared. And in the middle of the cloud, they hear a voice saying, this is my son. And then the cloud goes away and they only see Jesus. Now, what does all this mean? If you knew, if you and I knew our Bible's better, we would immediately be absolutely astonished. And the reason that you and I do not get astonished when we first read that, I certainly wasn't, because I don't know my Bible. Let me just explain. Why were they afraid? This was not fog. This was not mist. This is not brigadoon. This is not in the gloaming, you know, the mist coming up out of the heather. This is not that. Here's why they're so scared. They realized not just that he was glorious in a general way, but when the cloud came down, do you know what the cloud is? In the Old Testament, God says, my royal presence will guide you. And do you remember what came down? As the children of Israel were trying to get out of Egypt, down came a cloud. It was the Shekinah glory of God. And by day in the sunlight, it looked like a cloud, and at night it looked like a pillar of fire. And it held off the entire army of Pharaoh, the greatest army in the world. And when it came down on Mount Sinai, it was the presence and glory of God. The mountain shook, and anything that touched the mountain was killed. And a voice came out of the cloud, and nobody could listen to it. And so, here, the cloud. And Moses says, I want to see your glory. I want to go right into the cloud of your glory. And God says back in Exodus 33, I can't, you'll die. And here's Peter, James, and John, and down comes the cloud. And they can't believe it. And they're scared. I guess they're scared. But to their shock, in the midst of a cloud is a voice that they can hear. Not like the voice at Mount Sinai that nobody could bear to listen to. And it says, this is my son. And the cloud goes away, and there's Jesus. Here's what God is saying to them. God is trying to say, my son is the glory. He says, do you remember the tabernacle? When I built the tabernacle in the midst of the people in the book of Exodus? Down came the glory cloud into the Holy of Holies in the center. And the priest couldn't stand to minister. Nobody could get near it. It was like a furnace. But that cloud, God is saying, was just an old and primitive and imperfect representation of my absolute glory. But now let me show you the perfect. The perfect way to see my glory. The perfect way to see who I am. Everything you've ever seen before. Earthquake, wind, fire, pillar of fire, cloud. All these things have been, they've shown me to you, but now perfectly. Jesus Christ is the glory of God. Now, the reason that this is a rebuke to Peter is very simple. N.T. Wright, a great New Testament scholar, maybe one of the best in the world right now, is a British man, put it this way. And he does an incredible job. He says, how can you live with the terrifying thought that the hurricane has become human, that the fire has become flesh, that life itself has walked in our midst? Christianity either means that or it means nothing. Christianity is either the most devastating disclosure of the deepest reality in the world, or it's a sham, a nonsense. Most unable to cope saying either of these things are condemned to live in a shallow world between. Now, do you see what's going on? The Bible makes incredible claims. Jesus continually claimed not to be a great man, not even to be some son of God in some general kind of way, but the very glory of God. The very, as the book of Hebrews says, the very, the express image of his person, the absolute and perfect and unique and final and unimprovable revelation of the very essence of God. Jesus claims that. The Bible claims that. Luke is claiming that. And you've got a choice. Luke is giving you a choice. You can either say it's an absolute sham to think that the great hurricane of the universe, the great fire, the very energy of the whole universe, the thing that keeps everything together, has actually become a human being, has become a person, a unique person, and is the way to understand God, and the way to know God, and the way to see the glory of God. You can either believe that or it's a sham. Nothing in between. Luke gives you... is a story written by a lunatic about a greater lunatic than he. And there's nothing in the middle. Now N.T. Wright is saying if people do not want to go either direction. You either have to say this is a wicked man. Jesus Christ is wicked. He's terrible. He's insane. For anybody to claim things like this. Or you have to say he is God but nobody wants to do either. The average person. I know this is the average New Yorker does not want to say Jesus Christ is a wicked madman nor will the average New Yorker say this is the way to God. Instead like Peter you say well he's one of many wonderful people. I three tents see. God is saying either he is the glory of the tent the tabernacle the very glory itself or he's nothing but don't make three tents. Unless you see the greatness of God in Jesus Christ. Unless you see the magnificence of this. You'll never worship. You'll be inspired. See if you don't believe this about Jesus Christ. If you don't think he is this. Then you can read his sayings. He says turn the other cheek. How inspiring. Think. Think. You can't do it. Inspiring. If all he is is a great teacher he is discouraging. He can inspire you as long as you don't think too much. But don't ever change your life through worship. Peter wanted to do three tents. One for you. One for Moses. One for Elijah. And he's being rebuked. For putting Jesus equal with those other great men. God is coming to saying Jesus Christ is not another prophet who gets you near the glory of God. Jesus Christ is not another law giver who gets you near the glory of God. He is the glory of God. That Peter. That James. That David. That Moses. That Elijah. We're just pointing to. Now listen. If you read the Bible this is the case. I don't know. New Yorkers should not be offended by this. I got to move on but I have to say this. New Yorkers sometimes are offended by the idea that Jesus is the unique son of God. It's very offensive. It shouldn't be offensive. You should like it. New Yorkers are very direct. You may disagree with it but you shouldn't be offended. You should like this. Jesus comes and says don't you dare make me one tent among many. Look at what I claim. If you read the Bible. Do you remember a couple weeks ago we read a place in Luke 10 where Jesus says I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning. Remember that? What kind of thing is that to say? I saw Satan fall from heaven. Who is this? Where were you? Do you know how long ago that was? And where were you standing? In Matthew chapter 10 Jesus says yes yes yes I have been sending you wise men and prophets and you never listen to them. Who is this who claims that all the prophets and all the wise men who have ever come came from him? Jesus is so casual when he says these things. That means that every spot, every page, everything he does, anything he says behind it is this consciousness. And if you don't see it you'll never worship. He can inspire you but you'll never worship. But that's not enough. Besides the fact that God rebukes the idea of making Jesus one of three tents. N.T. Wright is saying either he's no tent or he's the tent. Either he's no way to God at all or he's the very glory of God. But don't live in the center. Don't live in the shadows. Don't live in inspiration. Worship him or hate him. No inspiration. The other thing you've got to see if you really want the power of God to come in your life the glory of God is not just that he is strong. Not that he's great but that his glory is defined as his weakness. The other thing that's important about the transfiguration narrative to understand is that just before this happened when Peter says you're the Messiah, you're the Christ, you're the deliverer from heaven. Jesus says yes and I'm going to suffer and I'm going to be rejected and I'm going to die. As disciples said say what? Because his disciples had a paradigm of glory that was utterly different than Jesus' paradigm. The disciples believed that the main problem in life was human injustice and therefore a Messiah would redeem us by coming in and wiping out the oppressors. And therefore because they believed that the main problem in life was human injustice they believed the Messiah would be a man of strength. But Jesus Christ comes and says the main problem is not those oppressors over there but every human heart. The main problem is not human injustice but an alienation between you and God and therefore the Messiah who comes is going to serve, lose, suffer, and die. And the transfiguration which is what this account is. This account tells us that Jesus Christ is... Every so often, I read about gridiron glory. Gridiron glory. Why? Because he was the number one tailback, because he was the Heisman Trophy. Gridiron glory. This is a different kind of glory. Jesus Christ, by being glorified by God on the mountain, Jesus Christ is being revealed as redefining greatness and glory. And actually, the key to this is the place where it says, Moses and Elijah and Jesus, what does it say they were talking to him about? What were they fascinated with? What were they obsessed with? What were they discussing? His departure. But you know what the word departure is in the Greek? The translators can never get at this. They just can't. The word in Greek is the word Exodus. Exodus. Jesus is being shown as the true Moses who's leading us out of the true bondage, but he's also the real lamb who was slain, whose blood was put on the door lentils of the Israelites so that when the angel of death came, the lamb sheltered them and they came out from under the blood of the lamb. Jesus Christ, by losing, Jesus Christ by being the lamb that was slain, Jesus Christ by coming and taking the death we should have paid because of our alienation from God, paying for our sins, Jesus says, from now on, this is what glory is. Glory is losing. Glory is sacrifice. Glory is dying for others. And anybody and everybody who wants to bring my glory into the life of other people will do the same thing. Glory now is sacrifice. Glory now is losing. Glory now is giving. Glory now is pouring yourself out for others. Unless you understand, now this is, the reason this is very practical is very, very simple. If you believe that Jesus Christ came as an example, that's inspiring, but that won't help you worship. See Jesus Christ dying on the cross? Are you inspired? You say, I need to forgive people. Look at them dying and forgiving. Father, forgive them. They don't know what they do. If you understand that the way he saves us is by coming and showing us how to live, then that inspires you. Not unless you think about it for a while, because nobody can forgive like that. But if you understand that he didn't just die on the cross forgiving others, he died on the cross to forgive you. When you understand that he has done that for you, when you understand the glory of his weakness, you begin to worship. When you see he's done it for you, you begin to worship. Now, do you see how practical this is? Only when you see the greatness and only when you see the weakness of Jesus Christ will you move from inspiration to worship. Stop getting inspired. It's not good for you. Lastly, ignition. Somebody says, would you please tell me exactly how to do this? I'm not sure I get it. You say, look, okay, I see now the reality of worship. It's not just saying your prayers. I see that there's something, some way in which these things become real to my heart and really change my life. And now I even see that somehow it's not just through God or the example of Christ but seeing Jesus Christ, the great one who saw Satan fall from heaven, fall himself. I saw Satan fall from heaven like lightning and Jesus Christ took on that kind of lightning. What was Satan falling from heaven with? It wasn't the lightning of the glory of God. It was the lightning of the judgment of God. And Jesus Christ got the judgment of God so that we would get the glory of God. Well, you say, okay, I get it, I think. But now what do I do? You know, it's Sunday. What do I do tomorrow? And what do I do next Sunday? There's actually two very, very, very, very practical hints right here on how to actually get worship ignited in your life. Number one, listen to him. Some people say it doesn't matter what you believe as long as you're sincere. That's like saying it doesn't matter what you ingest as long as it tastes good. It does. Listen to him means worship is not seeking God in some general way but answering the God who has spoken. Therefore, if you want to get started with this, I'll tell you, if you do this, I can guarantee you eventually there'll be some glory. Read the Gospels about Jesus. Read about his life. But when you want to respond to God, take the Psalms and pray the Psalms instead of just using your own words. Now you say, why would you do that? Eugene Peterson wrote a great book on the Psalms called Answering God and this is what he says. He says, the Psalms set their faces against lush eroticism, this rank jungle growth of desire seeking to fulfillment. In a world of prayers that indulge the religious ego and cultivate passionate longings, the Psalms stand out with a kind of angular austerity. These prayers don't seek God, they respond to the God who seeks us. The Psalms. looking for something quite other than what God who comes speaking to us looks like. Left to ourselves, we will pray to some God that we understand. There's a difference between praying to an unknown God who we hope to discover and praying to the God revealed through Israel and Jesus Christ. In the first, we indulge our appetite for religious fulfillment. In the second, we worship. All we're saying is this. If you just sort of seek God in a general way, you're not going to worship. You have to respond to God. Worship is answering God who has spoken. And what Eugene Peterson is saying, take the Psalms and pray the Psalms. Use the Psalms. He says, it won't feel right. You know why? Because the Psalms are responding to the God who's really there. Whereas if you just pray, babble, babble, what you'll do is you'll respond to a God who's not really there. A God who you know in some general kind of way. A God who you hope is there. Listen to him means you've got to respond to the truth. Worship is the truth beginning to shine. So read it and respond. The second thing is, look at this verse at the very end. They kept it to themselves. Worship is not an individual experience. God did not take Peter up on the mountain. Pardon me, Jesus did not take Peter on the mountain. He didn't take James or John. He took Peter, James, and John. And they talked about it. They processed that forever. Now here's what this means. Remember how C.S. Lewis said it wasn't until his friend Charles died that he realized he had not more of Ronald, his friend Ronald? Because when Charles died, he lost the part of Ronald that only came out when Charles was around. And therefore, Lewis says, I suddenly realized that I'll never know Jesus Christ deeply unless I deeply know other people who have had an encounter with Jesus Christ. Because every one of your friends who knows Jesus Christ will actually see a part of Jesus that you don't. And you also represent something that they don't see. It's only together that you're willing to worship. Unless you're committed to a group of people who are seeking God too, you'll never find him as he is. If you come to a church just hoping to get individual inspiration instead of committing yourself to a group of people who are also finding him, you'll never really find him. Jesus says, come to the mountain. I've got things for you. Those of us who have actually experienced the glory of God on the mountain don't like to talk about it. Paul hated it that he was forced to talk about it in 2 Corinthians 12. It was dragged out of him. He felt like a fool. People who have really experienced the glory of God don't like to talk about it. But what they can say is, there's glory on the mountain. He says, come on up. This is my beloved son. Hear ye him. Let's pray. Father, we pray that you would make us a worshiping community and we pray that you would make us a community who seeks you. We thank you that worship creates community and community enhances worship. We thank you that through the greatness of Christ and through the weakness of Christ, instead of inspiration, we can worship. And we pray that you'd make us a community that doesn't just get inspiration, doesn't just get teaching and information, but becomes the people of God who Jesus Christ died for through worship every time they meet. Change our lives through Jesus, we pray it in his name. Amen.
