TITLE: The Bible and Finality
SCRIPTURE: Hebrews 1:1-4
TOPICS: 
SERIES: What We Believe: Foundations
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-bible-and-finality/

============================================================

The scripture reading is taken from Hebrews, chapter 1, verses 1 through 4, and chapter 4, verses 6 through 13. In the past, God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many times and in various ways, but in these last days he has spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, and through whom also he made the universe. The Son is the radiance of God's glory and the exact representation of his being, sustaining all things by his powerful word. After he had provided purification for sins, he sat down at the right hand of the majesty in heaven. So he became as much superior to the angels as the name he has inherited is superior to theirs. Therefore, since it still remains for some to enter that rest, and since those who formerly had the good news proclaimed to them did not go in because of their disobedience, God again set a certain day, calling it today. This he did a long time later. He spoke through David, as in the passage already quoted, today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts. For if Joshua had given them rest, God would not have spoken later about another day. There remains then a Sabbath rest for the people of God. For anyone who enters God's rest also rests from their works, just as God did from his. Let us, therefore, make every effort to enter that rest, so that no one will perish by following their example of disobedience. For the word of God is alive and active, sharper than any double-edged sword. It penetrates even to dividing soul and spirit, joints and marrow. It judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart. Nothing in all creation is hidden from God's sight. Everything is uncovered and laid bare before the eyes of him to whom we must give account. The word of the Lord. So, in the month of September, what we've been doing is we've had a short little series on what the Bible is, how we should approach it, how we should regard it, how we should understand it. And what we've been especially doing is contrasting our Western culture's attitude toward the Bible to what Jesus himself's view of the Bible was, or what the biblical authors' view of the Bible were, what they were. And we have looked at the reliability of the Bible and the trustworthiness of it. We looked at the authority of the Bible, what authority it should have in our lives. But today we come to another aspect of how we understand the Bible and another aspect of how our Western culture looks at the Bible. Because it's very typical to hear people say something like this. They say, there are many good things in the Bible, absolutely. But there are also things in the Bible that are really outdated. There are things in the Bible that we can't accept anymore because we have new insights. As the years go by and the ages go by, we get new insights that shows us there's some things in the Bible we can't accept anymore. And therefore, we have to, in a sense, update our own views, get some things from the Bible, yes, but also we can't take everything. And therefore, the Bible, as great as it is, is not the final word on how to believe and live. It's not the final word because it has to be updated, because it has to be corrected by insights later on. Now, how do we respond to that? Well, the place to go in the Bible to respond to that is the book of Hebrews. Now, we've taken the first verses of chapter one. We've taken some verses from chapter four. I wish I could go to other places. I'll refer to other places because the book of Hebrews is basically about this very subject. Does God's revelation, does his word make progress? Are there parts that are obsolete? Is that really true? And as we look at what Hebrews is saying, we're going to learn this. I'll put it in one sentence, but when you see how long the sentence is, you'll know why I'm breaking it into three parts and three points. What we're going to learn here is that Jesus brings God's final word. That creates a living dynamic relationship with him because of the unsurpassable beauty of who he is and what he's done. See, I told you it was a long sentence. God, Jesus brings God's final word. God, Jesus brings God's final word. God, Jesus brings God's final word. God, Jesus brings God's final word. God, Jesus brings God's final word. unsurpassable beauty of who he is and what he's done. See, I told you it was a long sentence. Jesus brings God's final word, which creates a living, dynamic, personal relationship with him because of the unsurpassable beauty of who he is and what he's done. So let's break that into three parts. First of all, this idea that I just said is what we're learning here is that Jesus brings God's final word. Now, let's take a look at the first four verses. That's where we learn this. In the past, God spoke to our ancestors, but in these last days, he has spoken. So twice it says we have a God who speaks. The biblical God is a speaking God. He's not a force field God. He's not a God that you just sense. He's not a God who is an it, an impersonal force that we just sort of sense on the edge of our emotions. Sunsets are gorgeous. Mountains are gorgeous. Oceans are beautiful. They take your breath away. They touch the emotions. But do they replace friendship? Would they replace marriage? No. Because they cannot replace, as beautiful as that is, and the sense of the wonder of kind of an impersonal sight that can't replace for us, for human beings. They can't replace personal relationships. And we're told here that the biblical God is a personal God, a God who speaks, who reveals his will and himself through words. But we're not just told here that God gives us his word, but that God has given us his final word. Now, that you can see in a number of ways if you just read with a little care. First of all, you'll notice in verse two, there is a perfect tense. In the past, God spoke through the prophets, but in these last days, he has spoken. It's a perfect tense. It's over. He has spoken to us by his son. Also, when it talks about the past, it says, in the past, God spoke to our ancestors. It says, through the prophets, and the prophets were the people that we would call, pardon me, the prophets were the people who wrote what we would call the Old Testament, the Hebrew Scriptures. So he says, in the Old Testament, through the Hebrew Scriptures, God spoke to our ancestors. And he says, at many times and in various ways. In Greek, it's a bit of a play on words. He says, polymoros, polytropos. Polymoros means in many ways, in many places, at times, excuse me, many times. But polytropos, which is translated in various ways, is a very interesting word. It actually means piecemeal, in pieces. So it's saying, in the past times, God spoke truly to us, but always in pieces, not in holes. But now, he says, in Jesus Christ, he has spoken to us fully, obviously not in pieces, but wholly. He's shown us the whole truth. And in Jesus Christ, I see has spoken truly to us. And then, the idea that this is God's final word, that he's spoken many other ways, but now he's finally spoken through Jesus Christ, through his life, through his words, through his teachings. Then it actually says, in verse 3, it ties that to the fact that after he had provided purification for sins, he sat down. Now, the purification for sins, we'll get back to this, is when Jesus went to the cross, he died for our sins. Okay. But then it says, he sat down. And that is a metaphor for finished. His saving work is finished. There's nothing more that can be added to it. So you see the link? Here's what verses 1 to 4 is saying. Jesus is the ultimate Savior, who ends the sacrifices of former times, because there's nothing more that can be added to his saving work. So, he's the ultimate revealer, who ends the revelations of former times, and gives us his final word. So, what we're being told here is this, that in the work, in the life, and the teachings of Jesus Christ, given to the apostles, and written down for us in the New Testament, we have a revelation as complete as his salvation is complete. His salvation is complete. His revelation is complete. That in the Bible, Old and New Testament, we have God's final word to us about who he is and how we should live. It's the final word till judgment day, which means the Bible cannot be improved. It can't be updated. It can't be corrected. You know, it can't be added to. So, it can't be added to or improved or corrected, because how could anything be higher or beyond Jesus Christ? Now, those of you who are sitting out there hearing me say, no, the Bible can't be updated. It can't be corrected. It can't be improved. There's no part of it that's obsolete. It's the final word. It doesn't get corrected by later on things and insights. Some of you are saying, wait a minute, and you have objections. Now, I can't possibly answer them. some, right? Because I know either they're in your own mind or else other people have asked you about these things. So let's talk about this. When I say the Bible is God's final word, can't be improved. It doesn't get obsolete. It doesn't go out of date. What are the objections? Well, here's a bunch. Somebody might say to me, or you may be thinking in your mind, no, wait a minute, wait a minute, there's lots of stuff in the Bible that's obsolete. There's lots of stuff in the Bible that Christians don't do anymore that we've decided, you know, no, we can't do it. For example, polygamy. The Bible approves of polygamy, and yet Christians don't practice it anymore. Okay, well, let me ask you, where does the Bible approve of polygamy? You say, well, read the book of Genesis. I mean, all these heroes of the faith, Abraham and Jacob, they all have multiple wives. Well, okay, the Bible records that Abraham had multiple wives. It also records that he lied and cheated. That doesn't mean it approves of the lying and cheating. If you go to the beginning of the book of Genesis, the very beginning, here's what it says. A man shall leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife. It does not say cleave to as many as you can get. It just says a man shall leave his father, mother, cleave to his wife. That's the beginning of Genesis. Then, of course, the rest of Genesis, you say, but all these guys are having multiple wives, and they're miserable. They are miserable. All kinds of dysfunction and destruction happens because of multiple wives. One commentator, a Jewish commentator, once said that anybody who reads Genesis and thinks it's promoting polygamy doesn't know how to read, doesn't know how to read a narrative. If anything, this is undermining, if anything, this is critiquing polygamy in spite of the fact that it was just the way it was done in the ancient times. It's a critique. No, no, no, no. The Bible doesn't approve polygamy. Okay, you say, all right, well, but wait a minute. There's lots of stuff in the Bible. In the Old Testament, there's all kinds of stuff that say you can't dress like this. You can't eat these things. You can't wear a garment that mixes fabrics. You can't eat pork. You can't eat this. You can't eat that. You can't touch these things. There's all kinds of rules that Christians have completely abandoned, but then there's these other things that they hold on to, and so, see, it's arbitrary. Christians pick and choose. They pick the things they want to hold on as they point to that, but then the things that they want to discard, they discard, and it's arbitrary. Christians arbitrarily pick and choose the parts of the Bible they consider obsolete, parts that they want to keep on, and the answer to that is it's not arbitrary at all, and in the book of Hebrews, you come to the right place. Actually, the book of Hebrews is completely about this. The New Testament book of Hebrews is completely about this. If you go to Hebrews chapter 10, verse 16, it says, when you become a Christian, the Holy Spirit writes the law of God on your heart, writes the law of God on your heart. Now, don't forget, the book of Hebrews, when it talks about the law of God, it's talking about the Old Testament. It's talking about the Ten Commandments, and we're told that the Holy Spirit writes the law in your heart. That means it's eternal. That means it's abiding. It doesn't go out of date, but it's also the same book, Hebrews, that says that also says that Jesus Christ's sacrifice ends the need for all the animal sacrifices for sin, and that Jesus Christ, when you believe in him, he makes you completely clean and acceptable in God's sight. And all those other regulations, like you can't eat this, you can't touch this, because otherwise you're not clean, you're not ceremonially clean, you're not able to go into worship, all those things were pointing to Jesus. All those things are extremely important. All those things are saying, you can't just go into God. There does need to be atonement for your sin. You have done some things wrong. Something has to be done. All those things are true, but in Jesus Christ, they find their fulfillment. Jesus makes you clean. Jesus atones for your sin. And so, yes, yes, Christians don't follow lots of those things in the Old Testament that were required of Old Testament believers, but it's because the Bible itself tells you what things you don't have to follow. There's no arbitrariness about it at all. Yes, there are some things in the Bible that Christians don't follow, but the Bible tells you. You don't decide. The Bible tells you what things are obsolete in the sense of they're fulfilled in Christ, because in other sense, they're not obsolete. But the Bible tells you, you don't decide that, because you are not in the position. Every 10 years, your heart changes, and you realize what I thought was great 10 years ago, I was wrong. Every 100 years, society says, oh, the stuff we thought was great was wrong, but in 100 more years, they're going to change that too. No, no, no. Nobody's in the position to do that, to say, this stuff is great. This stuff is great. parts of the Bible you don't have to follow, and therefore the Bible is the final word. But somebody says, okay, okay, that was a nice move, but. The Bible condones slavery. Absolutely, you have to admit the Bible condones slavery. And we now know that that's wrong. And if that's the case, then there are parts of the Bible that go out of date. There are things the Bible says that are wrong, we have to update it. Well, you know, that is actually a big subject, but at least can I lay the groundwork for you? First of all, when somebody today says the Bible condones slavery, I immediately say, tell me what slavery, what do you have in mind, what is slavery? And almost immediately you're going to talk about the African slave trade. And then I'm going to say, well, wait a minute, 1 Timothy 1, that's the New Testament, and Deuteronomy 24, that's the Old Testament, unconditionally condemned kidnapping and slave selling. The slave trade, someone you kidnapped, was absolutely condemned. 1 Timothy 1, Deuteronomy 24. And if you go to the Old Testament, of course, there it talks about slaves and, you know, modern readers get creepy, it talks about slaves. But you have to realize that in the Old Testament, slavery was what we today would call a form of bankruptcy law. Do you understand that? If you don't understand that, then you don't know what the Bible says about slavery. Because in Israel, if you fell into debt that you could not pay, you did not actually declare bankruptcy and say, whoops, can't pay my debts. What you did was you became an indentured servant of the person you owed, and you worked for that person until the debt was paid. But there were all kinds of rules about that. One rule was it couldn't last more than seven years. Did you know that? Every seven years, even if you hadn't paid the debt off, you're freed from the indentured servanthood. And here's some others. Exodus 21, 27 says that if you have a manservant and you hit him and you knock his tooth out, he goes free. You do not have the right to treat somebody like that. This person basically is trying to make up a debt. You don't own the person in a way. You own their means of production until they pay the debt. And then thirdly, the most amazing place is Deuteronomy 23 actually says that if a slave runs away to you, you don't send him back to the master. I mean, in all of ancient times, there was no law like that. Why would they say that? And the answer is, you give the slave the benefit of the doubt. You figure, the implication is you figure that if a slave is running away from doing what the slave is supposed to be doing, you know, which is paying the debt back, probably the slave is being mistreated. So there's no way that you send that slave back. And you immediately begin to say, well, that's not what I mean by slavery. Okay, then. There's more to say. I won't say it. I'm looking at the clock. But I want you to see that it is a complete, it's not only a misconstrual, but it's a reductionistic and frankly misleading thing to say, the Bible condones slavery. But now we know better. Let me repeat point one. The work of Jesus Christ, the teaching of Jesus Christ, the life of Jesus Christ, given to the apostles, written down in the New Testament, means that the Bible is as complete a revelation as Jesus Christ's work is a complete salvation. And the Bible, therefore, is God's final word till judgment day, and it can't be added to or improved or corrected or updated. Now, the reason I'm not going to stop there is this. Some of you are disappointed. And being a good pastor, I want to deal with your disappointment. Because some people are going to say, are you saying that God can't speak today? Are you saying that God doesn't speak anymore today? Is that what you're saying? And if I say, oh, no, no, of course I'm not saying that. Of course God can speak today. But he speaks through his final written word. And then if you say, oh, is that all? I don't think you know what you're talking about exactly. So that wasn't very pastoral, was it? Okay, maybe I should say a little better. But here's what I'd like to say. It's because, and only because, the Bible is the final authoritative written word, complete, that you can have a living dynamic relationship with God in which he continually speaks to you. Let me make my case. First of all, George Whitefield, some of you know, kind of a hero of mine, was a British, Anglican, 18th century. He was a British, Anglican, 18th century. of the world, we think. Anyway, he was a fine man in many ways. But when his wife gave birth to his only child he ever had, his wife gave birth to an infant boy, he named him John after John the Baptist. And he told the reason why, he told a crowd one time why. He said God had revealed to him, God had told him that his son was going to grow up to be a great preacher. God had told him that his son was going to grow up to be a great preacher. And just a few months after he told the crowd that, his son got a fever and died. And in the depths of his grief, he realized that what he had done was he'd taken a fine and natural feeling in his heart. You look at your infant child and you just want the world for that child. You just want everything for that child. It's just so natural. But what he had done was he'd taken a very good thing and he had deified it. He had baptized it, as it were. And he said, no, that's not my heart working. That's God telling me something. And later on, he wrote about the fact that he says, he realized how wrong that was. Now, I've seen innumerable situations like that as a pastor, but here's what I want you to know. I do not say to you that God cannot lead you through your feelings, that God can't give you impulses, give you impressions that are ways of leading, that God can't. I'm not saying that. I'm saying this. If you're mature, you'll never be sure at the moment. And by the way, if you are sure at the moment, you'll have experiences like George Whitfield, maybe not that dramatic, but as time goes on, you realize eventually, no, I can't be sure. I'm not saying God doesn't lead you like that. I'm just saying you can't be sure. And here's why that's so important. Because if you are going to have a personal relationship with somebody, you got to have words that you know are from that person, that you know are from that person. So for example, first of all, you got to have words. Now, sometimes my wife and I will just look into each other's eyes and wordlessly adore each other. But I got to tell you, the only reason that works is because we spent 40 years of talking to each other. So we know a lot more about each other. Because I have to say, 40 years of staring at each other's eyes, we probably wouldn't have gotten very far in knowing who we are. So yeah, there's times of wordless adoration. But you got to, first of all, you need words for a personal relationship. But more than that, let's just say the person that you're trying to have a relationship with is not physically present with you. And you're trying to have the relationship using words over the internet. We all know the problem that the internet sometimes poses. There's been a lot of fraud on the internet. And sometimes when you're using the internet, you have to say, now, am I really talking to the person that I think I'm talking to? Are you really male? Are you really female? Are you really this age? Are you really the person I think I'm talking to? Because why would you open your heart up to someone when you're not totally sure that the person you're talking to is the person you think you're talking to? Now, if you say, well, there's parts of the Bible I think that are true and parts of the Bible that I just don't think are true. I don't think they're right. You're not identical exactly, but analogous to what happened to George Whitefield. What you're saying is my heart is telling me what things are in the, you know, God's word. And my heart is telling me what things are not God's word. Here's the problem. Your heart's going to change. And as time goes on, you're going to wonder. No, no. The first step in having a dynamic personal relationship with God is you accept the complete authority and the finality of the Bible. You say, everything in it I have to accept. And then when you open your Bible, you can know every single word here is a word from God to me. But that's not all. Because now chapter four tells us that when you trust the Bible like that, you will see that it is not just now a book of truth, true things. It's not just a book of facts. Look what it says in verse 13, 12 and 13 in chapter four. For the word of God is alive and active, sharper than any double-edged sword. It penetrates even into the dividing of soul and spirit, joints and marrow. It judges the thoughts and attitudes of the heart. The word of God is alive. It's active. Why would it say that? I'll tell you why. I mean, if you read the Bible, you'll see in the beginning, okay, God said, let there be light. And there was light. That's a significant, a theological statement as you're going to find in the Bible. It doesn't say God said, let there be light. And then he went and did it. See, if you say, let there be light, you then have to do something about it. You have to screw in the light bulb or at least flick a switch or something. You can say, I want to do, this is what I want done. And then you have to do something. And then you have to do something. deed, because his word is his power. His word is a power. It's through his word that power, his power operates. And that means it is through his word and only through his word that his power starts operating in your life. And I tell you, God does speak through that word personally, dynamically, penetratingly, like a sword that goes, like a surgeon's scalpel goes right down. Some years ago, I was reading a new translation of the book of Romans. Now, sometimes one of the best ways to learn what a verse really says in the Bible is to read more than one translation. You can get kind of used to translations and you think, you know, that verse, I've heard that before. Then you read a new translation, you say, wow, that's weird. That's different. And then you realize I'd never really thought about that verse. So I was reading Romans chapter one, verse 16 and 17. And the translation said, he who through faith is righteous shall live. He who through faith is righteous shall live. Now, to use more modern language, we all are trying to be righteous, but that's not how we talk about it modern wise. If you understand what the Greek word there means or the Hebrew word the concept is like this. We're all looking for significance. We all want self-worth. We all want self-respect. We all want to feel like we're living the way we ought to live. We want to be, we want, we want respect from people. We want self-respect. So we're all trying to achieve significance and self-worth and self-respect, right? But what are we doing? We're working so hard to achieve it ourselves. We might try to be moral. We might try to be good parents. We try to, we're trying to, you know, we're trying to be successful. We're trying to, we're trying to have, we try to be good looking. There's all kinds of ways in which we're trying to do it. It's very exhausting. In fact, that's actually to a great degree what the first part of chapter, the first part of the chapter four reading is about. We're not at rest. We're working so hard through our good works to try to achieve a sense that, you know, of significance and self-worth. Here's what God is saying. He who through faith is righteous shall live faith in Jesus Christ. There is a way to so rely on Jesus Christ's love and salvation that you don't have to worry about that. You rest from that, all that incredible work to know that in Jesus Christ, God loves you as, as you stand there in Jesus Christ, he loves you completely. And you can, you know, lay your deadly doing down, down at Jesus' feet, stand in him and him alone, gloriously complete. You can just stop all that worrying and all that. And, and, and so it was, but he who through faith is righteous shall really live. You won't be just, so I was reading it. I was saying, that's great. Yeah, I can preach that, you know. And then suddenly a thought came into my mind as just as clear as a bell. And here's what it said. Yeah. And he who through preaching is righteous shall die a thousand deaths every Saturday night. Now, what I said is what every preacher I know says, oh, I'm in the, my motives are perfectly pure for why I've gone into the ministry. I want to honor God. I want to help people. But all of a sudden the word of God pierced, what do you say, to the dividing of soul and spirit, to the deepest emotes of my heart and said, you know why you, you, you obsess, you know why you're so anxious about your preaching? You know why, uh, you know, you're just so restless and you're struggling all the time when it comes to preaching? It's because you're trying to feel good about yourself by being a good preacher. It's not just about God. It's not just about everybody else. You're trying to feel good about yourself. And suddenly, what, huh? Nothing in all creation is hidden from God's sight. Everything is laid bare, uncovered, and laid bare before the eyes of him with whom we have to do. And I experienced the power of the word of God, the active and living power of the word, which actually showed me, you better do something about your motives or you're never going to be, frankly, any good for anybody. And that started a pilgrimage for me, a major change for me. Do you see, you, God speaks. God speaks immediately. God speaks penetratingly. God speaks personally to you, not by giving you some other revelation, but through the revelation that he's given you, climaxing in Jesus Christ. God speaks. God speaks. which you can see here because I gotta move on to my last point here, but there's two basic ways in which you need to believe the Bible is absolutely true if God is gonna have this dynamic ability to change your life and speak into your life. One, of course, as I already mentioned, a lot of it is God has bad news to give you. That comes out when it talks about, frankly, this is pretty scary. Nothing in all creation is hidden from God's sight. Everything is uncovered and laid bare before the eyes of him to which we must give account. That's saying that the word of God, if you trust it, the word of God has the power to show you things you don't wanna see about how self-absorbed you are. You know, Paul talks about the fact, he says, I was alive apart from the law once. This is Romans 7. But then the commandment, thou shalt not covet, came home and it slew me. You know what he's talking about? You know, he said, I always believe the Ten Commandments, but the last commandment is the only commandment that's not about behavior at all. It's only about motive. Thou shalt not covet. You shalt be envious and jealous. And one day, it came home and slew me. I thought of myself as a really good person. And one day, it just wiped me out and showed me what I was really like. Now, if you don't believe in the full authority and truth of the Bible, that can't happen. Every personal relationship that's ever been of any help to you has been one in which the other person was empowered to confront you. So if you leave out of the Bible things that you don't like, how will God ever tell you something you don't like? If you leave things out of the Bible that offend you, how will God ever be able to offend you? Every friend I know has offended me sometime. Every spouse I know has offended me sometime. You see, it's only if you accept the whole thing. Only if you see it as a final word that God can ever tell you the things that you desperately need to see. But here's the other thing, and here's the best thing. Only if you really accept the word of God fully, only if you actually accept the bad things or the hard things that God wants to tell you that are hard for you to accept, you won't be able to handle the great things that he wants to tell you that your heart doesn't want to accept either. First John 3, 20, if our hearts condemn us, God is greater than our hearts. One commentator says this, it's an item of faith that we're children of God. There's plenty of evidence against it. Faith, real faith in Jesus Christ, surmounts the evidence and is able to warm itself at the fire of God's love instead of having to steal love and self-acceptance from other sources. See, here's what it's saying. We don't want to believe we're as bad as the Bible says we are, but we also can't believe we're as loved as the Bible says we are in Jesus Christ. And sometimes we hate ourselves, and unless you're willing to let the Bible tell you, willing to let the Bible tell you things about your sin that you don't want to believe, how will the Bible ever come in and say, you're more loved than you believe? When our hearts condemn us, what are we going to do? God is greater than our hearts. Well, not if we're not giving the Bible the right to speak into our life. Otherwise, we're going to go stealing self-acceptance from all kinds of other, love and acceptance from other things instead of getting it from God. Thomas Goodwin, the great Puritan, British Puritan, once told a story like this, and he was talking about Romans 8, 16. Romans 8, 16 says, sometimes the spirit bears witness with our spirit that we're children of God. And he said, one day he was walking along, and he saw a father and a little boy walking before him, in front of him. At one point, the father turned to the little boy, picked him up in his arms, and said, I love you. And they hugged and they kissed. I love you too, Daddy. And then he put him down and left. And Thomas Goodwin said, Now, was the boy more the son of his father when he was in his arms than when he was on the sidewalk? No. Not legally, not, you know, objectively. But in his arms, he was experiencing his sonship. He was experiencing his father's love. And sometimes, yeah, when you don't believe, you just cannot believe that the Lord of all the universe loves you with all of his might, sometimes, and only the word of God, places where the word of God will tell you he loves you, you'll read it, and suddenly he'll be picking you up and putting you in his arms. That happens through this. That happens through this. And so this final word, and it's exciting, a living dynamic relationship with him. But the last point, and it's brief but important, and the reason why I gotta say it is this. Some of you are probably saying, I've never had a relationship, I've read the Bible, I've never experienced anything like what you're talking about. And some of the rest of you are ready to cry because you have, but it's been a long time. And you say, why have I lost it? Well, the answer to probably both questions, how do I get it, how do I get it back, is to remind yourself of the emphasis here. This is not saying, it could say, it's not saying the New Testament is the end of the Bible, along with the Old Testament, is a complete canon. You should believe the New Testament writers because they're right. Well, we actually spent some time on that. Yes, that's true. But that's not what it says here. It says that God has spoken, brought his final word through his son. Before you get your doctrine of scripture straight, you gotta get your doctrine of Jesus Christ straight. And if you start to read the Bible, just hoping it'll be like a, you know, just some kind of magic thing, that if I read it, I'm gonna feel God's love. No, you have to understand the main message of the Bible. And the main message of the Bible is, the reason this is the final word is because Jesus Christ is unsurpassable in the beauty of who he is and what he did. It tells you here a little bit about it. There's the who he is. He is the radiance of God's glory and the exact representation of his being. That is a, I could do a whole sermon on that. You remember the Shekinah glory cloud that nobody could stand in front of when it appeared before the Egyptians, they fell back. If it appeared to the tabernacle or the temple, nobody could go in, everybody fell down. The Shekinah glory, which is the representation of the brilliance and the superlativeness and the beauty of God. This is saying that Jesus Christ, isn't to say he has some of God's glory, he participates. He says he is the radiance of his glory and the exact representation of his being means that Jesus Christ is God's glory in human form. God's glory, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him, Colossians 2 says. And 2 Corinthians 3 and 4 makes some amazing statements where it says that if you're reading the Bible and you're hearing the gospel and the Holy Spirit takes the veil off of your heart because you're thinking about the greatness of who he is, sometimes, we're told, you behold the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, not with your physical eyes, but with your faith. And his love, his humility, his wisdom, his courage, his tenderness starts to reproduce in you as you adore him, as you read about him in the word. But it's not just who he is, it's what he's done. Only when you see that he took everything you deserve will you really see his beauty and the Bible start to become a living power in your life. Another way to put it is this says that the Bible can be a penetrating, piercing, life-giving power, the way a surgeon penetrates and pierces and cuts you, yes, but to heal you, to take out the tumor, to give you life. But the only reason the Bible can actually pierce you unto life is because Jesus Christ went to the cross. There he quotes Psalm 22 as he's dying and part of Psalm 22 is saying, they pierced my hands and my feet. He was pierced. Nails, thorns, spear, you know, two-edged. He was pierced because he took the punishment we deserve for our disobedience to God. He was pierced unto destruction so we could be pierced, as it were, by the word of God, but only unto life. See the beauty of that. See the beauty of who he is and what he's done. And then the Bible, once you accept and trust in it, will become the vehicle through which God's living, powerful word comes in and changes your life. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that you've given us this possibility. So we do ask that you would, on the one hand, help us to accept your word, accept your word, even where it offends us, even where it doesn't seem intuitive to us, so that we can know this is your word and so that can be the basis on which you begin to speak into our lives and to speak into our lives is to change us. To say I love you is to change us. To say I love you and active. So we ask that that would happen now. We ask it through Jesus. We ask that you would affect these things in our lives through the power of the Holy Spirit. It's in Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
