TITLE: The Meaning of Free Grace (1999)
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 48:8-19
TOPICS: The Ten Commandments Sin Understanding the Gospel
SERIES: The Lord’s Prayer 1999
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-meaning-of-free-grace/

============================================================

By the way, you need to know, I want to ask you something. We're doing four services this summer, in July and August, because of the need to, well, put it this way, you know, God came to Abraham and he said, Get out! And Abraham got out. And then God came to Redeemer and said, Get out! And we have to be out of the auditorium at Hunter College, so we're in the gymnasium, and we have a morning service on the west side at 9 o'clock at St. Paul, St. Andrews, the 86th and West End. We have this service here. We have a morning service in the gym at Hunter College, and we have an evening service at Christ Methodist at 60th and Park. Now, here's the thing I want you to do for me. The morning service went really good, as good as it can go in a gymnasium, but even on 4th of July, it was packed, and it was, we usually had 1,400 people in the morning, and there's only seats for about 1,100. The evening service, usually we get 800 or 900 people out to Hunter Auditorium, and the Christ Church only has 600 seats. Therefore, if you're here today and you know anybody that's going to the east side to services, if you know anybody that's going to the east side, I want you to call them up and bribe them to come here or come to the west side, at least in July and August. You know, say you'll buy them an ice cream cone and walk in Central Park with them or something. Anyway, I'm glad you're here. The only glitch in all this has been for me that I can tell, and that is I wanted us tonight to read from Genesis 48, verses 8 to 19, but I stupidly told the office to print Genesis 43, verses 8 to 19. I'm going to have to read. I'm very sorry. It's not in your bulletin. It's in the Bible, which is the important part, but it's not in the bulletin. What we're doing is we're going to read from Genesis 48, verses 8 to 19, and we're looking every single week in this summer at an aspect of the Lord's Prayer. The Lord's Prayer is Jesus' way to approach God and to experience intimacy with Him. It's almost as if, in the Lord's Prayer, you had gone to Jesus and you'd said, how do I have an existential encounter with God? How can I have intimacy with God? And Jesus says, pray in this way, which means every single part of the Lord's Prayer, every phrase almost, is pregnant with principles on how to have intimacy with God. And the ones we've looked at so far are, most modern people kind of, you know, they track with it. They say, okay. Like, Jesus says, if you want to have intimacy with God, you've got to approach Him as Father. Understand that you can be part of His family. And everybody says, all right. And then secondly, if you want to have intimacy with God, you've got to learn how to adore and hallow His name and adore the beauty and the glory of God. And you say, okay, okay. And then, of course, you say, and also if you want to have intimacy with God, you have to understand that you're part of the kingdom program, the kingdom of God spreading through the world. Okay. But tonight, this week, we come to the first of Jesus' phrases in the Lord's Prayer that really give us pause. Thy will be done. What Jesus is saying by sticking thy will be done in the Lord's Prayer where He does is He's saying, you can never have intimacy with God, you can never have a personal existential encounter with God unless you know what it means to pray from the heart, thy will be done. Thy will be done, in a sense, is a kind of prayer. It's a kind of experience. Like adoration, like confession, it's its own experience. Have you had a thy will be done experience? Now, what I'm going to do is I'm going to read you a section out of the life of Jacob, Genesis 48, which most of us have not spent much time thinking about or studying, and many of you may not have ever heard. It's an extremely obscure part of Jacob's life. But the thing that made me start studying it was I was shocked, actually, when one day I was studying through Hebrews 11. And Hebrews 11 is a catalog of the great acts of faith. You have Noah, by faith, Hebrews 11 says, Noah by faith built an ark. Abraham by faith, you know, went out not knowing whither he went. Abraham by faith offered up Isaac. Moses by faith suffered to be with the people of Israel rather than enjoy the pleasures of sin in Egypt. And on and on it goes, saying these great acts of faith, and they're all very familiar, but when it gets to Jacob in Hebrews 11, this is what it says. It says, By faith, Jacob, while dying, blessed each of Joseph's sons and bowed in worship. That's all it says about Jacob. It doesn't choose his right. the vision of the ladder in the desert. It says, by faith, Jacob, while dying, blessed each of Joseph's sons and bowed in worship. Why did that take faith? Why was that such a big deal? I'm going to read you the passage, and I know the first experience, the first thing you're going to say is, why is this chosen as the great climactic act of faith? And I think the answer is, Jacob's having a thy will be done experience. And he's teaching us what a thy will be done experience is. Let me read it to you. Verse 8. Now when Israel, that's Jacob, when Israel saw the sons of Joseph, he asked, who are these? They are the sons God has given me, Joseph said. Then Israel said, bring them to me so I may bless them. Now Israel's eyes were failing because of old age, and he could hardly see. So Joseph brought his sons close to him, and his father kissed them and embraced them. Israel said to Joseph, I never expected to see your face again, and now God has allowed me to see your children too. And then Joseph removed them from Israel's knees and bowed down with his face to the ground. And Joseph took both of them, Ephraim on his right toward Jacob's left hand, and Manasseh on his left toward Jacob's right hand, and brought them close to him. But Israel reached out his right hand and put it on Ephraim's head, though he was the younger, and crossing his arms, he put his left hand on Manasseh's head, even though Manasseh was the firstborn. And then he blessed and said, May the God before whom my fathers Abram and Isaac walked, the God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day, the angel who delivered me from all harm, may he bless these boys. When Joseph saw his father placing his right hand on Ephraim's head, he was displeased, so he took hold of his father's hand to move it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head. Joseph said to him, No, my father, this one's the firstborn, put your right hand on his head. But his father refused and said, I know, my son, I know. He too will become a people. He too will become great. Nevertheless, his younger brother will be greater than he, and his descendants will become a group of nations. And so he blessed them that day. Now, if somebody says, What is the big deal? Why would this be the thing that's taken out of Jacob's life as a triumph of his faith? Well, he's having, Jacob is having a thy will be done experience. And we learn from this passage that thy will be done experience is, number one, a test of grace, number two, a tool for growth, and number three, the way to intimacy with God. To say to God, Thy will be done. To say, even though I don't understand what's going on, I don't understand why you have given me the direction you've given me, I don't understand why you sent me the thing into my life you sent me, but I'm going to be faithful to you even though I don't understand. To say, Thy will be done is a test of grace, a tool for growth, and the way to intimacy with God. And we learn that from here. First, let me show you. First of all, Thy will be done is a test of grace. And this incident is fascinating. Joseph brings Jacob to bless his children. And to bless the children, when a grandfather, an old man blessed, it was very serious. It was a significant thing. To bless a child, on the one hand, meant to predict what was going to be the course of life of this child, but it was also not just predicting what the child would be like, but it was directing the family as to how to regard the child. It was predicting where the child was going to go, but it was also directing how he should be regarded, how he should be treated, how he should be guided. And therefore, it was taken very seriously. And you see, Joseph, though, brings Manasseh and Ephraim. And it's kind of interesting. Here's Jacob. And Joseph brings Manasseh to his right hand, and Ephraim to his left. Manasseh was the older boy. Manasseh was the bigger boy. And we certainly know, from what we know of ancient and traditional culture, that Manasseh would have been the favorite boy. He would have been the apple of the father's eye. He would have been lavished with all the father's affection, and a great, great deal more of the father's wealth and resources and so forth. And you see, to be at the right hand was to get the main blessing. For Jacob to give Manasseh the right hand was to give him the main blessing to say, this is the one who's to be honored. This is the one for the supremacy of the family. This is the one for the leadership. And it's almost comical. Joseph brings these two boys up, like this, to old Jacob. And Jacob reaches out and goes, like this. It says, he crossed his arms. And he did not give the main blessing to the choice of Joseph, to the choice of the world, to the choice of... he blesses the younger child. He blesses the little one. And Joseph is not very happy. See, Joseph says, no, father, that's the wrong one. See, Joseph thinks that Jacob's having a senior moment. Joseph says, well, you know, you know, fuzzy eyes or maybe fuzzy brain or something. And Jacob looks at him and says, no, my son, I know exactly what I'm doing. Now, what is Jacob doing? Jacob, representing God, is crossing the will of the world. He is saying to the world, not thy will, mine. The world says the first shall be first and the last shall be last. The savviest, the biggest, the coolest, you see, the most competent. The world says the first shall be first and the last shall be last. But in God's economy, the first shall be last and the last shall be first. Jacob is, first of all, crossing the will of the world. Jacob, representing God, is saying, I never do things the world's way. I always confound. I always surprise. I always amaze. What he does is he's testifying to the economy of God. Now, what is the economy of God? Well, let's just think about this for a minute. I think Jacob, see, Jacob is, this is the reason this is used as such a climax of faith. Jacob is starting to get it. Jacob's starting to understand his whole family. He looks back and think about this. God had come to Abram and God had come to Abraham and said, I'm going to save the world through one of your descendants. I'm going to take the brokenness of the world. I'm going to mend it with the Messiah and the Messiah will be one of your descendants. But that means that in every generation, one person will bear the messianic seed. One, the salvation, my salvation will come into the world through one member of every one of your generation. But look at how God does it. Now, do you see a pattern here? Jacob's starting to see the pattern. That's why he crosses his arms. That's not the only, but it's the first reason. You see, first, here's Abram and here's, who are the women at his side? Here's Sarah, old, barren. Here's Hagar, beautiful, fertile, and God blesses the world through Sarah. God visits Sarah. Then you go to the next generation. Here's Esau, ruddy, handsome, big, macho, athletic, charismatic, dynamic, a leader. Instead, God saves Sir Jacob. God chooses Jacob. Then you go down a little further. Here's Rachel. Here's Leah. Rachel, the beautiful one. Rachel, the apple of Jacob's eye. Leah, the homely one. Leah, the marginal one. Leah, the rejected one. Leah, the unwanted one. And God comes to Leah and gives her Judah. Her son is Judah, the ancestor of Jesus. In other words, God comes and Leah becomes the mother of Jesus. Are you getting this? The Leahs, the marginal, the outsider, the weak, the failure is always, always the mother of Jesus. Always the mother of salvation. Always the way God's grace works. Let's keep going. Look at all the nations of the world that God could choose to bring into the world salvation and truth. And what does he do? Israel. Why? Israel. Look at a little Israel. No economic clout, no natural resources, there's no military power. God needs a champion to fight against Goliath to save Israel. So Samuel, the prophet, goes and he looks at all the sons of Jesse. Look at all these strapping young men. But God chooses the littlest one to go up against Goliath, David. Look at judges, and I don't want to take time for this, but if you look at judges outside of the first guy, there's the first judge, and the judges are these charismatic leaders that God raises up to deliver Israel in a moment of crisis. And outside of Othniel, the first of the judges, every other judge is exactly the opposite of what the world would think would be a leader. The opposite of what the world would say would be the one who would lead us, who would deliver us. The salvation never... Ehud, let's go through the judges for a second. Ehud, disabled. Deborah, a woman. Gideon, low life, wrong side of the tracks, that's in the text. Jephthah was basically a mafioso. He was basically a crime boss. He was an organized crime. Samson, do I need to go into Samson? You know, dysfunctional sex addict. But, you know, even, listen, let's get even, let's push even further. Every page of the New Testament, have you ever noticed that Jesus almost never confronts one person? He always confronts two. There's always two sets or two people. And always look, if there's a, you know, if there's a fallen woman and a religious leader, it's the fallen woman. If there's a tax collector and a... the law, it's the tax collector. If you have dreamy Mary and competent entrepreneurial Martha, it's Mary. If you have the demoniac, you know, the garrison demoniac in Mark chapter 5, it's the demoniac and you have the leaders of the chamber of commerce. It's the demoniac. And then finally Jesus himself, born in a manger, an outsider. When he dies, he has nothing but his garment. And his great triumph is to be stripped naked and beaten into the dust. Now what's going on? Over and over and over and over again, God crosses his arms on the world. He crosses the world's way of thinking. Always. He crosses the will of the world. And what does that mean? What is Jacob testifying to then? Why does God do it that way? He doesn't have to. He could have chosen the big kid, not David. He could have chosen Rachel, not Leah. He could have. Why does he do it that way? Why is it his main way? Why does he choose always the poor? Why does he choose always the marginal? Always the outsider? Never the moral. Never the religious. Never the insider. Never the upstanding. Never the right. Why? Because he's a God of grace. And you see, the world doesn't believe that. And God has to over and over and over again hit the world over the head. I'm a God of grace. Salvation comes not by you, but by me. It doesn't come through pedigree. It doesn't come through competence. It doesn't come through your planning. It comes by me. No matter who you are, if you're the Pope or if you're a genocidal dictator, you need to be saved by grace. And by the way, the Pope would be the first to tell you that's true. You need to be saved by grace no matter who you are. Now, somebody says, how could that be? Why would that be? Well, I'm glad you asked me that. Take a look at the family of Jacob himself. Look at Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jacob, that's as far as we've gotten so far in the book of the Bible, when you get to Genesis 48. But what do we see? We see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob have fouled up a lot. But how have they fouled up? You want to see the essence of sin? Abraham makes an idol out of Isaac, makes him feel young. Isaac makes an idol out of Esau, I guess makes him feel masculine. Jacob makes an idol out of Rachel, and then of his Rachel's children, and I guess it made him feel significant. Now, was that a lie? Was that breaking the Ten Commandments? Is that a lying? Is that cheating? Is that adultery? Well, it led to lying. It led to cheating. It led to stealing. It led to even murder. It led to everything. But sin, the essence of sin is not breaking the rules. That's the result of sin. That's the symptoms of sin. The essence of sin is taking a good thing and making it more important than God. Taking good things and making them ultimates. Taking good things and living for them and being defined by them. That's the essence of sin. That's the reason why in the Ten Commandments, the first commandment, the primary commandment, is have no other gods before me. And everything else, all the other, the cheating and the lying and the murdering and the stealing and all that awful stuff, it all flows out of the first one. That's Commandments 2 through 10. And here's what that means. Paul is literally right when he says, no one is righteous, no not one, no one seeks for God. There are bad people. Bad people who mug you and cheat and hurt people. And they, of course, are not looking for God. But here's what's scary about good people, religious people. Good and religious people think they're looking for God, but they're not. They're not looking for a God of grace. They're looking for a God they can control through their good works. Because, you see, good people and bad people are both self-savers. They both are taking things and they're making them into idols. It's just that some idols lead you to be obedient to the law of God. Some idols lead you to be disobedient to the law of God. But all the way across the board, no one is righteous. No, not one. No one's seeking God. No one. Good people think they're seeking God, but they're not. They're seeking not a God of grace, not the real God, not a sovereign God, not a God, you see, who is free with his grace, but a God they can control through good works, a God who owes them. And that's the reason why, if you're a Christian, grace has come in and grabbed a hold of you and shown you something you weren't looking for. And grace has shown you you can only be saved through the merits of Jesus, not your own merits. And therefore, anyone who is a Christian is somebody who realizes God has to cross the way I think. God has to cross the way the world thinks. God absolutely has to do that. And that's the reason why what Jacob is doing, first of all, is he's testifying. by crossing the will of the world and doing things in a way the world considers hopeless defeated loser wrong-headed now let's let's apply this for a minute and move on to the second point i said let me apply it here therefore to say thy will be done not my will is a test that you know you're saved by grace not by your work do you believe you're saved by grace do you believe that you were saved completely by grace that god actually had to come and open your eyes through grace because you were not seeking him and he had to show you you're not saved by anything you do but by what his son has done now if you believe that then thy will be done has logic to it it makes sense but if thy will be done makes no sense to you it means no matter what you say on paper you don't believe you're saved by grace if you believe you're saved by works you will say there's a minimum standard to what god has there's a minimum standard of life that god owes me if you believe you're saved by works you say god couldn't just ask me anything of me i mean god can let me have a few problems but not major problems i mean i paid my dues i go to church i sit through much longer sermons now they go redeemer than i used to i just say no to all these sexual impulses i used to give into i'm a god look i'm hey therefore god owes me now see if you believe you're saved by works then the i the saying thy will be done is impossible it's nuts why would you ever give a give away your right of self-determination why would you say i have to obey god no matter what whether i understand it whether it makes sense to me i just have to obey if you say that that's nuts it's because you really don't believe you're saved by grace because you really believe god owes you something but if you know you're saved by grace thy will be done at least though it may be very hard as we're going to see make sense but if thy will be done i obey you no matter what i owe you everything you owe me nothing that statement is only logical if you're saved by grace and therefore the ability to pray that is a test of grace that you have seen that you're saved by unpredictable god of grace who contradicts the world's standards at every point that's the first point i will be done is a test that you know you're saved by grace secondly when it's also a tool for growth secondly when jacob crossed his arms he wasn't just crossing the world's will he was crossing joseph's will now this is going to get listen this is halfway through my how many times have i preached this now six this is the sixth time today i can't remember but um i'm in the middle of one of the sermons today i suddenly realized how hard this is this is one of the hardest things i can say to people i promise you i wouldn't say this unless i thought it was a matter of life and death that you believe it joseph represents you and me jacob represents god very clear joseph comes to jacob with an agenda he wants blessed he says i know how my family has to go i know basically i know how my life has to go just bless it and when you come to god in prayer almost always that's the same thing you do we come to him and we have our agenda we know how our life needs to go it's reasonable it's we've worked it out it's equitable it's fair it makes good sense it's not unreasonable you come before god and you have your agenda you know what needs to happen first then second then third and all you do is ask for god to bless it and ordinarily god crosses his arms on you which means he crosses your will he doesn't just cross the world's will he crosses your will he crosses arms on you he tears up your plan and we react the way joseph reacts joseph is mad i mean i i i read and reread this uh if you're an american a modern american what joseph says isn't so bad i mean he says no father this one is the firstborn put your right hand on his head but he's really he's mad this is not the way in ancient traditional cultures you speak to your father not on his deathbed it doesn't sound gentle to me he's mad no father and he's and he's treating him as if he's ignorant he says that's the firstborn put your head over there at the very least he's treating him like a child at the very least joseph is saying now father you don't understand this is what you should be doing dad at the very most he's saying dad you are screwing things up but either way joseph is saying to the father you what is necessary, I do. But Jacob comes back the way God does to us and says, I do know. In fact, he says it twice. He says, I know, my son, I know. No. God says to us, I do know what you need. I do understand what has to happen. You don't. See, it's a battle of the sanities here. It's a battle of knowledge. Joseph says, we say to God, let's get right to it. We say to God, I know what needs to happen here. All you've got to do is bless it. And God looks at you and me and says, I am the one that understands what you need. I know how your life ought to go. And that's all the explanation you get. The thing that's so scary about this, this shows us something that the Bible really says in a number of other places in a number of other ways, but this is very vivid here. God will do his will. He will cross your will. And he owes you no explanation other than to say, I know. God does not owe you anything. No explanation. It says, you know, in Romans 11, in Romans 11, it says it this way. If I can find it, yeah. For who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? For who has ever given to God that, oh, for who has ever given to God that the Lord owes him? For from him and through him and to him are all things. Do you see that? Who has been the Lord's counselor? Who does God owe? What that means is God does not consult with you. He sends things out into your life without explanation. He doesn't consult. He doesn't ask your opinion. And he doesn't need to give you any explanation other than to say, I know better. Now, here's a problem. Remember, Jesus Christ said, until you can pray thy will be done, you can have intimacy with God. Now, actually, I'll get to that in a second. But you have to recognize the importance of this. The pray thy will be done is to say, God has the right to contradict me. God has the right to confront me. God has the right to send things into my life that I don't understand. God has the right to ask me to do things in his word that don't make sense to me. And he has the right to do that without explanation. He has no obligation to give me an explanation. And I must gladly submit to him, as gladly as I can possibly muster. And that's what's being taught. God will cross his arms. He will cross your will. Now, boy, we have an awful lot of trouble with that. There has never been a more individualistic culture than ours. And, you know, I've got children, and some of you do. And you know that it goes like this. My children, anyway. So one of the problems with, you know, upper middle class, college educated parents, especially my age, I'm a baby boomer. And I really believe all of us overdid it with kind of reasoning with our children. We look back on it now. And, you know, it seemed enlightened at the time. So we'd sit down with our kids and say, Well, let me explain why you should do this. So what would happen is, when you... So we just, we encouraged the dialogue too much. So very often, you'd tell your child to do something. It was very important. And your child would look at you and go like this. Well, Dad, I'd be happy to do what you asked. But first, I'd like a reasonable explanation. I'd be happy to do what you asked me to do. But show me why. Show me that it makes sense. Show me that it accomplishes some good. Show me that, you know, make your case. I'll be happy to listen to you. I'll do it. But first, you've got to be reasonable here. You've got to show me. Then I'll listen to you. And what do you say to your kid? Well, you look at him and you say, Son, you're four years old. I shouldn't have encouraged this approach. But here's what I want you to know. You're four years old. I can't explain germ theory to you. You're not going to get it. You can't eat this. You can't eat this here. You can't do this. You can't do that. And here's the one thing we know. Unless children obey the inscrutable will of their parents, they're going to die. Children have got to listen to parents when they don't understand why. Children have got to listen to their parents when the reason for the command is some reason that the kids don't have the capacity to take in. I mean, we're always crossing the will of our kids. All the time. But when God does it to us, when God does to us what we do to, to people in the very same relationship to us as we are to God, we hit the roof. In fact, there's a terrific number of people who really just will not do it this way. They'll say, I'd be very happy to come in, and I'd like to have faith, and I'd like to have faith. parts of the Bible that are very primitive. There are certain parts of the Bible that I think, you know, I just can't accept anymore. And one of the problems with that is this. How will God ever cross your will? How will God ever treat you the way you have to treat any kid growing up? How will he do that? But he will do that. He must do that. He has the right to do that. Well, you say, why? But now here, let me apply this. To pray that I will be done, to say, I owe you my submission and my allegiance, regardless of whether I understand it or not, is the greatest opportunity for growth you can possibly have. Actually, Jacob is, see, looking back on his whole life, as we'll see in a second. And it's one of the reasons why he's able to say what he says, is because he sees all this. He sees his whole life now in light of this. I mean, Jacob has been one of the most incredibly stubborn people. And he was always trying to say, hey, well, God's not giving this to me, so I'm going to have to lie and cheat to get it. This isn't happening to me. Well, I'm going to have to do what I have to, double-cross somebody to get it. But now he's looking back, and here's why. To say, thy will be done, is one of the greatest ways to grow. Why? Didn't we say, if the essence of sin is not breaking rules, but it's making certain things too important to us, then the essence of growth can't come through trying. If you say, look it, if I say to you, I want you to grow into Christlikeness, you say, good, I want to get to work. And you can look at your behavior. You can look at things like, oh, what if you tend to tell a lie, or what if you lack sexual self-control, or what if you, you know, in other words, you can try, you can work on keeping the rules, but the essence of sin are things that are too important to you, and the only way you're going to get at that, the only way you're going to grow through that, the only way you're going to grow out of that, the only way you're going to get freedom from those things, is if God crosses your will, if God keeps something that's very important from you. So, for example, what if money's too important to you? What if money's way too important to you? You're probably not going to know it. But as long as you have money, you'll be in a state of spiritual weakness. You'll be dependent on money for your significance instead of on God. You'll be dependent on money for a sense of being secure. You'll be making poor assessments of how to live. You'll be assessing people wrongly. You'll tend to worry about money. In other words, if you have your will when it comes to money, you are in a state of weakness, and you don't know it. Only when he crosses your will in an area like that will you start to get free. Let's move. Only when you begin to say, only when something that's that important to you gets pulled away do you start to get free from it. Don't you want to be in a position where stuff doesn't bother you? Where circumstances don't bother you? Where nothing really gets you down? Where nothing scares you, angers you? Why? I mean, how would you get into that situation of freedom? Only when God crosses your will at so many places where you're too dependent on something and you learn to say, hey, my real riches are in Jesus. Let me press you on this. It takes pride to be petrified. If you are just petrified about something, it's because you're saying, like Joseph, I know what needs to happen. My will be done. That's why you're petrified. If you would be able to say, I don't know. You know. Thy will be done. You're not going to be scared. Some of you are angry or bitter against somebody. All right. The only way for you to be bound up in bitterness is if you think, I know. I know what this person deserves. I know how my life should have gone. If you say, my will be done, I know. You're bound into bitterness. The only way to forgive somebody is to say, I don't know what that person deserves. I don't know what needs to have happened. God knows. You know. Your will be done. The only way to freedom is to say, thy will be done at a place where it's incredibly hard. Really, really, really hard. Do you see that? So, thy will be done is not just a test of grace. Thy will be done is the most tremendous tool for growth that you can possibly have. Now, lastly, thy will be done is not only a test of grace, and it's not only a tool for growth, but lastly, it's the way to intimacy. What amazes me about the blessing itself, now, unfortunately, it's not in front of you. You can't read it. I'm sorry. It's my fault. But here's what he says. When he made the blessing, he says this. May the God before whom my father's Abraham and Isaac walked, here, the God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day, the angel... to the angel. bless these boys. The God who has been my shepherd all my life to this day, the angel who has delivered me from all harm. What a way to talk about God. Look, Jacob was a shepherd. He was a professional shepherd. He understands that. Now he looks back on his whole life. In fact, he's very careful to say the Lord has been my shepherd every day. Now Jacob has suffered all those years of the pain of being rejected by his father Isaac, who loved Esau more. All those years of the fear of having to flee from his brother Esau, always being afraid for his life. Afraid Esau would catch him. Afraid Esau would come after him. Afraid when he came back that Esau would kill him. Always living in fear for his life. Always feeling rejected by his father. Feeling betrayed by Laban. Then later on being lied to and betrayed by his own sons. And losing Joseph, he thought, going in a deep depression. And Rachel died young, by the way. We didn't even get into that. He has the audacity now to look back and say, the Lord has been my shepherd. My Lord's been with me. See, shepherds know that sheep are stupid. And shepherds have to stay with the sheep every single place. The shepherds don't just say, go out and graze. The shepherds have to take them on out there. And they have to see where they're eating and what they're eating. And see, Jacob is willing to say, now, because I realized that God knew when I didn't. See, now that he's thinking about his whole life in terms of thy will be done, he sees God, his whole life is suffused with personal intimacy of God as a shepherd. If you live your life, my will be done. I know best. My will be done. God might be in your life, but he's kind of remote. He's kind of up there. There's no intimacy. He's there. He's out there. And you're always making application. You're saying, well, something bad's happening, so I need his help. Or something I need, so I'm going to make application. You'd go to him for application. He's sort of like a rich uncle or something. He's in your life. But you see, when you start to say, thy will be done, I don't know. You know. When you stop being like Joseph and you see things the way Jacob sees things, then you begin to see God in your life all along. You can't have a personal relationship with God unless you're willing to say, thy will be done. An awful lot of people today I meet, they're very interested in being spiritual. But here's one of the things they always say. They always say, look, I believe and I want to meet God and I want to be spiritual, but, you know, don't you tell me what's right and wrong for me. I have to decide what's right and wrong for me. Everybody has to determine their own right and wrong. I have to find out what's right and wrong for me. The only thing I have to ask you about then is, well, I won't ask you. I'll tell you. You have a spirituality, without a thy will be done in it. You have a spirituality in which your God cannot contradict you, confront you, stop you, you see, thwart you, contradict your deepest convictions. If you have a personal relationship with somebody, that's always happening. You know, if you have mild acquaintances, I have plenty of mild acquaintances in my apartment building. People I've now gotten to know, I've seen them for years and we always talk nicely, but we haven't gotten down to the place where we actually criticize each other. We haven't gotten down to the place where we most, in most cases, where we actually come at each other. Good friendships or marriage, you're constantly having to say, not my will but thine be done. You're constantly, you don't have a personal relationship. You don't have personal intimacy unless you say that I will be done. Now, somebody says, well, this is a very interesting ideal, but I'm not capable of it. Surely somebody out there is saying, I see what you're saying. If I believe I'm saved by grace, if I've got a God of grace, if I want to grow, I have to go to God and say, you don't owe me an explanation. I'm going to listen to you. I'm going to obey you no matter what. Well, if you're honest, you'll say, I can't do that. I'm not capable of that. And the answer is, you're right. But there's one who has done it. And you have, you, you have a resource that Jacob didn't, you've got a resource with Jacob did not. The second part of his blessing, he says, God has been my shepherd to this day. And then he says, the angel who has delivered me from all harm. Now, what's, that's very interesting. When did, when did Jacob meet the angel of the Lord? When he wrestled with him. And what did the angel of the Lord do? If you remember that story in Genesis 32, the angel of the Lord crippled him. So he's limp and he's lame. He's crippled for life. The angel of the Lord touched his thigh, put it out of joint. And it says, we're told that Jacob limped the rest of his life. He was crippled the rest of his life. me from all harm? Israel means wrestling with God. Israel means struggling with God, Elohim. And Israel said, but you know what? Somehow, there was redemption that happened in that struggle. Now, that's what he saw. But let me tell you, you see, and I can see something even bigger than that. That'll help us with this whole idea of submission. There was a greater Israel than that Israel. There was somebody who really wrestled with God. There's a greater Israel than Jacob. And he wrestled with God in a far deeper way. In the Garden of Gethsemane, Jesus Christ wrestled with God. Blood was coming out of his pores. And he said, finally, thy will be done. Now, that was the greatest wrestle that's ever happened. When you and I wrestle with God and say, like Jacob, thy will be done, all we're asked to give up is a sin or an idol. And the result is going to be closeness to God. But when the ultimate Israel wrestled, when Jesus in the Garden of Gethsemane wrestled with the will of God, he knew that if he said, thy will be done, he would lose God. He would lose himself. He would lose all life and all love. He would be thrown into the fiery pit. Now, when you see the ultimate Israel, Jesus, saying, thy will be done for you and me, that melts your heart so that you can become a little Israel in a little garden saying, thy will be done. Now, I do not want to minimize the kind of little gardens that you can get into. Some of you, I mean, as a pastor over the years, I've sat in the presence of people who had found things coming into their life that were just horrible, just awful, just tragic, so different, difficult. And for you to wrestle and say to the Father, I don't know, you know, and be healed, and get a freedom, and get a poise, and get a humility, and get a greatness, is very hard. And you can't do it by trying. You can't just say, well, I'm going to be a good Christian. I'm going to be, I'm not, I'm going to have faith. Oh, no. You have to look out of your garden, out of your struggle, out of your thy will be done experience, as great as it may seem, and look to a greater one. Someone who wrestled more than you did. Someone who, it cost a whole lot more for him to say, thy will be done. And you have to look at it till it melts your heart with love, joy, and gratitude, and you say, if you said, thy will be done for me like that, I can say, thy will be done for you. Right here. And that's the secret. If you see the ultimate Israel wrestling with God, then you can become Israel. You can be one who wrestled with God and won because you said, thy will be done. Is he crossing arms on you? Is he crossing your arms? Is he crossing your schemes? Is he ripping up your agenda? It's the free grace of God. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray. Let's pray.
