TITLE: The Mothers of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 1:1-17
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Matthew’s Messiah
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-mothers-of-jesus/

============================================================

Scripture reading comes from the book of Matthew, chapter 1, verses 1 to 17. This is the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah, the son of David, the son of Abraham. Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers. Judah the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamara. Perez the father of Zerun, Hezron the father of Ram, Ram the father of Aminadab, Aminadab the father of Nashion, Nashion the father of Solomon. Solomon the father of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab. Boaz the father of Obed, Obed whose mother was Ruth. Obed the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of King David. David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah's wife. Solomon the father of Rehoboam, Rehoboam the father of Abijah, Abijah the father of Esa, Esa the father of Jehozaphat, Jehozaphat the father of Jehoram, Jehoram the father of Uzziah, Uzziah the father of Jotham, Jotham the father of Ahaz, Ahaz the father of Ezekiah. Ezekiah the father of Menasseh, Menasseh the father of Ammon, Ammon the father of Josiah, and Josiah the father of Jeconiah and his brothers at the time of the exile to Babylon. After the exile to Babylon, Jeconiah was the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel the father of Abahud, Abahud the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor, Hazor the father of Zedok, Zedok the father of Achim, Achim the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Eliakim. Eliakim the father of Eliezer, Eliakim the father of Mathan, Mathan the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Joseph the husband of Mary, and Mary was the mother of Jesus who is called the Messiah. Thus, there were fourteen generations in all from Abraham to David, fourteen from David to the exile to Babylon, and fourteen from the exile to the Messiah. The word of the Lord. In Advent, which are the weeks leading up to Christmas, we take a look at usually Matthew and Luke that tell the story of how Jesus was born. Interestingly enough, they start, both Matthew and Luke, with genealogies. Those boring things that you just heard read. They're boring to us. In the old King James Bible, you know, the word, it's missing, it's a shame in the modern translation, the word that's missing is begat. Over and over and over again in the King James it says, so and so begat, so and so, and so and so begat, begat, begat, begat, begat. And modern readers, our eyes start to glaze over, and we say, when are we going to get to some action? It doesn't, we don't understand the significance of it, but the ancient people did. And I think you will see, that not only was this incredibly interesting to ancient people, this genealogy, but it will be, I think, to us, too, if we spend a little time thinking about the multiple meanings here. This genealogy helps us understand what we're going to do these next four weeks, which is we're looking toward Christmas and asking, what does it mean that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was born as a human being? Here's three things we learn about Christmas from the genealogy. One, at Christmas, promise came true, grace changed all the categories, and reality became fact. Promise came true, grace changed categories, reality became fact. Look, number one, first, promise came true. The main, probably the main message of the genealogies is right here in verse one. This is the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah, son of David, son of Abraham. See, a promise was made to both David and Abraham. Amen. seed, all the families of the earth would be blessed. David was promised that one of his descendants would sit on a throne and his reign would last forever. And now in Jesus Christ, the promises have come true. That's the first thing that we're learning here. And it's not just Matthew. Luke starts the same way. The story of Luke, the story of Jesus and Luke starts with genealogies. And Luke has Mary's song, the Magnificat. And in Mary's song, she sings, he has remembered to be merciful to Abraham and his descendants forever, just as he promised. So, the meaning of Christmas, among other things, is that God keeps his promises. He made a promise and he came through with it. But, could I show you something about this promise? Very important for us to understand. Keep in mind. Look how long it took God to fulfill his promise. It's centuries after he made the promise to David and millennia after he made the promise to Abraham. Abraham. It took God thousands of years to fulfill his promise. But he did. And, something else that's important to notice. And that is, not only did it take God a long time, as we consider it a long time, not only does it seem to take God a long time to fulfill his promise, but on the road, it didn't look like he was working toward that at all. Well, the 400 years before Jesus was born, there weren't even any prophets anymore. Prophecy had died out. And, not only that, but the kings had died out. The lines of David seemed to have died out. There were no more kings on the throne. And, the children of Israel had been sent into exile. And, when they came back, they were subjugated by Rome. In other words, the promise of the Messiah, not only did it go on centuries and centuries and centuries without God answering, fulfilling the promise, but it looked like history was going in a different direction away from the promise. It didn't just look like God was taking a long time. It looked like he was actually not doing anything. Things were just moving further and further away. And, then Jesus comes, and, as we will see, he was a greater Messiah than anyone even had imagined. So, here's the lesson. God always fulfills his promises. Now, this is your God, if you believe in him. God always fulfills his promises, but he never operates on our time frames. Even the way in which he's working to fulfill the promises is something that we cannot see. It looks like he's going, you know, he's abandoning us. But, in the end, he will give you more than you actually can imagine or even want. He's not a tame God. He always fulfills his promises, but it always takes longer than we think he should. He always does it in a way we think he's not doing, you know, he's not working on it. And, in the end, it's more than we can imagine. See, if you have embraced the Lord, if you have said, I'm going to follow you, Lord, one of the promises that God promises all through the Bible is he will give you the desires of your heart. But I bet you there's a lot of people out there right now, right, who say, yes, I gave myself to him, and he promised to give me the desires of my heart, and he seems to be taking a long time to do that. In fact, my life doesn't even seem to be going in the direction of having my heart's desires fulfilled. And yet, we have a whole hymn about this. We sing it fairly often. Judge not the Lord by feeble sense, but trust him for his grace. Behind a frowning providence, he hides a smiling face. Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take. The clouds you so much dread are big with mercy and shall break with blessings on your head. When Jesus finally did show up, he was more than anyone dared ask or think. God always fulfills his promises, but it's foolish to judge God by our time frames. So that's the first point, the first thing we learn from the genealogies. Promise comes true, but generally not in the way or the time that we expect. Number two, the second thing, though, the genealogies teach is maybe not quite as obvious to see. It's that grace changes all our categories. Now, we get that from the middle of the genealogy, not the beginning, and especially in the names. There's a whole lot of names here, and some of you have maybe your eyes glazed over as you were listening, but there's five names in particular I want to look at, and that is five names of women that are in this genealogy. Notice in verse three, Judah, the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar. Down in verse three, there's a whole lot of names. mother was Rahab. Boaz, the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth. And then finally, David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah's wife. And at the very end, at the very bottom, Mary. Five women. Now, why is that unusual? It's extremely unusual. In fact, and the nature of the character of the woman is also incredibly unusual. But first, we have to stand back for a second. Why are these genealogies here? What is the big deal? Here's the answer. In every society, if you want a place in society, a place in the world, you've got to have credentials. Now, today, our credentials are what we call resumes. If you want a place in the world, you've got to have a great resume. And your resume is who you studied with, if you're a musician, who you've played with, who you studied under, if you're, you know, you're a businessman, you know, what school you went to, what companies you worked for. In other words, what you've accomplished, where you studied, what awards you've gotten, how much money you've made, that sort of thing. Your resume. And if you want a job, you want a place, you say, here's my resume. And people say, oh, wow, you worked for them, you did it. Well, I'll take care, we'll consider this, okay? That's how you get a place in the world. But in ancient times, it was your genealogy, not your resume. And the reason was, we live in a highly individualistic society in which all that matters is what you accomplish. But in ancient times, and some of you, some of you know, even today, in many parts of the world, or where you've come from, or maybe some of your parents have come from, there's still plenty of places in the world where it's not the individual resume that matters as much as who your family is. What have they accomplished? What are they like? See, a lot of people think a way better gauge of who you are and what you're going to do if you work for me is how you were raised, who your family is, what they've accomplished, their place in society, their character. You see that? And therefore, in the ancient times, if you wanted to have a place in the world, you pointed to your genealogy. That's how you proved who you were, not your resume. And this is the reason why, for example, Herod the Great, a nasty character that we're going to come up to see soon. We're going to go right through Matthew 1, 2, and 3, you know, the early chapters of Matthew to talk about the birth of Jesus. And Herod the Great is a villain. He's a potentate over this part of the world, but he's a very mean tyrant who kills all the infants of Jerusalem and trying to destroy the Messiah. We'll get to that later. But the reason I'm bringing him up is that he was half Jewish and half Edomite. And because he had Edomite blood in him, that made the resume not look good. See, even today, there's certain parts you might leave off your resume. I won't mention that I worked for them because we might call him up. And, you know, so we leave certain people off the resume. And in those days, you expunge certain people from your genealogy too. You just said, and Herod we know, by the way, expunged or kind of excluded certain people. I mean, we do that even today. You know, don't tell people about the crazy uncle. Tell them about, you know, this other, you know, this other uncle who's, you know, the head of such and such bank. And so, but back then, you didn't put people on your genealogy unless you were proud of them. You put people on the genealogy that showed who you were. And so you left off the people that you didn't want anyone to see. So the genealogy was the resume. The resume is the genealogy. All right. Now that you understand that, do you see what's going on here? First of all, Jesus puts five women in his genealogy. That wasn't completely, it wasn't that no one ever did that, but very few people ever did that. Why? Well, because you usually didn't list your mothers, you listed your fathers. Why? Because in a patriarchal society, the men had the power and you were trying to connect yourself to successful and powerful people and they were men. And so you didn't put your mothers in the genealogy, you put fathers in the genealogy. So the fact that he's got five women in here already kind of raises an eyebrow, but it goes beyond that. First of all, Ruth was a Moabitess and Rahab was a Canaanite. They weren't Jews. These are the kind of marginalized, despised racial people, people of despised marginalized races that you usually, you expunge, you didn't have them on there, but there they are. But more than that, Tamar, now notice it was, it's intriguing what, what Matthew does here. It says, Judah was the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar. Tamar had these two boys. by Jewish moral code, she therefore was committing incest. And Rahab, we know from other passages in the Bible, was a prostitute. And what that means is, you have not only gender outsiders, women, but you've got racial outsiders, Moabitess and Canaanite, and now you've got moral outsiders, immoral people. And I won't take the time to go into Deuteronomy, Leviticus, and Numbers and places like that, but the Mosaic Law excluded these women permanently from the presence of God in tabernacle and temple worship. See, if you go back to the Old Testament and you read the temple and the tabernacle worship, the people that went into the Holy God had to be clean. They couldn't be sinful. Or if they had sinned, they had to spend, you know, weeks purifying themselves. You know, you could not, this is a Holy God, and sinners can't go before a Holy God, so you have to cleanse yourself. And people who did incest, people who were Gentiles, these women, according to the Law of Moses, were permanently excluded from the presence of God. And yet Jesus Christ brings them in. Jesus Christ brings in people that the Law of Moses excluded. Why? See, by having him on the, it's not just that they're in the family tree, but remember, their genealogy is their resume. The genealogy is telling people who you are. They're being owned. See? They're being, you might say, Jesus is proud of them. So why would Jesus bring in people that the Law of Moses would exclude? And the answer is, I hope you recognize great writing when you see it. This is the first chapter of the book of the entire New Testament, right? And the answer is the rest of the New Testament. If you understand, and I'm trying to help you understand, if you understand genealogies and the meaning of genealogies, I'm trying to help you understand, then when you read this, it raises all kinds of questions in your mind that say, wait a minute, what's going on? And it makes you want to read the rest of the book. That's good writing. But rather than actually just saying, I will close in prayer, and now you can go home and read the rest of the New Testament, there is a clue, and it's a big one, to what you're going to find in the rest of the New Testament. And that is this strange spot where Matthew goes out of his way, not to mention a particular woman's name. You see down here in verse 6, David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah's wife. Now, she had a name. She's Bathsheba. She was David's wife and the mother of King Solomon. But Matthew deliberately calls her not Bathsheba, but Uriah's wife. This is not a slam at her, but this is an enormous slam at David himself. And see what Matthew's doing. See, David is the one guy that anyone would have wanted on their resume, or on their genealogy, right? I mean, if there's anybody you want on your genealogy, it's David. He's the ultimate insider. He's male, of course, but a Hebrew of the Hebrews, devoutly religious. He wasn't an idol worshiper. He didn't put up a share of poles. He didn't worship the bales. He was religiously orthodox. He was religiously devout. He was powerful, of course, the greatest king in the history of Israel. And so anybody who brings out a genealogy would want David on there. And look what Matthew's doing. By saying Uriah's wife, he's forcing you to remember the whole story. You know what the whole story is? It says that Bathsheba was Uriah's wife, and David fell in love with her. And in order to get her, he had Uriah killed. He murdered Uriah so he could marry her. And in one stroke, Matthew is forcing you to remember all this stuff about this great king who everyone would be so, so excited to have on your resume. And guess what? Here's what he's saying. He's no better than the prostitute. See, the prostitute is right next. See, there's Rahab, there's Ruth, and there is David. And what he's actually saying is, Matthew's saying, David the king had no more right to go into the presence of a holy God than a prostitute. Yes, immoral, irreligious people don't deserve fullness. They don't deserve God's blessing. They don't deserve life with God forever. But neither do religious moral people whose sins overtly don't look as obvious, but inside, in their heart, do they love God with all their heart, soul, strength, and mind? Do they love their neighbors as themselves? No! And therefore, do they love their neighbors as themselves? Do they love their neighbors as themselves? Do they love their neighbors as themselves? Whose sins overtly don't look as obvious, but inside, in their heart, do they love God with all their heart, soul, strength, and mind? Do they love their neighbors as themselves? No! And therefore, what is the message? Anyone who relates to God will have to be related through sheer grace. Because all people are equally lost. The prostitute, the king, right next to each other. They're equally lost. But, obviously, because Jesus Christ has brought them in, if you're saved by sheer grace, then you're equally loved. It doesn't matter how high you are, you need God's grace. It doesn't matter how low you are, you've got God's grace, if you reach for it. What's so amazing about the gospel of God's grace, which is what the whole New Testament is about, is it's so intense, it's such an incredible message, that even the baguettes are dripping. It's coming right through the baguettes, don't you feel it? And here's what it means. Two things. Two practical applications, and then we have to move on to the third implication of this genealogy. The first thing it means is, it really doesn't matter who you are or what you've done. If you are in Jesus' family, if you're in his family, then and only then do you have a name. You don't get a name through a resume, and you don't get a name through a genealogy of being connected to royalty or to whatever. The only way you get a name, a self, an identity that lasts, the only way that you get an honor and a significance that lasts is like this. We just had read, and you applauded, all these names. These names, many of these names are 2,000 years old, 3,000 years old, 4,000 years old. And yet here we are in New York City, thousands of years later, and you've just heard them read to you. These names have not perished. Why? These names will never perish. Why? Because they're connected to Jesus. That's the only possible reason. It doesn't matter how much money they made. It doesn't matter how famous they were in their day. All those names would have perished. But because they're related to Jesus Christ, their names will never perish. And guess what? It doesn't matter what you have done, good or bad, in this life. Apart from a relationship with Jesus, your name is going to perish. It won't take long. Your great-grandchildren will hardly know who you were. Maybe your great-great-grandchildren may not even remember your name. Maybe if you've written a book or something, it'll last for 100 years. And then it'll be gone unless you are connected to Jesus Christ. Do you know the honor of being a Christian? To be in his genealogy, he's proud of you. He sings over you. Hebrews 2. He is not ashamed to call us brothers and sisters. When you toss in bed at night because somebody has snubbed you or your reputation has been hurt or someone has overlooked you and you get all upset, do you remember, if you're a Christian, do you remember the honor of being a Christian? Who cares what the peasants think if you've got the love of the king? What is any other kind of acclaim or applause compared to this? See, and secondly, not only does this give you the deepest consolation, but secondly, if you're a Christian and you're trying to be, if we're inside the Christian church, we must not be like out there in the world. This is New York City. This is the land of the killer resume. Who you know and what you've accomplished means everything, but not in here. We can't be controlled by that. We can't be looking at people as if, oh, you work for them or you've come from there. Oh, no. Oh, no. Because the grace of the gospel smashes conventional, worldly canons of respectability and accomplishment. It did the ancient ones. It made mincemeat of genealogies. It does the modern individualistic meritocratic ones. It makes a mincemeat of resumes. Matthew Henry, the great Bible commentator and writer, you know, he wrote the great commentary. His parents, as they were coming together, they were courting or whatever they did. His father's name was Philip Henry. His mother's name escapes me just this moment. But I do know that when they were courting each other, Philip Henry, Matthew Henry's father, did not come from the right side of the tracks, as it were. His genealogy wasn't great. But Matthew Henry's mother came from the right side of the tracks, and her parents were very upset that she was hanging out with someone like Philip Henry. And they came to her at one point and said, this Philip Henry, we don't even know where he's from. And she was a Christian, and Philip Henry was a Christian. So she turned to her parents, and she said something like this, now, I don't know where he's from, but I do know, all I hear about is where he's going. So all that matters is not where he's from, his pedigree doesn't matter, his background doesn't matter, it's where he's going. comes true. Grace changes all the world's categories. And one last thing, reality becomes fact. What do I mean by that? I chose those words very, very carefully. I'm only going to take five minutes to point this out because this is not a teaching of this text, this is an implication of this text, but I want you to see one of the most significant things about the story of Jesus in both Matthew and in Luke is it starts with genealogies. It doesn't start once upon a time. The story of Jesus' birth and death and life and death and resurrection does not start once upon a time. Does that matter? Sure it matters. Many, many years ago, and we know about this because it was written up, J.R.R. Tolkien, the great fantasy writer, was walking with an atheist friend on Addison's Walk near Madeline College in Oxford, along the river, Cherwell, a very famous place to walk in. He was walking with his atheist friend and they were talking about stories, great old fairy stories and legends and myths and all those wonderful stories. And they were talking about the fact of how different they were from realistic fiction. You see, the ancient stories would depict wonderful things like, sometimes they would depict stepping outside of time, maybe even time travel, or they might depict escape from death. They often would also show us communication with non-human personal beings. They also talked about love without parting, love relationships that you never lose, and ultimate triumph of good over evil. And that's why we find those stories moving. Now the point is, those stories are not factual, because the factual world, in the factual world, the empirical world, the here and now, in the factual world, none of those things are true. You can't step outside of time. You can't escape death. Every single love relationship you have will be, you'll be parted from every loving, every person you love will be taken away from you. You know that. By time and death. Everyone. And you'll be taken away from them. And there are no non-human, in the factual world, there are no non-human personal beings, and good never totally triumphs over evil. So in the factual world, none of those things are true, and yet, in the world of the fairy tale, and the legend, and the myth, we read about these things, and we keep reading them. And we keep writing them, Harry Potter, and things like that, and Lord of the Rings. We keep reading them, we keep writing them, and we just, they're the ones, those are the books that sell, those are the blockbuster movies, places that depict escape from death, and stepping outside of time, and communication with non-human beings, and love without parting, and the triumph of good over evil. That's what we want to see depicted. And even though we know it's not factually true, it still feels kind of real. It feels like these are realities that even though they're not factually true, they ought to be true. They ought to be true. But it's a kind of reality that we sense, a kind of deep structure. It feels real, and yet... You know, so they're walking along, Tolkien, this atheist friend whose name was C.S. Lewis, who was an atheist at the time. And they're walking along, they're talking about things like, you know, beauty and the beast. Not factually true, but isn't there a love that can liberate us from our self-made prisons? Sleeping beauty, not factually true. But do we really feel like death is the end? What if there was a hero who could awaken us from death and break the spell with a kiss? See, not factually true, but there's a reality there that ought to be true, and yet isn't true. It's not factual. And so we read them, and we're moved by them, but, you know, we have to go back to the factual world. And at one point, Lewis was actually saying, I love the old myths, I love the old legends, I love the old stories, and then he said something like this, because Tolkien wrote it down later. But myths are lies, though breathed through silver. But myths are lies, though breathed through silver. And Tolkien says, no, they are all not. Not all. They are not all lies breathed through silver. And he says, think about this story. A man from an obscure village, a nobody, but he's found to have a power to resist. And he's found to be so he's raising children from the dead, and he's stilling the storm, and he's feeding the multitude, and he's casting out demons, and he's loving the poor, and he's loving the marginalized, and he's really making a difference. And then, oh, he's betrayed, and he's put to death, and all hope is over, but no way. He's miraculously raised from the dead. What does that sound like? Sounds like another one of those great stories that's not factually true, but oh, it's so moving, it's so wonderful. And Tolkien says, but wait a minute, see? Now, Tolkien didn't say this, I'm saying this. But see, the point is that this story is different. It doesn't start once upon a time. It starts, this is a genealogy. This is a historical record. This really happened. And so Tolkien essentially said, Jesus is not one more story pointing to this underlying reality. Jesus Christ is that reality, that ultimate reality to which all the stories point. In fact, Jesus Christ is God's ultimate reality becoming a fact, breaking into the real world, breaking into the world of facts. Jesus Christ is the ideal becoming real, breaking through the barrier between ideal and real, becoming real, and starting to transform reality into the likeness of God. Jesus is the ultimate reality becoming a fact. And so this, what everybody else in the world, but Christians are living with, is this concrete slab between fact and what life ought to be. And yet now, Jesus Christ, our great captain, has opened a cleft in the pitiless walls of the world. He's punched a hole. And now what that means is reality, that undermining reality has become fact. Oh yes, in some ways, he's the handsome prince, you know, that kisses you and wakes you up from the sleeping death. See? He's the love that can get you out of your self-made prisons. He's the knight that slays the dragon. He's the one who does all this thing, these things. Oh, but it's not a story. That's the whole claim of Christianity. This is the claim of Christianity. This is not once upon a time. This really happened, and get this, if it did happen, please listen really carefully. If he really was born in a manger, a real manger, if he was really raised from the dead, not a legend, but actually raised from the dead, and you believe in him, then all the things that you have read in those stories over the years that you've longed for will come literally true. You will step outside of time. You will escape death. Your love relationships will go on forever. You will even speak to non-communicate with non-human personal beings, and good will triumph over the evil. That's the claim. No less than that. And you know what that means? If you're in your right mind, with all due respect, if you're in your right mind, you should at least want that to be true. Why would you want it to be true? It's the stuff in the stories we've longed for, and yet, no, it's not factual. But in Jesus Christ, that has become fact. And that's the reason, by the way, you can be saved by grace. So point three proves point two. Do you know why you can be saved by grace? Do you know the reason why the prostitute and the king are equally lost but equally loved? If Jesus Christ is a legend, if he's just a story, just a legend, then the best he can ever do is be an example for you. He can, in other words, he can show you you should love the poor, and you should tell the truth, and you should love good. In other words, at the very best, if he's a legend, all he can be is an example for you to try to live up to and to save yourself. And you won't. But if he actually happened, if he happened, it's not just a legend, but he happened, if he really was born in a manger and he really died on the cross for our sins and he's really raised from the dead and broke death, the power of death over us, then you can be saved by grace. And you can be someone that he's proud of, no matter what you've done. See, Christmas is not once upon a time, it's veiled in flesh, the Godhead see, hail the incarnate deity, pleased as man with men to dwell, Jesus our Emmanuel. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that even the genealogies are dripping with the gospel. We thank you that you always keep your promises, so make us patient. We thank you that grace completely destroys God's, the world's category, so teach us to open to people and not to follow that kind of racism and classism and snobbery and self-righteousness that... the human race and teach us to see that the only way in which our own names will live forever and we can get an identity and an honor that really is impervious to anything is if we are your children, if we are your brothers and sisters and last of all Lord help us to see that because your son Jesus Christ really really was born and became a human being and lived and died for us we can be your brothers and sisters and your children oh Lord Jesus thank you for doing all that for us and bring into our lives the greatness that ought to be there if we really took seriously all the things that we have learned about tonight that are taught in your word and that we will enjoy more and more as we get closer to Christmas and we pray all this in Jesus name, Amen.
