TITLE: The Hands of the Lord
SCRIPTURE: 2 Samuel 24:10-19
TOPICS: Repentance Atonement Salvation
SERIES: The Gospel According to David
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-hands-of-the-lord/

============================================================

This morning's text comes from 2 Samuel 24, verses 10 through 19. David was conscience-stricken after he had counted the fighting men, and he said to the Lord, I have sinned greatly in what I have done. Now, O Lord, I beg you, take away the guilt of your servant. I have done a very foolish thing. Before David got up the next morning, the word of the Lord had come to Gad, the prophet, David's seer. Go and tell David, this is what the Lord says. I am giving you three options. Choose one of them for me to carry out against you. So Gad went to David and said to him, Shall there come upon you three years of famine in your land, or three months of fleeing from your enemies while they pursue you, or three days of plague in your land? Now then, think it over and decide how I should answer the one who sent me. David said to Gad, I am in deep distress. Let us fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercy is great, but do not let me fall into the hands of men. So the Lord set a plague on Israel from that morning until the end of the time designated, and 70,000 of the people from Dan to Beersheba died. When the angel stretched out his hand to destroy Jerusalem, the Lord was grieved because of the calamity, and said to the angel who was afflicting the people, Enough! Withdraw your hand. The angel of the Lord was then at the threshing floor of Araun of the Jebusite. When David saw the angel who was striking down the people, he said to the Lord, I am the one who has sinned and done wrong. These are but sheep. What have they done? Let your hand fall upon me and my family. On that day, Gad went to David and said to him, Go up and build an altar to the Lord on the threshing floor of Araun of the Jebusite. So David went up as the Lord had commanded through Gad. This is God's word. We're looking each week at the life of David, and we have been actually staying with the account of David's life given to us by one author, the author of 1 and 2 Samuel. You shouldn't be misled by the term 1 and 2. It's one book. It's one piece of literature. It was divided only because it couldn't fit all on one scroll, so there were two scrolls. But the author of 1 and 2 Samuel ends the story of David right there. That's it. That's the very end of his account of David's life. We do know things about David's old age and how he died from other books, but this author ends the story here, and that must mean that he sees this as a summation of so many of the themes that we've been looking at for several months. What makes or breaks an individual human life? What are the things that we have to have? What are the things that we must discard if our lives are going to... If they're going to be... The things we've been looking at are things where you have them, your life is made. If you don't have them, it breaks your life. All of that is summed up here. But if we're going to understand what the teaching is, we probably have to ask it the three questions that will be on your minds anyway. Because when modern readers read this text, there's three questions that come right up. Actually, three problems we have. Why this judgment? I mean, why is God judging again? There he goes smiting people, thousands of people. What's going on? Why does he have to keep doing that? So the first question is, why this judgment? The second question is, why is this a sin? I mean, what's wrong with numbering... What's wrong with taking a census of the fighting men? Why is that so wrong? And then lastly, we're going to be... If we look more carefully, we're going to say, why this grace? Because actually, God does not follow through on the penalty. He does not hit Jerusalem. So why this judgment? Why this sin? And why this grace? First question. Why this judgment? Now, let's just... We won't take long on this, but we have to... It keeps coming up. Here is God, angry at sin, smiting thousands of people with plague. And this is the reason why so many people, especially in New York, just have trouble. They say, I can't believe in a God, or at least I can't believe in a God like this, a God who judges people and smites people. Well, could I help you a bit? Could I help you think along these lines? One of the things that surprised me when I did a little study of all the places in the Hebrew Bible where God judges a city or judges a nation or comes down with some sort of judgment is almost always, I'm not saying always, but almost always, God's judgment comes down on human violence. It's amazing how often... So for example, the flood. In Genesis 6, the famous Noah's flood, we're told that the reason God judged the world was because the earth was filled with violence. Or you know when God sends Jonah to Nineveh and says, unless you repent, I'm going to smite Nineveh in judgment. And they're called to let them give up their violence. Or then there's the famous Sodom and Gomorrah. And whatever you think, there's Ezekiel chapter 16, verse 49, that says Sodom and Gomorrah were judged for oppressing the poor, for grinding the poor, for violence toward the poor. And you can go to the book of Isaiah, the book of Amos, especially the first two chapters of Amos. And here, as we're going to see in a minute, I don't want to let the cat out of the bag too fast, but he is judging them for a military buildup because they're going to be a threat to their neighbors. The main thing, the thing that God usually comes in and judges, according to the Bible, is human violence. And therefore, would you think like this? Western people think that if you believe in a God of judgment, that leads to violence. The Bible, au contraire, says that God's judgment is the main antidote to human violence. It's the only antidote to the poison of violence. What do I mean by that? Think with me. When you are actually the victim of violence, it is virtually impossible not to be sucked in to a cycle of retaliation, sucked into the bitterness. In other words, it's hard not to be poisoned, virtually impossible not to be poisoned by violence. For example, on the individual level, you probably have read this, if you were physically abused, you're more likely to become a physical abuser, extremely likely. Or we know that at the social cultural level, that when a nation or a people group is a victim of violence, there's a tendency, of course, there's a cycle of retaliation. That's the reason why we mentioned this last week. You know, when in the early 90s, when all the ethnic cleansing came out in the Balkans, one group said, well, I know we're doing it to them, but it's because they did it to us last century. And of course, they said, yeah, we did it to them last century because they did it to us the century before that. And on it goes. What is the antidote? In other words, when you are the victim of violence, you're sucked in and you become part of the problem. And on and on it goes. And so the poison spreads. And is there no end to it? The Bible says, yeah, there is. The judgment of God. And there's a writer, and I get, this is such, this is so helpful when I found this a few years ago that I get it out about once a year and read it to you. There is a writer, a Christian writer who was Croatian and who therefore was part of the Balkans problem. He's been there. He's seen it. And he makes a statement that's astounding to us. He says, violence thrives today, secretly nourished by the belief that God refuses to judge or take the sword. Violence thrives today, secretly nourished by the belief that God refuses to judge or take the sword. Did you hear that? He says, he says the only antidote to violence in the world is the belief that God will judge violence and take up the sword. And when we hear that, we say, how could that be? Because again, the average Western person thinks, well, if you believe in a God of judgment, doesn't that lead to violence? And here's what this man says. You have to have a really comfortable life if you believe that. He says, if you have ever experienced violence yourself, if you have ever been the victim of violence, it doesn't matter what they taught you in philosophy 101. It doesn't matter whether you're a relativist. It doesn't matter whether you say, oh, all views of justice are socially constructed. They're culturally constructed. It's all relative. You know, one person's terrorist, another person's freedom fighter. All these things are relative. If you are actually the victim of horrendous judgment, injustice and violence, you'll know that there's justice. There is such a thing as justice, and you'll want it. And you'll want nothing but it. And you will pick up the sword or the grenade or something else, and you will go get it. And if you don't think you will, you have had a comfortable life. But this is what this Christian thinker says. My thesis that the practice of nonviolence requires a belief in divine vengeance will not be popular in the United States. But it takes the quiet of a suburb for the birth of the thesis that human nonviolence can result from belief in an all-loving God that refuses to judge. If God were not angry at injustice and did not make a final end to violence, that God would not be worthy of worship. You know what he's saying? The only way that he can actually respond to violence nonviolently is by knowing there is a God who will judge it. In other words, the only belief powerful enough to stop the poison in your veins, the only belief powerful enough... injustice and violence, that you will respond not with just vengeance and be sucked back into retaliation, is to know that someday God is going to put everything right, that not a single wrong will go unredressed. Nothing wrong. Do you hear that? In other words, the only thing powerful enough to stop the spread of violence in my heart, says this man, is to know that there's a God of judgment. And if you think that believing that there's just no God or God loves everyone, there is no God of judgment, then you'll never be able to escape it. When you're wrong, you will go get your blood. You see that. And if you think, therefore, that believing in a God of judgment leads to more violence, you've had a comfortable life. So the first thing you have to understand is the Bible presents the judgment of God as an antidote to human violence. The thing that evokes the judgment of God is human violence and oppression and injustice. So that's why the judgment. Now, the second question, of course, comes up is, why this sin? What is so wrong with this? In the book of Numbers, chapter 1 and 2, in the book of Numbers, God tells Moses, count the fighting men. But here in verse 10, we see, it says, David was conscience-stricken after he had counted the fighting men. And this is the thing that God is so mad about. He counted the fighting men. In the very beginning of the chapter, I didn't print it, but here's what it says. It says, and David said to Joab and the army commanders, go throughout the tribes of Israel and enroll the fighting men so that I may know how many there are. But Joab said, why does my lord the king want to do such a thing? But the king's word overruled Joab and the army commanders and they left the presence of the king to enroll the fighting men. What's wrong with this? On the surface, it doesn't look like there's anything wrong with this at all. What's so bad about counting the fighting men? There's two reasons that this is wrong. The first reason it's wrong is because God says so. And I don't want to rush on to the second reason. There are other, and I've already kind of let the cat out of the bag already, so you already know where I'm going to go, but there are other reasons that we could say that this was wrong. But I don't want to miss the fact that when a modern reader goes through this passage, the first thing you, your first reaction is that God's overreacting. I don't get it. God is mad at David. He's saying, this is terribly wrong for you to count the fighting men, and it doesn't make any sense. Who does this hurt? What is going on? It doesn't make any sense. And I don't want you to go on too fast because I want us to sit and realize that something's wrong simply because God said so. Even if you can't see why, even if it doesn't make sense, even if you don't see the downside. One of my three sons used to, when he was little, used to always resist, you know, my parental directives by saying, Dad, I'd be happy to obey you if you could just explain why you want me to do this. I mean, why? So he said, I'll do it if you can just explain to me why. And I used to always have to come back and say, if you obey me only when my reasons make sense, you're not obeying me at all. You're just agreeing. You're not obeying. You're just agreeing. In other words, to paraphrase, my son would say, Father, I would be happy to follow your parental directives if you could show me that not to do so would harm me or others or society or the environment in some way. Show me what is the downside here. I'd be happy to follow. And the only proper response to that would be to say, son, you're five. And if you only obey your parents when you understand why they're asking you to do something, you're going to die. Because when you ask, well, I'm just asking for a reason. What you're actually doing is you're refusing to admit the wisdom differential. What you're actually doing is you're refusing to admit that you're a child. You're refusing to ascribe that role to yourself. You're refusing to have the relationship with us you should have. Now, we live in a very, very, very, how do I say it? Our culture is ethically pragmatic. We are immersed in ethical pragmatism. The way our culture decides right and wrong is not by looking at any rules. In some ways, we don't believe in the rules. What we say is something is right as long as it makes you happy and it doesn't hurt anybody else. If it makes you happy and it doesn't hurt anyone else, then there's nothing wrong with it. Now, I can't go into this, but do you realize that, and since that's the working ethic for our society, do you realize what godlike knowledge that we're doing? Yes. It's not so good. you to sit down and think, okay, if I do this, what effect will this have on my character, and what effect will it have on my children's character? In other words, you have to think of all the ramifications, social and psychological and cultural and relational. You have to practically have godlike knowledge to decide right and wrong in that ethical system. But having said that, the fact is that that's it, that that's what we have, and we're immersed in it. And so when you and I, immersed in that culture, come to God, we say, I want a connection. So we start to read our Bible, we start to pray, we come to church, we might put our faith in God, we might put our faith in Christ. And we say, I'm following God. But when we read the Bible, there's some things in the Bible that make sense to us, but there's other things that seem primitive, it seems offensive, it seems like we're beyond that, so we just ignore that, we cut that out, we discard that, we don't follow that. You know what you're doing? You're not obeying God at all when you do that. You're just agreeing, some places. If you really think of it like this, we are, we like to think about this chronologically. See, we're flattering ourselves because we think chronologically. We say, well, there's some things in the Bible that make sense. There's other things that don't. Because some things in the Bible are primitive, regressive. So we like to think chronologically. We're in today, we're contemporary, we're modern. That was then. But let's think culturally instead of chronologically for a minute. Everybody is culturally situated. Every reader of the Bible will be culturally located. And therefore, from that cultural perspective, some things in the Bible won't make sense. So if you come from a more traditional culture that puts all the emphasis not on the individual but on the family and on the tribe and on the clan, there's things in the Bible that make no sense because they contradict that. So there's places that if you come from a traditional culture, you see places the Bible says, you must hate your father and mother and follow me. I am more important than your family. Or there's the places where it says you're a Christian first and you're white or you're black or you're Asian or you're Latino second. The racial distinctions don't make any difference. Traditional people listen to that. See, we in the West, we listen to that and we say, that's great. We like that part of the Bible. But people in more traditional cultures say, that's outrageous. Ah, but we Western people, all have emphasis on the individual. We believe the individual is more important than anything else. So when we get to this stuff on sex or on gender, we're offended now. But why should your cultural objections be privileged over their cultural objections? Huh? What makes you think that your cultural problems are more important than their cultural problems? Let me tell you what's really going on. You and I, we don't want to admit the wisdom differential. We don't want to admit we're children. And that's putting it mildly because the wisdom differential between a parent and a child is nothing compared to the wisdom differential between God and a human being. We don't want to admit the role. We don't want to go there. But if you and I only obey God when it makes sense, we're going to die. Things are wrong because God says they're wrong. Whether you see a downside or not. I mean, that's the thing that you should get first from reading this passage saying God's all mad about something and we have no idea why. What's wrong with it? Because he says he's wrong. Most of us operate like this. If I know in my heart this is right, then I'll do your will. The Bible says it's the other way around. John chapter 7, verse 17. If anyone is willing to do his will, he will know of the teaching whether it is of God or whether I speak for myself. You see the opposite? If you're willing to do my will, later on it'll make sense. If you do my will, eventually you'll know. Not, I don't know, therefore I'm not going to do it. You know, that original pragmatist, the serpent, comes into the garden and says to Adam and Eve, wow, paradise, this is great. You can do anything you want in paradise, right? Anything you want? And Adam and Eve said, well, almost anything. We can't eat that tree. And the, I guess the serpent said, why? And Adam and Eve said, we don't really know why. You don't know why? And the text in Genesis 3 actually says, after talking to the serpent, they began, they saw that the tree was good to eat. What does that mean? It must have meant the serpent was trying to reason with them. Say, okay, you mean, you think it's poison? Well, let's feed some to the bunny. Oh, there's no, the bunny's doing fine. So what's the reason? You mean God's told you not to eat this tree for no reason? Just an arbitrary, naked exercise in power? And finally, Adam and Eve ate? And everything in the world fell apart. Because in a sense, God, through the rest of the book, says, yes, there was a reason why I asked you not to eat the tree. The reason not to eat the tree is that God but because of our relationship. I wanted you to not eat the tree because of who I was and of who you are. I wanted you to eat the tree just because of who I am, not eat the tree just because of who I am. There wasn't any reason, and that was the reason. If you only obey me when it makes sense to you, you're not obeying, you're agreeing, and you're going to die. So that's the first reason. There's a second reason, however, and they're actually linked. The second reason, all the commentators point this out, and this really, I think, will help you when you see why God's so mad. Israel has never had a standing army before. And notice, I read you the first part of the chapter, he's not just counting the fighting men, he's enrolling them. Israel had a defense-only army, a volunteer army, that when you were attacked, you could bring them out, and they defended. But as we all know, if you have a standing army, a permanent army, standing armies, you say, well, there it is, let's use it. And so instead of just defense, you start to move to aggression. And it's a frog in the kettle thing. At first, I'm sure David was just simply saying, look, everybody around us is out to get us. So first of all, what we're going to do is we're going to have a standing army just for defense. But defense will be faster, right? It'll be better. If we have a standing army, we'll be able to defend ourselves more quickly. And then, of course, the next thing that would happen is he said, well, now, if we're going to defend ourselves against those great big nations out there, there's all these little smaller nations around us, so we ought to conquer them just to create a buffer zone. And if we conquer them to create a buffer zone, we're just doing it by defense. It's not really aggression. And on and on it would go. And God says, over and over again, by his prophets, he says things like this, woe to those who rely on horses who trust in the multitude of their chariots and in the great strength of their horsemen. Do not look to the Holy One of Israel or seek help from the Lord. Some trust in chariots, some in horses, but we trust in the name of the Lord our God. One of the reasons we don't do everything in the Bible just because God says is we don't trust him. And the thing that David was saying was I'm going to look to my economic might, my military might, my material might instead of God for my security. And God comes after him and says, I do not want a culture like that. I don't want you to be like all the other nations, just calculating power. Now, you attack nations simply because they're weaker. I don't want you to do that. I'm not going to let you go there. And by the way, what's very interesting about this is when you see him smiting 70,000 people, you say, isn't that terrible? You must keep in mind that the Bible continually says our days are numbered. Psalm 139 says God knows exactly how many days we are going to live. Exactly. They're set. In his wisdom, he knows how long we're going to live. Over and over again, it says our days are set. So when God actually smites and kills 70,000 people at once, all he's doing is collecting everybody who's supposed to die at a certain period of time just to get our attention. It's not as bad as it sounds. So he says, what I'm going to have to do is, I've got to do something to wake you up. I don't want you to become like, I don't want you, I don't want a culture of death. I don't want a culture of power. I don't want a culture based on power, not on justice. I don't want you to go in that direction at all. Trusting in your material wealth. Trusting in your military might. I don't have it. And so he comes after them on that basis. So that's why the sin. And by the way, it's very easy to immediately say, oh, well, what has this got to do about national policy? How do we apply it? You know, in January 4th, I talked about that a bit because there's another passage in the life of David, 1 Samuel 15, where Saul does something like this. And if you want to think out the applications for national policy, you know, even though they're rather brief remark, get the tape, January 4th, 1 Samuel 15. I don't want you to wriggle out from under the personal application right now. I don't want you to think, well, what should governments be doing? I want you to think about this for yourself. The Bible says, for example, tithe. The Bible says, give at least 10% of your money away to charity, to others, to the church, to the work of the Lord. We don't. Why not? We want to buffer. Our security is in counting. We don't want to have to trust in God. We want to have enough money socked away so that we feel completely secure. We want to go secure our own security. Do you know what incredible good you could do if you gave money in those kinds of proportions? Why don't we? Because basically we're afraid. Because basically the security. We don't want to trust the Lord. We want to trust chariots. We want to trust the census. We want to trust in those things. So what is the sin here? I don't trust him. I don't trust him. I don't trust him. what it really means is you're not obeying me. You're only agreeing with me. You don't trust me. You're not admitting the wisdom differential. You're trusting yourself. You're trusting yourself. And that's why the sin. Now, lastly, why this grace? That's why the judgment, why this sin, and lastly, why this grace? Now, when I say why this grace, it doesn't immediately hit you, perhaps, but if we read carefully, we'll see something that's very interesting. God says to David, David, there's going to be judgment coming down on this nation. It's the only way to save this nation from becoming like all the other nations. It's the only way for me to save the nation, save your neighbors from you. So you can have a choice. Three months, pardon me, three years of famine, three months of military defeat, or three days of plague. Now, we'll get back in a minute to David's choice, but David says, I want the three days of plague. So what we're told here is people began to die. And in verse 15, it says, so the Lord sent a plague on Israel from that morning until the end of the time designated. Notice, it's not past the time. It's near the end of the three days, and many thousands of people had died, and then the angel stretched out his hand to destroy Jerusalem. So the time's not up. Jerusalem hasn't been touched. Many people have died, but the time's not up. But for some reason, God relents. God doesn't follow through. He doesn't exact the full penalty, which had been already prescribed. Why? Why does God relent? Why this grace? Not only that, you could even ask, Saul did things like this, and God just withdrew completely from Saul. So why this grace to David? Why does God do this? And the answer is, David does three things. This is the reason why grace surrounds David and works through his life and into his people's lives. He does three things. The first thing he does is, he repents. Verse 10, David was conscience-stricken after he had counted the fighting men. Literally, in the Hebrew, it says, David's heart smote him. David's heart smote him. Now, even though it's because it's at the top of the passage, maybe you can't tell this, but let me lay it out for you. Remember when David sinned against Bathsheba and Uriah, right? We've talked about that. David's just sitting on his throne thinking he got away with it. God has to bring Nathaniel, the prophet, Nathan, excuse me, the prophet, and Nathan comes in sort of with a spiritual two-by-four and has to smack David over the head before David says, I sinned. Here, something completely different. There has been no prophet coming after him. There's been no revelation from God. There's been no judgment. There's been no consequences. Nothing has gone wrong, and yet David's heart starts to smote him, smite him. You know what this is? This is progress. If you think that as you grow in grace, if you think that as you become more and more of a spiritually great person, you repent less and less, you're wrong. The more spiritually great you are, the quicker and the more often you repent. Now, of course, if you base your moral discipline on a belief that your morally disciplined life can evoke God's blessing, if you believe on the basis of your ethical behavior and on the basis of the quality of your character, God will bless you, and he will answer your prayers, and he will take you to heaven, if your morally disciplined life is done with that motivation, yes, then whenever you have to repent, whenever you do something wrong, have to repent, it will be traumatic, it will be painful, it will feel like you're psychologically coming apart, because you will be, because your self-image is completely based on your good record. The reason you like yourself, the reason you have an identity, the reason you have any confidence is because you've got this good record, and repentance is to say, I've got a terrible record, and therefore you will only repent after being hit over the head by a two-by-four. You need to save face, you can't admit what you've done, and you literally feel like you're falling apart, you don't have a self as you're repenting, because your very self is your record. But if, on the other hand, you believe the gospel, that you're a sinner saved strictly by grace, in spite of your failures because of what Jesus has done for you, if that works itself down deeper and deeper in your heart, then you, as time goes on, less and less need to save face, less and less need to blame, less and less need to hide, less and less need to look good to yourself or other people. And it gets, you get quicker, faster, and more often do you repent, and not only that, instead of it traumatizing you and making you... into the source of your joy, which is God's grace in spite of your failure. So what ends up happening is repentance becomes actually something that sweetens your life instead of embitters your life. And repentance happens more and more often instead of less and less often. Here's how you know you're growing in grace. You don't need to defend yourself. You're never offended. Criticism, instead of saying, explanation, blame shift, how dare you? You're right. In fact, it's, I'm worse than you say. I mean, this is, the chief believers are the chief repenters. Do you know the release of being someone who, because of God's grace, finds that it gets easier and easier to repent? That it happens more and more and more? Is that happening in your life? Do the people around you know it is? So the first reason why there's this grace is that David's, David repents. The second reason this grace comes is because David abandons his idol. When we, David had made an idol out of power. It's happened in the past. We've talked about this during the series. He was not making God his trust. He was making his military might. He was making, it's natural, his economic might. That's my security. When God comes along and says, you got three choices. Famine, military defeat, or plague. For many years when I read this thing, I always figured that David took the plague because it was the shortest. You know, three years, three months, three days, I'll take the plague. How bad could it be? Three days. That's really not it. That's not at all. He says why he takes the plague. He says, because I want to fall into the hands of the Lord. What? If there had been a famine because of the impoverishment, he would have been devastated and he would have fallen into the hands of his enemies. And if, of course, he had had the defeat, he would have fallen into the hands of his enemies. And David finally puts himself in God's hands where he should have been all along because he says, it's only in the hands of the Lord that I'll find mercy. Do you know what the principle is here? This is a pretty profound principle. If you make anything but the real God your God, you'll never find mercy from that God. If your real God is your family, if your main source of significance and security and love is, I have a great family. My family loves me. I've raised good children. If your family blows apart, you, because if your family's a God, it will always, always punish you. It'll say, you failed. You're a bad husband. You're a bad wife. You're a bad mother. You're a bad father. And it will just, if you make your, your, the expectations of your parents, the main thing by which you're going to get your significance and security and you fail them, it will, it will kick you and curse you. It will never have mercy on you. Even if your real parents come to say, well, honey, it's okay. You fail. We still love you. The parental expectations, if that's the God of your life, it will never, ever forgive you. See, the Bible's smart about this when it says idols aren't real. They have eyes, but they cannot see. They have arms, but they cannot pick you up. They're, they're, they're not real. They're not persons. They're abstract. They're, they're objects. And that means that if you make anything but the real God, your God, it can't die for you. It can't, it can't love you. It can't forgive you if you fail it. It'll grind you into the ground. If my career is the main thing that gives me, is the main thing in my life and you don't have a good career, it will punish you all the rest of your life. You have to put yourself in the hands of something, but only God's hands are merciful hands. And David knew that. David knew that if I put myself in the hands of the enemies, they'll take every bit out, but only God will relent. Only God will have mercy. You see, the real God is the only God of your life who, if you get him, will satisfy you. And if you fail him, can forgive you. So he gives up his idol, the idol of his power, the idol of, you know, he, he starts to trust God again. And the third thing, though, the third thing, there's three things. Number one, he repents. Number two, he abands his idol. And number three, he offers a substitute. In this wonderful spot, we're told that David saw the angel of the Lord standing on this high place, the threshing floor of Araunah the Jebusite, and his hand was stretched out. Now, in 1 Chronicles, we're told that David actually saw him with a sword stretched out toward Jerusalem. And when David saw this, the angel with a sword stretched out against Jerusalem, he said, I am the one who has sinned and done wrong. These are but sheep. Let your hand fall upon me. And what he's saying is, yes, I know my culture is going bad, my society is becoming militaristic and materialistic, but I'm the one, I'm the, I'm the most responsible one. Smite the shepherd. says, well, you're offering a substitute. Okay, but he doesn't take David's life. Instead he says, build an altar up there where you saw the angel of the Lord, and I'll accept the sacrifices of animals. But we all know intuitively, and the book of Hebrews in the New Testament says, that we all know intuitively that animal substitutes certainly can't deal with the evil of the world. What's going on here? The secret is a little verse in 2 Chronicles 3, verse 1, where we read this. Solomon began to build the temple of the Lord in Jerusalem. This is David's son. Solomon began to build the temple of the Lord in Jerusalem on Mount Moriah, where the Lord had appeared to his father David on the threshing floor of a round of the Jebusite. Now that is a fascinating verse because it tells us that the place where the temple was built, where all those thousands of substitutionary animal sacrifices were done for years, was at the threshing floor of a round of the Jebusite. But only in 2 Chronicles 3 does it tell us it's Mount Moriah. Do you know what happened on Mount Moriah? You know, one of the commentators points out that it's when God himself here sees the angel of the Lord standing on the top of that Mount Moriah with his hand stretched out, that God is grieved, a word that actually has the implications of weeping. And God begins to weep when he sees the angel with the sword stretched out on the top of Mount Moriah, and he says, enough, withhold your hand. And one commentator says God begins to weep maybe because he knows what that mountain is all about. Eh, that's speculation, but I like it. What happened on Mount Moriah, class? Centuries before, Abraham stood on the top of that mountain with his hand stretched out with a blade over Isaac. And God said, enough, withhold your hands, stay your hand. Now I know that you love me because you did not withhold your son, your only son, from me. And then he provided a sacrifice, which was a substitute, the ram. Centuries later, someone else is standing on the top of that mountain with a sword. And God again says, enough, stay your hand. There's a substitute here. But what is a substitute? Again, just a bunch of animals? Maybe the reason why God is weeping is because he knows what this all points to. It all points to the ultimate David who said, smite the shepherd, that the sheep would go free. It points to the ultimate David who said, let your hand fall upon me. It points to the ultimate situation in which the sword of God's justice was coming down on somebody. But on the cross, it came down on Jesus Christ and there was nobody to say, stay your hand. And the sword of God's justice, the penalty for all of our sins, was paid right there. He was the substitute. And you know what this means? This is not a grumpy God that we have to appease somehow and he reluctantly says no. He starts to weep before David says anything. He sets up the substitutionary sacrifice. Do you have a trouble with trust? Do you have a trouble trusting God in those places which doesn't make any sense? Do you have a trouble with trust? Do you have trouble trusting God enough to give so generously that you're really not totally secure in how much money you've got in the bank if you count it? Do you have trouble trusting in God's timing? You know, you're waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting and God just doesn't seem to come through? Why would you want to hurry somebody like this? Why would you want to mistrust somebody like this? You see, if I'm told by someone you've got to obey God because he's so much wiser than you, all right, I'll knuckle under. But if I'm told you've got to trust God, look what he's done for you. Look what he's done for you. If he's willing to do this, how could you not trust him? Or as Paul puts it in Romans 8, he who did not spare his own son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also along with him not freely give us everything? Nicholas Wolderstorf loves every place that talks about God grieving over our sin, God's heart being filled with pain over our sin. And in one of his books, he says, if you don't see God suffering for our sin, you don't know what history is all about. Every act of evil inflicts pain and pulls tears from God. The tears of God are the meaning of history. And the tears of God are also the secret to... the joy of it. It's a secret to everything. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that you have shown us in this climactic moment in the life of David where he has come. He's not a perfect person. He's not even close to being a perfect person, but he's now a great repenter. And as a result, grace, grace flows into his life. It flows into the lives of the people around him. It flows into his people and his nation. We thank you for that. And we ask that you would show us how to trust you, trust you even though sometimes things you say and the things you do certainly don't make sense. And especially put ourselves into your hands so that we know that ultimately you will be both merciful and judge of everything that happens. And so we can have peace. We need peace. We need to put ourselves in your hands. Only in the hands of the Lord will we find mercy and peace. We put ourselves there now. Help us to do that by your spirit. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
