TITLE: The Man the King Delights to Honor
SCRIPTURE: Esther 3:1-6; 6:1-10
TOPICS: Sin
SERIES: Esther and the Hiddenness of God
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-man-the-king-delights-to-honor/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is found in Esther chapter 3 verses 1 through 6 and chapter 6 verses 1 through 10. It's on page 8 of your bulletin. After these events, King Xerxes honored Haman, son of Hamadatha the Agagite, elevating him and giving him a seat of honor higher than that of all the other nobles. All the royal officials at the king's gate knelt down and paid honor to Haman, for the king had commanded this concerning him, but Mordecai would not kneel down or pay him honor. Then the royal officials at the king's gate asked Mordecai, Why do you disobey the king's command? Day after day they spoke to him, but he refused to comply. Therefore they told Haman about it to see whether Mordecai's behavior would be tolerated, for he had told them he was a Jew. When Haman saw that Mordecai would not kneel down or pay him honor, he was enraged. Yet having learned who Mordecai's people were, he scorned the idea of killing only Mordecai. Instead, Haman looked for a way to destroy all Mordecai's people, the Jews, throughout the whole kingdom of Xerxes. That night, the king could not sleep, so he ordered the book of the Chronicles, the record of his reign, to be brought in and read to him. It was found, recorded there, that Mordecai had exposed Bithana and Teresh, two of the king's officers who guarded the doorway, who had conspired to assassinate King Xerxes. What honor and recognition has Mordecai received for this? The king asked. Nothing has been done for him, his attendants answered. The king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman had just entered the outer court of the palace to speak to the king about hanging Mordecai on the gallows he had erected for him. His attendants answered, Haman is standing in the court. Bring him in, the king ordered. When Haman entered, the king asked him, What should be done for the man the king delights to honor? Now Haman thought to himself, Who is there that the king would rather honor than me? So Edith answered the king, For the man the king delights to honor, have them bring a royal robe the king has worn and a horse the king has ridden, one with a royal crest placed on its head. Then let the robe and horse be entrusted to one of the king's most noble princess. Let them robe the man the king delights to honor and lead him on the horse through the city streets, proclaiming before him, This is what is done for the man the king delights to honor. Go at once, the king commanded Haman. Get the robe and the horse and do just as you suggested for Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate. Do not neglect anything you have recommended. This is God's word. We've been looking at the story of Esther. Esther is a Jewish woman, becomes queen of Persia. And as we have seen, and next week we'll see the denouement of the whole narrative and story, she uses her position to save her people by working for justice in society. She's the protagonist of this story, but tonight we're going to look at the antagonist, the villain, a man named Haman. And Haman is the most vivid and sustained case study in the Bible of everything the Bible says about pride and humility and what happens to people who let pride rage unchecked. And therefore, it's very vivid. It illustrates so many other places the Bible speaks about pride and humility. We're going to learn a lot. But I don't want you to think this is hype when I say, I really want you to listen because it might save the rest of your life. I'm not kidding. There's three things we learn here. First of all, the character of pride, what it is, the deadliness of pride, what it does, and the cure for it. The character of it, the deadliness of it, the cure for it. And first of all, we learn from the story and Haman about the character of pride. After these events, King Xerxes honored Haman, elevating him and giving him a seat of honor higher than all the other nobles. All the royal officials at the king's gate knelt down and paid honor to Haman for the king had commanded this concerning him. Now, when we're told he was given the highest position, that means he must have been essentially prime minister. It's pretty amazing. He had the highest position in the king's administration. But that other statement in verse 2 is pretty intriguing. Haman must have been a particularly obnoxious person because in hierarchical and traditional societies, bowing is absolutely instinctive. Totally instinctive. In fact, some of you may come from or know of traditional societies in which you always bow to anybody older than you or anyone who was in a station or social position higher than you. It was absolutely instinctive. And therefore, Haman must have been particularly obnoxious if the king had to command people to bow to him, which he did. But one man wouldn't do it. Mordecai, the cousin of Esther, who was the older cousin who raised Esther when her parents died, that she was a savior. Mordecai, the cousin of the closest cie do it. Mordecai, the cousin of Esther, who was the older cousin who raised Esther when her parents died, he refused to give respect where respect wasn't due. And the fact that he wouldn't bow down wasn't galling to Haman simply because he wasn't giving, this one individual wasn't giving Haman respect, but it really was a reminder of what Haman certainly knew in his heart of hearts, and that is that in spite of this great power he had, in spite of this great position he had, he didn't get the respect and the approval of people that he thought should go with it. At one point he even says to his wife and his friends, this is in chapter 5, it says, calling together his wife and his friends, Haman boasted to them about his vast wealth and all the ways the king had honored him and how he had elevated him above all the other nobles and officials. But all this, he said, gives me no satisfaction as long as I see that Jew Mordecai sitting at the king's gate. So he's furious. Now what he does about it we'll look at soon, but right now let's stop and say, what do we learn about pride? Pride, according to the Bible, is concentration on the self. Pride is absorption in the self. I'll give you a definition, it's from C.S. Lewis and I'll talk about him a lot tonight because I think he writes about this subject in a way no one else does. Pride, he says, quote, is ruthless, sleepless, unsmiling concentration on the self. This is what pride does. Pride makes you concentrate everything about you. So you don't get into relationships, you don't get into jobs, you don't do anything unless it makes you feel good about yourself. And therefore, nothing is about the thing you're doing, everything is about you. So for example, as Lewis writes in his famous chapter on pride, he says, pride gets no pleasure out of having something, but only out of having more of it than the next person. You may think you're proud of being successful or intelligent or good-looking, but you're not. Because when you're surrounded by other people with as much or more success, intelligence, or looks, you lose all pleasure in them. Lust may actually drive you to sleep with a beautiful woman because you want her. Pride, however, drives you to sleep with a beautiful woman just to prove to everyone, including you, yourself, that you can do it and do it over all others. A proud man gets no real pleasure from the woman. It's all about him. And so what you're doing in pride, pride is, is pride turns everything into a means to an end. You never do anything for itself. It's always a means to an end of getting respect and getting approval. And that's the reason why Haman gets no satisfaction from his accomplishments. It's really, he doesn't care about the position, really. He doesn't care about anything he's doing. What he wants is he wants people to respect him. He wants people to approve of him. And that's the reason why pride creates this endless, that's why Lewis is right when he says it's sleepless, endless ego calculation. You're always adding things up. You're always looking and saying, am I getting the thanks I deserve? Am I getting appreciated here? How am I being regarded? How am I looking? How does this make me look? Everything is about that. You're always saying, what about me? What about me? What about me? And therefore, since pride is concentration on the self, self-absorption, there are two forms of pride. It's very important to see this. On the one hand, you've got the superiority form of pride. And the superiority form of pride is generally recognized as pride by most people. Because people with a superior air are constantly doing that calculation. They're always comparing themselves. They're always thinking, how do I look? How's it going? Am I being appreciated? Am I being regarded? How am I being regarded? And you feel like you're making up pretty well. You're doing the calculation and it's adding up okay. And that's one form of pride. But there's another form of pride. And the other form of pride is the inferiority form of pride. The inferiority form of pride is where you're down on yourself and you don't like yourself and you don't like how you look and you don't like how you're doing and you're very self-conscious and you're kind of, you know, always beating yourself up. But you're just as self-absorbed. Don't you see? You're doing all the comparison too, but you're not making out as well. But it doesn't matter. We don't think of inferiority, people beating themselves up as proud. But you absolutely are, by biblical definition. You better get it straight. Because those two kinds of people have far more in common than a humble person. Because, see, now, if you understand self is self-absorption, pride is got two both inferiority and superiority forms, then you realize what humility is. According to the Bible, humility is not thinking less of yourself. It's thinking of yourself less. or respect, not caring about approval or respect. You say hello to people, you hang out with people, you go into certain jobs, you do things, not because it makes you feel good about yourself, it gets respect, it gets approval. You do it for the things themselves. It's not all about you. And that means you're unneedy. A humble person, if you actually ever met a really humble person, you would never come away thinking they were humble. All you would remember is they were happy and they were incredibly interested in you. Because they're not thinking about themselves and how you're treating them and how you're looking to them. Not all. And all that calculation, that ego calculation, it's gone. They're not doing it. They're relaxed. That's why there's a place in Screwtape Letters. And Screwtape Letters is written by C.S. Lewis. And it's about a senior devil writing to a junior devil about how to tempt people. So you have to understand that the enemy here is Jesus. And the patients are us human beings. But once you understand that, there's a devil talking to another devil about how to tempt patients and come against the enemy, which is Jesus. And when you understand that, it's a pretty good quote. But you do have to put that, you're going to get your head into it. And here it is. He says, you must conceal from your patient the real nature of humility. Let him think of it not as self-forgetfulness, but as a low opinion of his own talents and character. To thwart the enemy, we must consider his aims. He wants to bring your man to a state of mind in which he could design the best cathedral in the world and know it to be the best and rejoice in that fact without being any more or less glad at having done it than if it had been done by another. Our enemy, you see, wants to turn the man's attention away from self altogether toward him and the man's neighbor. Remember, both vainglory and self-contempt equally keep the mind on the self. Both can be, therefore, the starting point for some wonderful contempt of other selves, other people, cynicism and cruelty. Pride is ruthless, sleepless, unsmiling, concentration on the self. Number two, so what? Okay, okay, you say, all right, so you define pride rather broadly. And, okay, I see your point. So how bad is that? Very bad. Verse 5 and 6. Haman, when he heard about this, was enraged. Yet having learned who Mordecai's people were, he scorned the idea of killing only Mordecai. Instead, Haman looked for a way to destroy all Mordecai's people, the Jews, through the whole kingdom of Xerxes. He wasn't satisfied with just killing Mordecai and thereby, as it were, making him bow. Rather, he wants to destroy the whole community. So he goes to King Xerxes in verses right after this that we didn't have printed, and he tells the king about a group of people who don't obey the king's laws. And he says, if you give me permission to slaughter them and take their wealth, lots of that will come into the king's treasury. And the king, who had depleted his treasury through a very disastrous campaign to Greece, needed the money, and so he gives him the signet ring and says, go ahead, doesn't even find out who this group of people are. And Haman makes a law, and the law of the Medes and the Persians were irrevocable. When a king made a decree, it was irrevocable. And Haman designated a day, and on that day, the neighbors of the Jews anywhere in the Persian Empire were able to destroy them and take their wealth as plunder. Thousands of people are going to die, no matter what. And as we see, though the Jews are saved, thousands of people still die. And Haman himself is going to die. Everywhere in the Bible, we're told, pride goes before a fall. Pride leads to devastation. Pride leads to destruction. Pride is deadly. You say, well, how is pride so? I mean, this is an extreme case. Okay, I want you to see that all pride is deadly. All pride. How? Let me count the ways. Ready? First of all, and this might seem low-level, but it's important. First of all, pride makes you a fool. How so? First of all, pride keeps you from ever learning from your mistakes, in general. But why? Because you're self-justifying. A proud heart is always justifying itself and always saying, in other words, your relationship breaks up or, you know, there's a falling out with this person and this job doesn't work out and that job doesn't work out. And what are you always doing? It's him, it's her, it's them, it's the circumstance. It's never you. And you justify yourself, so you just can't learn from your mistakes. See, a humble person, humble people are not always looking at themselves. They're not always standing on their own dignity. learn fast. When something goes wrong, they actually look for what they have done wrong. Even if it's not mainly their fault, partly it's their fault, and they find it and they learn from it, and they grow so fast, and proud people don't. But not only that, proud people don't just not learn from the mistakes in general. They don't learn from criticism in particular. One of the best ways to grow as a person is to take criticism. But see, the superiority type of pride keeps when someone criticizes you, you dismiss them or you attack them. And in the inferiority form of pride, criticism so devastates you that when people even try to talk to you, you just melt down, and they just say, forget it. And you never learn anything. And because you don't learn from your mistakes in general, and you don't learn from your criticism in particular, you are a fool. What do I mean? You constantly make bad choices. You choose the wrong jobs. You choose the wrong boyfriends or girlfriends. You choose all kinds of things that are wrong. Why? Because the superiority form makes you overestimate your gifts. And the inferiority form makes you underestimate your gifts. You're always feeling down on yourself. And the people who are above you, you resent and fear them, and you find them threatening. And the people who are below you, you tend to disdain, and you don't learn from them. And as a result, you're constantly making miscalculations. You're constantly making wrong moves, just like Haman does here. But it doesn't just make you a fool. Pride makes you evil. Pride is what made the devil the devil. Since St. Augustine, Christian theology has understood that pride is not one sin among many, but really the root under all of them. Pride is the hellish spiritual Petri dish that grows all kinds of stuff in your life. Let me show you. Bitterness. Some of us, many of us, struggle a great deal with bitterness and anger toward things that people have done or people have done to us or classes of people or individuals. There's many people whose lives are being distorted by anger. But remember this. You can't stay angry at someone. You can't stay resentful at someone unless you feel superior to them. There's no bitterness without pride. Because you're saying, I would never do anything like that. And if your life is distorted by anger, it's because pride is at the root of it. Or what about paralyzing fear? Some people are paralyzed by worry. You know where that comes from? You know exactly how things have to go. You're sure you know what's best to happen in history. And it's got to be this. And if this doesn't happen, it'll be a disaster. And you're freaking out about it. Why? Because you know exactly how things have to go. How can you know? You just know. That takes arrogance. You can't be, you can't, listen, you can't be horribly worried without being proud. You can't be terribly bitter without being proud. Pride leads to being opinionated, which everybody doesn't like. But pride also leads to being indecisive because that's the inferiority form. You're just afraid of making a wrong move and how you're going to look. Pride makes you, pride makes you too shy. That's the inferiority form. Pride makes you too abrasive. That's the superiority form. And that's just the personal stuff. Then there's the social evils and all the great social evils. Racism and injustice and imperialism all come from class pride or racial pride. See? Or overweening national pride. And this week, some young man's going to be gunned down on the streets of New York. And what will the cause be? Pride. That's what so many of them are. Maybe that's what most of them are. It's not all. Pride makes you fool. Pride makes you evil. It's not all. Let me tell you something else that makes it deadly. On top of everything else, as bad as pride is, it's the one sin that hides itself. Pride is the carbon monoxide of sin. Killing you without you having any ability to tell it's happening. It's odorless. See, by definition, the more proud you are, and therefore the more in its clutches you are, the less proud you think you are. See? Pride hides itself. Look, you know when you're committing adultery. Right? You never say, oh my gosh, you're not my wife. No, you know when you're committing adultery. You know when you're embezzling somebody. You don't say, oh, how did that $300,000 get into my bank account? You know. I mean, I don't make that much every year. No, see, you know when you're embezzling. You know when you're doing lust. You know when you're doing embezzlement. You don't know when you're proud. Virtually nobody ever comes and says, I'm proud. I've got a problem with pride. I've listened to all kinds of sins confessed to me over the years. I don't think anybody ever come and told me about that one. And let me show you just how inescapable it is. Joseph Epstein, in his book on pride, says, so many people hate snobs. They just hate snobs. But you can only hate snobs if you feel superior to them. Which means hating snobbery is a form of snobbery. Do you look down your nose at snobs? Do you look down your nose at people who look down their nose at people? You see how inescapable it is? Or let me go one step further. Just to show you how it's a carbon monoxide. But honestly now, up to now, haven't you mainly been thinking about a couple of other people during this sermon? Haven't you immediately said, oh my gosh, boy does that sound just like him or just like her. It takes a certain amount of pride to have come through this sermon up to now, mainly thinking about somebody else. I'm serious. And that's not all. Let me just tell you, there's one more deadliness. One more thing that makes pride so incredible. It makes you a fool. It makes you evil. It hides itself. And then last of all, some of you are saying, well, it's about time for point three. And being a minister, I know what you're going to say. You're going to say, pride's very bad. Yes, very bad. Okay, I got you. It's very bad. What's the solution? God. You need to get closer to God. You need to obey God. You need to pray. You need to obey the Ten Commandments. You need to humble yourself before God. That will deal with the joy-killing, psychological, and sociological deadliness of pride. I'm not going to tell you that, at least not that way. And here's the reason why. This is the worst thing about pride of all, is that if you get somebody really religious, and they start to be really good, and they come to church, and they study their Bible, and they try real hard to pray and obey God, religiosity will kill off lust to a great degree. And religiosity will kill off materialism to a great degree, but it just makes pride worse. There is no pride like religious pride. There's no pride. There's no proud people like Pharisees. And just to be told, God is great, and you need to obey him, that doesn't necessarily, let me tell you, that does not decrease pride at all. Jonathan Edwards, in his great sermon on humility, in his book, Charity and Its Fruits, says to know that there's this great infinite God of holiness and justice does not create humility, because either you will try to live up to that God's standard and then become a self-righteous Pharisee, or you will feel like you can't live up to that standard, and you'll just feel crushed. And that still makes you self-proud, self-absorbed. It's either the superiority or the inferiority, and religion makes it worse. Religion will make you feel more self-conscious and like a failure, or it will make you feel much more superior to everybody else and think, we have the truth, and look down your nose at everybody. All by itself, just obeying God and trying to be a good person. It's scary. Religiosity can kill off other kinds of sins, but it's like pouring oil on the fire to try to deal with pride that way. So are we cooked? To extend the metaphor. Now, there is a point three, and here's the point three. There is a cure. At the beginning of chapter six, Haman is coming to see the king. And you know why? Because as we learn here, down in verse four, Haman has not just been satisfied to kill Mordecai, and he hasn't just been satisfied to kill his community. He wants to make a public spectacle of Mordecai, so he has built a gallows in a public place, and he has come to the king to ask for special permission to make a public spectacle of Mordecai and to hang him in that public place on the day in which the Jews are going to be slaughtered. But God has a different idea. And that night, the king can't sleep, and he begins to read a book or have a book read to him. And he suddenly remembers that Mordecai had saved his life, had saved his life from assassination, and he'd never been rewarded. Haman happens to come in just as the king has realized this and says, Haman, what should we do for a man that the king delights to honor? And Haman, desperately needing respect, desperately needing approval, desperately wanting honor and glory, thinking the king means him, comes up with a fascinating proposal. He says, let the king's robes be put on that man, and let him be put up on the horse, which of course is the position, the king's horse, which is the position of a conquering king. And let, he says, your greatest noble take the position of a slave or a servant, because that person will simply walk along, leading the horse by the reins through the streets as a kind of herald. And that will show how much you delight in that man. Now, why does he talk about the robes? In ancient times, the robes were much more significant than they are, actually. We miss the significance. Let me help you with it. For the king to put the robes. position. When Pharaoh puts the robes on Joseph in Genesis 41, it means he actually partakes of the king's position. And when Jonathan gives his kingly robes to David in 1 Samuel 18, it's Jonathan's way of actually saying, I love you and you should be the king, not me. And for the king to put the robes on somebody, his own robes, was a way of not just simply saying, I honor this person, but I delight in this person. I love this person. And here's why Haman is excited. Haman is saying, if the people out there saw that I'm loved like that by someone as great as that, that I'm loved, but not just loved, I'm loved like that by someone as great as that. I'm loved by the king. Then they'll know. And then I'll know my worth, my value. See, that really is what we need. We don't just want love. We want someone that we think the world of thinking the world of us. Or as one writer put it, the praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. The praise of the praiseworthy is above all rewards. And that's what he's saying is, if I had that, if I had the king putting his robes on me, the king loving me like that. If I was loved like that by someone as glorious as that, then I would know. Then everyone would know. But to his absolute shock, the king says, do that to Mordecai and you take the role of the servant leading the horse along. And it's astounding to Haman. It's the most incredible and astonishing reversal of fortunes. Because you see, Mordecai was literally about to be trampled into the dust, literally. But suddenly he's up high on the pinnacle. And Haman was about to go up into the pinnacle. He's down in the role of the servant. But he's down worse than even the king knows. Because he realizes now he couldn't possibly, now that they're doing this to Mordecai, he can't possibly move against Mordecai or his people. And Haman knows he's doomed. There's been a total reversal. And Haman also knows it's because he tried to put himself up there, he's been brought down. And this is exactly what the Bible says everywhere. This goes across the board. This is a, this is part of life. What is part of life? If you humble yourself, you'll be exalted. If you exalt yourself, you'll be humbled. All through the Bible. In fact, C.S. Lewis writes about it here. He says, lose yourself to find it. Does that sound strange? It works in everyday matters as well. In social life, you will never make a good impression on people until you stop trying so much to make a good impression on people. In literature and art, you will never be original until you stop trying so hard to be original. The principle runs through all life from top to bottom. Lose your life and you will save it. Look for yourself and you will find in the long run only loneliness, despair, rage, ruin, and decay. But look for Christ and you will find him and with him everything else thrown in. Why is this a principle of the universe? That if you seek to lift yourself up, you'll be brought down. I'll tell you why. Because it's the nature of God and he made the universe. And how do we know this is the nature of God? Like this. Haman did not ask for the wrong thing. What Haman was asking for is something we all want. We want someone of ultimate glory loving us. Not love in general. What we need is this ultimate assurance of who we are. Ultimate assurance of our worth. We need someone like that loving us like that. We need someone we think the world of thinking the world of us. We need the praise of the praiseworthy. He didn't ask for the wrong thing. That's what's wrong with us. That's why we all have a problem with pride. We all have this problem. That's why we're so needy all the time. He didn't ask for the wrong thing. He asked the wrong king. He went to the wrong king. There's a better king. There's a king with ultimate glory who believe it or not came to earth and stripped himself of his glory. And when he went to the cross he stripped himself not just he wasn't just stripped of his clothes. Literally he was. He was stripped of his father's love. He was stripped of he was stripped of his father's approval of his father's respect. Why? He was reversing places with us. Mordecai was saved only because Haman reversed places with him. But it was involuntary. But Jesus does it voluntarily. There's the ultimate king. There's the king of glory. Jesus Christ is the king that you can go to because he at infinite costs to himself reversed places with us. God made him sin that knew no sin that we might become the righteousnesses of God in him. Jesus Christ was clothed in the righteousness of his son. Jesus Christ exchanges places with us. He takes what we deserve so we can get what he deserves. And now, in John chapter 17, there's a place where Jesus actually says, Father, give them the glory that you gave me before the foundation of the world. That's unbelievable. The disciples, that's us. Jesus is, look, glory isn't just psychic, some kind of divine phosphorescence. Glory is delight. Glory is honor. Jesus says, you must realize that the praise of the ultimate praiseworthy, the glory and honor and robes of the ultimate king are yours. And when you know he loves you like that, when you know he went through all that for you, that's the one-two punch that the ego needs to make it finally self-forgetful and at rest. To fill it so it's not needy anymore. See, it's not enough just to say, oh, I believe in God. That doesn't make you humble. We just said that'll make you either superior or inferior. What you have to see is God coming all the way down and reversing places with us at infinite cost to himself. Because on the one hand, to know that he had to die for you humbles you. To know he was glad to die for you affirms you infinitely. And when you realize that, that one-two punch on the ego finally, look, you'll know this. Jesus Christ was strong enough to be weak. He was so strong they didn't care what people thought. He was so strong he was able to do the right thing. And if you see him doing that for you, you will be strong enough to be weak. You'll be strong enough to learn from your mistakes. Strong enough to take jobs and have relationships that don't just make you feel good about yourself, but they're just the right thing to do. Finally, you won't be snubbed all the time and you won't feel, you know, always be looking at yourself and always being down on yourself or up on yourself or anything about yourself. Don't you want that? Here's how it'll start. C.S. Lewis says, the only way that you can take a step to getting this healing, to take that down into yourself, to the degree you understand that he did that for you, to that degree you have that inner assurance and glory and joy that will enable you to move out with the blessed self-forgetfulness that we all need. And here's what Lewis says is the first step. If anyone wants to acquire humility, I can, I think, tell him the very first step. The first step is to realize that one is proud. And the biggest step it is, too. Nothing whatsoever can be done before it. If you think you are not conceited, it means you are very conceited. Indeed. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for assuring us that Jesus Christ is the ultimate king who clothes us in his robes but at cost to himself. And once we know that we are loved by the ultimate king, that we have the praise of the ultimately praiseworthy, that we have your delight, that we are men and women that you delight to honor, that will heal us. That will heal us. So heal us. We want it. We ask for it through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
