TITLE: The Two Cities
SCRIPTURE: Revelation 18:9-24
TOPICS: Cities
SERIES: Revelation: The Final Word
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-two-cities/

============================================================

People got together and they said, let's form a city. And do you remember why? This is Genesis 11, verse 4. Let us make a name for ourselves. Let's build a tower so high that no one can see the top. Let's build a great city. Now, this is the reason that most people come to New York. It's the spirit of Babylon. Let us make a name for ourselves. That's why many of you are here. That's why many of you came originally. It's the only way to really make it in this field or make it in this field. I'm going to make a name for myself. You have talents. You're a lawyer. You're a dancer. You're a person in finance. You can either use those abilities to make a name for yourself or to honor God. You can use, and a city can either be a city forming a culture that glorifies humanity, that glorifies the self, that maximizes your bank account, that maximizes your ego, or you can build a culture that honors God. As a dancer, as an artist, as a businessman or a businesswoman, you can use your culture forming ability to build a civilization that either maximizes the human ego and maximizes your own name, or one that honors God. And that's what God is saying. Now, this is, listen, I'm not sure anybody's going to walk out of here saying, tonight, oh, you know, this helped me with my self-esteem problem, you know, or I found Jesus tonight and my life has been changed. But listen, this is profound. This stuff at the end of the book of Revelation is profound theology, and actually profound sociology too. Inside New York City, there is a powerful spirit that says, use your talents, use your ability to make a name for yourself. Like the original manifestation of the great city of Babylon, the cosmic city on earth, which was the city of Babel, from which the name probably comes in Genesis 11. Let us make a name for ourselves. The Bible tells us that that spirit is rampant in any big city, and along with it is the spirit of God who is here seeking to build the new Jerusalem. Which city are you a part of? If you're part of the new Jerusalem, what you're doing is you're saying, I've got some talents. I want to use them to honor God and not make a name for myself. Don't you see why the sexual metaphor is used? Are you a harlot? Professionally? Are you taking the creative abilities that God gave you and using them to maximize yourself, using them as a commodity? Or are you seeking to realize, I'm part of the new Jerusalem, which means that professionally, everybody in this room, professionally, you're supposed to see yourself as the spouse of Jesus Christ. You're a bride adorned for your husband. Every one of us. Guys too, by the way. Remember, that's one of the problems with some of the metaphors. Remember, I always say this. According to the Bible, every Christian, male and female, you're all sons. And every Christian, male and female, you're all brides. So all of us have to do a little bit of, you know, thinking. We're all sons, you know. We're all sons of God. We're all brides of God and we're all brides of Christ. So at least, you know, God's very balanced about that. But in this case, what does it mean to say the new Jerusalem is the bride of Christ? And what does it mean to say that you want to be part of the new Jerusalem? You have to sit down and you have to really think out, what does it mean for me to put God first in every area of my life? And especially the kings here. A lot of you don't think of yourself as kings. But do you wield power? The merchants here. A lot of you are merchants. Yeah, I know that. The artists here. A lot of you are artists. The technicians. Don't you see? Who are you sleeping with? Professionally. Spiritually. The kings of the earth. The merchants of the earth. The artists of the earth. The technicians of the earth. The technicians of the earth that go to Babylon, into the spirit of Babylon, will eventually be terrified by her torment. You following this? Let me just give you kind of a quick example. I mean, I'm not sure this is true. I am not sure this is true. But I read an article that said that 25 years ago, there were, there might have been, oh, I don't know, 300,000 jobs. 25, 30 years ago, there might have been 300,000 jobs, something incredible like that, in the garment industry in New York City. And today there's, what, 80,000 or something like that. Some incredible difference. Some of you know. you had tremendous corruption. Organized crime did a wonderful job of getting control of all the industries, everything from the truckers, everything around the garment industry and inside the industry. So there was bid rigging. And so there was all sorts of corruption. There was all sorts of intimidation. And it jacked the prices up incredibly high so that almost anybody else, any other center, could compete with New York. And over the years, we've lost thousands and thousands of jobs and our ascendancy and so forth. What does this mean? If you decide to take your abilities and cheat, lie, pad your account, break the Ten Commandments, which talks about honesty and talks about integrity and talks about purity. If instead of trying to serve people through your business, for example, through your gifts, if you stop doing that, if you stop trying to serve people, if you stop trying to be honest, if you stop trying to serve God and your neighbor, eventually what you've done is you've bought into the systems of Babylon, matrixes and nexuses of systemic evil and corruption and violence and oppression. And eventually, you will be terrified with a torment because eventually Babylon will fall. It will happen penultimately right here. And eventually, it will happen ultimately at the end of time. Every city has an option. Jerusalem and Babylon are before them. And let's face it, some cities are much closer to Babylon than others. And the Bible says, here are the two cities. One is the Harlot, one is the New Jerusalem. Let me just give you a couple other ideas and try to summarize. So the first thing you see is there are two cities always at war with each other. And it's very easy for Christians to simply say, oh, of course. There's a lot of people around who are not Christians. There are a lot of people who are Christians. The Christians are the city of God and the non-Christians are the city of Babylon. It's much more complicated than that. I mean, I'm not saying that that is exactly wrong, but the fact of the matter is there are plenty of people who, though they may actually be converted Christians, but because of the way in which they are conducting their lives, because of their personal ethics, because of their relationships, because of the way in which they do their business, shoddy business, bad business, unhelpful, selfish. They're participating in the systems of Babylon. Don't you see that? And frankly, there are plenty of people who aren't Christians, who just have a lot of common grace. Do you remember we talked about common grace a year ago? How would you remember that? How many of you were here a year ago, for goodness sakes? But the Bible insists that God puts in every human being a strong dose of light in our conscience. It's right back here somewhere, my conscience. And every person, whether they're Christians or not, have a lot of knowledge of the golden rule, the Ten Commandments, and a lot of people have basic understanding. That's God's good gift to all human beings. And there's plenty of human beings who are not Christians and who are actually, because of their decency and their honesty, in some ways, are at least being good salt for a city and keeping it from sliding into being a complete form of Babylon. I'm just trying to tell you it's a little more complex than what you think. The merchants, the artists, you see, the professions, are you really giving yourself wholly to the city of God? It doesn't just mean, I'm converted, God has given me forgiveness of sins, I can face my problems. No, every area of your life, God has to be supreme. Every area. And you've got to be working for the city of God in every area. That doesn't just mean come to church and be active in your church and help the church grow and touch other people and lead people to Christ. Of course that's part of it, but it means even more than that. It means praying for your neighborhood. It means working with honesty and integrity and with a heart of servanthood, servanthood in your job. Of course that's mighty tough when you're right in the middle of not only a field or a vocation, but sometimes a department in which everybody else is absolutely obsessed with the spirit of Babylon. Stab people in the back. Get ahead. All that matters that I make money and I get ahead. I don't care whether I'm making a product that really helps people. I don't care whether I'm making this a better place to live. I don't care whether I'm really building a decent society. I don't care what the ramifications are of our profit taking. I mean, and of course, this is something that those of you who work in New York realize. There really is a lot of the spirit of Babylon here. it means for you to eschew and reject the city of darkness and work for the city of God. By the way, this isn't my idea. If you're saying, gosh, this is kind of radical, I don't want to, I never heard anything like this. There's a guy named Augustine, St. Augustine. He was really more famous than me, a lot more famous than me. And he lived about 1,500 years ago or so, and he wrote a book called The City of God in which he simply lays this out. This is basic Christian theology applied. Now, one more thing. If you look at, and you don't have it written down here in your book, but I want you just to look for five minutes at what it says about the other city, the New Jerusalem. Then I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and there was no longer any sea. And I saw the holy city, the New Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride, beautifully dressed for her husband. And I heard a voice from the throne saying, now the dwelling of God is with men, and he will live with them, and they will be his people. Get this. And he will wipe every tear from their eyes, and there will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain for the old order of things. The old system, the old order of things has passed away. And in Revelation 22, it tells us this, then the angel showed me the river of the water of life as clear as crystal, flowing from the throne of God and of the Lamb down the middle of the great street of the city. And on each side of the river stood the tree of life, bearing twelve crops of fruit, yielding its fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. No longer will there be any curse, and the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in the city. Let me just say this about the New Jerusalem. It's the Garden of Eden. Look at it. In the book of Genesis, it says, down the middle of the garden, there was a river. And here, down the middle of the city, there's a river. In the Genesis, it said, in the Garden of Eden, in the middle, there was the tree of life. And right here at the end, in the heavenly city, there's a tree of life. What is this? This is the Garden of Eden. The Bible says that the purpose of God is to build a perfect city. You know the place in Hebrews 11 where it says Abraham was looking to the future, to the great city whose builder and maker is God? God invented the city, and sin has corrupted the city, and God is going to wipe the city clean of all the corruption of sin so it can do what it was built to do. God invented the city. Somebody once said to one of my friends who teaches at Westminster Seminary, somebody said, well, you know, God invented the country, and man invented the suburbs, but the devil invented the city. It's not true. God invented the city. It's very clear that God wanted Adam to turn the garden into a city, because when we see God's purpose for the history of the world, in the end, it's a city. The garden has become a city. And here's why. Look and see what happens to you when you're in a city. A city brings out anything that's in your heart. God invented the city to be a magnifying glass, to develop culture. When you get into the city, you feel productive. You hate it. There's pressure to do your best. There's pressure to do excellence. When you get into smaller towns, you get somewhere else, you realize there's not nearly as much pressure. Nobody cares how you look out there. Nobody cares just how productive you are. But in New York, in the big city, why? That's not an accident. The Bible says that God invented the city. The city was a place that brings out what's in the human heart. But because of sin, the city just does what God invented it to do. But now it brings out both the best, all the great stuff God invented human beings to do, but also the worst, the sin that's in there. And therefore, people get upset when they look at the city. They say, look at all the crime. Look at all the perversity. Look at all the corruption. Yeah, but also, look at the incredible art. Look at the incredible athletics. Look at the incredible technology. Don't you see? The city is not bad or good. In a sense, the city is something that God made. And the city draws out of the human heart whatever is there. That's the reason why when you come into the city, you find that as the city goes, so goes the region, so goes the country. When St. Paul was doing his missionary journeys, he ignored the small towns and he went to the city. Why? Because people in the city, if you get a hold of the heart of a city, you can see. Why? the human heart whatever is in there. And as a result, the city develops culture. Do you see what I'm saying? You listen real carefully. I'm not saying anything plus or minus, but I read a very interesting article last week. It's completely neutral. It says something interesting. It says, if it's true, as all the studies are saying, that probably only about 2% of the population is homosexual, why is it that it seems like there's so many more? Why is it that the homosexual liberation movement has been so fairly successful? Why does it seem to be so influential? Now listen, if you listen carefully, you're listening to say if I'm going to say something negative or positive. I'm not. I'm just telling you what the article said. It says, the reason that such a tiny number of people has such a big influence in the society is because they are an urban people. The homosexual community lives in the cities. They live disproportionately in the cities. And if you live in the cities, and if your community lives in the city, whoever has the city has the society. Whoever has the city has the culture. Whoever has the city has the influence. Why? Because that God invented the city to be a place of productivity. He invented the city to be a place where the culture is formed. That's where the arts flourish. That's where technology flourishes, see? That's where commerce flourishes. And whatever has the city, whatever philosophy, whatever spirit has the city by the throat, that's what the rest of the country eventually has as well. So, if you're a Christian, number one, there is no more important place to live than in the city. If you can live in the city, you should. If all the Christians picked up and moved into the three largest cities in the country, if all the Christians everywhere in the country picked up and moved right into the heart of all of the three largest cities in the country, we would have a revolution in our culture. It would take us a while to get along. But once we did, if we did, we'd have a revolution. Why? Because you can't decide, oh, the city's an awful place. I'm going to move into small towns. I'm going to get away from it all. The city of God and the city of evil are battling everywhere, but it's in the big cities where you actually have the flashpoints in the battle. And the victories of either side in the big cities are the most strategic. Do you see? That's the reason why Paul went to the city. If you go to a small town, no offense, there's a lawyer in town, so you win the lawyer to Christ. Great, we have a lawyer who's a Christian, but if you want to win the legal profession, you've got to go to the cities. Don't you see? God is inventing universe in the form of a city anyway. See, might as well get used to it. There's going to be subways in heaven. Practically, I can say that from here. Why? Because we started in a garden, but we're going to end in a city. Ah. What is, you see what I mean when I say tonight, this isn't the kind of sermon that you leave, you say, boy, that really, you know, it really helped me face my self-esteem problems. It really, you know, I was weeping. I was down on the ground thanking God for his glory. No, this is the kind of sermon that's supposed to get you to think in a new way about your context. If you're a Christian, you should live in the city if you can. If you're a Christian, you should stay in the city if you can. If you're a Christian, being a Christian in the city is not as easy as just, I'm going to pray, I have my quiet time, and talk to other people about Jesus. There is a tremendous battle going on here, and you've got to make sure you are on the right side. Just because you're born again doesn't mean that you're really helping. Powerful, radical, profound teaching from the book of Revelation. Jesus is building a city. Are you building it with him? Let's pray. Now, Father, we thank you for this great teaching and this great truth. Forgive me for the faltering and semi-adequate way in which I expressed it. I pray that you'd enable the people who are here, who are thinking about this and are really seeking your will and are really seeking your guidance, that they might take these truths, they might hide them in their heart, and they might think and reflect and consider how they can be builders of the city of God. You're building a city, and we want to build it with you. Father, we thank you that your son did not commute from heaven, but he moved in with us. We thank you that you have called so many of us to live in this place. to do it better. Show us how to do it more effectively. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
