TITLE: The Openness of Heaven
SCRIPTURE: Genesis 28:10-22
TOPICS: God's Love
SERIES: The Gospel According to Jacob
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-openness-of-heaven/

============================================================

The scripture reading is on page 7 of the bulletin. I'm reading from Genesis 28, verses 10 through 22. Jacob left Beersheba and set out for Haran. When he reached a certain place, he stopped for the night, because the sun had set. Taking one of the stones there, he put it under his head and lay down to sleep. He had a dream, in which he saw a stairway resting on the earth, with its top reaching to the heaven, and the angels of God were ascending and descending on it. There over him stood the Lord, and he said, I am the Lord, the God of your father Abraham, and the God of Isaac. I will give you and your descendants the land on which you are lying. Your descendants will be like the dust of the earth, and you will spread out to the west and to the east, to the north and to the south. All peoples on earth will be blessed through you and your offspring. I am with you and will watch over you wherever you go, and I will bring you back to this land. I will not leave you until I have done what I promised you. When Jacob awoke from his sleep, he thought, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware of it. He was afraid and said, How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God. This is the gate of heaven. Early the next morning, Jacob took the stone he had placed under his head and set it up as a pillar and poured oil on top of it. He called that place Bethel, though the city used to be called Luz. Then Jacob made a vow, saying, If God will be with me and will watch over me on this journey I am taking and will give me food to eat and clothes to wear so that I return safely to my father's house. Then the Lord will be my God, and this stone that I have set up as a pillar will be God's house. And of all that you give me, I will give you a tenth. This is the word of the Lord. We're looking at the life of Jacob. It started last week. And Jacob is, as I think I said last week, one of the easiest of all the figures in the Bible for modern people to relate to because he's got so many problems. He's got so many doubts. He fails so often. He's got so many struggles. And today we come to the second chapter, major chapter in the story and account of his life. And the subject of this chapter or this text, this passage, is the subject of heaven. Because there's three parts to the passage, you notice. There's Jacob's condition before the dream. There's the dream. And then there's Jacob's response to the dream. And in each one of those sections, the sky or heaven is referred to. And so we're going to see that what the text tells us is first about the darkness of heaven for Jacob. It's just a closed thing to him. Then secondly, the openness of heaven that happens in his dream. And then as we ask, well, how could the dark heaven become open to someone like Jacob? And the answer is, in the last part of the text, we'll see that he begins to learn the secret of the gate of heaven. He learns the secret of heaven's gate. So we see the darkness of heaven. We see the openness of heaven. And then we ask, how can the dark heaven become open? And the answer is the secret of the gate of heaven is what Jacob begins to understand. Now, why do we need to look at this? Just quickly, I'll tell you. There was an article in the New York Magazine this week about how New Yorkers post-September 11th are doing more spiritual seeking and asking questions about religion and so forth. And it was an all right article. It wasn't particularly good or bad. But there was a very interesting quote in it. At one place, a woman who is a writer who says she's an agnostic or an atheist, she said to the reporter, the person doing the article, she said, you know, at times like this, I almost wish I did believe in God. Because at times like this, you need something more than Starbucks and Barnes & Noble to get through it. She said, I wish I could believe in God. That would help me get through it. But she's wrong. Because Jacob believed in God, but it wasn't enough to face the disasters of his life. He had to encounter God. He had to actually have a life-changing encounter with God before he could not just believe in God. Jacob believed in God. It wasn't enough. And she's wrong. But in order to get this encounter, Jacob had to learn the secret of the gate of heaven. So let's take a look and see what we learn about the darkness of heaven, the openness of heaven, and the gate of heaven. First of all, the darkness of heaven. These first couple of verses paint a picture. And the narrator is quite an artist because the narrator paints the picture in just a couple of strokes. we're told that Jacob reached a certain place. Why is it called a place? It didn't have a name. I mean, later it has a name, of course. It refers to that near the end here. But at that time, it was just called a place. It didn't have a name. The reason it didn't have a name was because it wasn't important. There wasn't a ford there. There wasn't a creek there. There wasn't a pass there. There wasn't a well there. You see, it would have a name if it was anything important about it. But it was just a place. It was a nowhere place, and it was a way of getting across the fact that Jacob was nowhere. He was out in the middle of nowhere. And secondly, we see that he has to use a stone for a pillow. Now, why would you ever use a stone for a pillow? Only if you have absolutely nothing else with you to ball up and put your head on. If you had anything else at all, if you had an extra pair of socks, if you had a knapsack, if you had anything, you'd put your head on that, right? Nobody's so stupid as to put your head on a stone. If you have anything else, he had nothing else. To say he had a stone for a pillow was to say he was penniless. Now, the reason these two strokes of the brush by the artist are so poignant is because it's telling us just how completely Jacob's life had fallen apart. The context of this, we have to go back to last week. If you were here last week, you'd know this. If not, just give me a second here. Jacob was one of two sons. And when they were still in the womb, a prophecy from God had come and said, the older will serve the younger. So God had promised that the younger of the two sons, Jacob, not the older Esau, that Jacob was the one that God had chosen, that Jacob was the one that God was going to work through, that Jacob was going to be the one that God blessed. But as they grew up, Isaac, the father, loved Esau more. He favored Esau. He ignored his other son, Jacob. And of course, you don't have to be. It's the common sense in psychology. All this tells us that Jacob, therefore, grew up desperate for his father's love and devoid of any sense of inner blessing, devoid of any sense of inner worth and value. And in this incredible incident that we saw in chapter 27 last week, where Jacob, desperate for his father's love, dresses up like Esau, dresses up as the strapping, dynamic, athletic, charismatic, you see, manly person that Jacob was not, and goes in to try to fool his blind, aged father to give him the deathbed blessing of the firstborn. But it backfires. And Esau wants to kill Jacob. And Jacob has to run for his life. And see, that's what's so poignant here. Everything's falling apart. The promise that he'd be the head of the clan, he'd get the inheritance, that God would work with him, that God would bless him. It's all falling apart. He has a stone for a pillow because he's penniless, no inheritance. He's got a place. He's out in the middle of nowhere because he's absolutely alone. He's got no clan. And the last stroke to paint the picture of Jacob's condition is the place where the narrator says, and the sun had set. And like in all good movies and plays and literature, this external physical darkness is emblematic of his inner darkness. Heaven had shut on him. Heaven was sealed. It was shuttered. It was silent. It was closed. It was dark to Jacob. And in two ways. First of all, heaven was a closed book. And secondly, heaven was a closed door. First of all, heaven was a closed book to Jacob. It was a closed book, and we should certainly be able to relate to this. Because God had said to Jacob, the elder will serve the younger. I've got a plan for you. I love you. I'm going to choose you. And everything had fallen apart. Why did God let all this happen? Why was he running for his life? Why was he, he'll never get his destiny now, which seems to be an utter contradiction to what God had promised. In other words, Jacob, in a sense, is looking to heaven like a lot of us have over the last few weeks and said, I don't understand you. You say you love us. You say you make all these promises. And then you let all this stuff happen. You let all this happen. It's an utter contradiction to what you have promised. See? So first of all, heaven is a closed door. Heaven is a closed book. Excuse me. Secondly, heaven is a closed door. Because God's actions, it's not just God's actions that are dark to Jacob. But God himself is remote from Jacob. At every other generation, Abraham had actually met God. He didn't just believe in God. He'd met him. Sarah had met him. God had appeared and spoken. Isaac, in chapter 26, had actually met him. Because the message of the book of Genesis all along is it's not enough to know. just to believe in God. You have to believe God. It's not enough just to have a cognitive subscription to a body of doctrine or an ethical compliance to a set of rules. You have to have an encounter with God. But now, I mean, if Jacob had never had an encounter with God before, certainly, you know, common sense tells you, normal thinking tells you, not now. Not when he'd done all the lying and the cheating and the stealing and everything else. And so you see, heaven was a closed book. He didn't understand what in the world heaven's doing. Heaven's remote, it's uninvolved, doesn't care. But heaven's a closed door. You don't see Jacob crying out, do you? You don't see him praying. You don't see him asking for mercy. You don't see him saying, oh, Lord, help me. Heaven is closed. It's dark. And then Jacob dreams. And all that changes. And starting in verse 12, it says, and he had a dream. And in that dream, he saw three things, and he heard three things. He saw three, and he heard three. First thing he saw was a stairway. And that's a good translation of this Hebrew word. Some of you may know an older translation. And traditionally, sometimes this has been called Jacob's ladder, right? But that's not a very good rendering of this Hebrew word, because a ladder, at least to us today, a ladder is a narrow thing that only one person can be on at a time. But whether this Hebrew word denotes a ramp or a grand staircase, the indication was what Jacob saw was something huge. It stretched from heaven to earth, touched both. The bottom actually touched the earth. The top actually touched the heaven. And on it were angels descending and descending. And it was a huge thing. Therefore, he might have seen dozens, hundreds, or even thousands. It could have been a stunning sight. And secondly, he first saw a stairway. Secondly, he saw angels on the stairway. Now, what are angels? Well, would you please, for a second, not think about Hallmark greeting cards, not think about 19th through 20th century artistic depictions of angels. Certainly not think of television shows, please. C.S. Lewis says that whenever an angel shows up, a real angel shows up in the Bible, whenever a real angel shows up, the angel always has to say, fear not. Obviously, there's something frightening and overwhelming about angels. They have to say, fear not. But when, you know, when an angel shows up on television, it says, hi. Or, yes, I'm an angel. Don't you see this back glow here? You know, it's, you didn't have to tell, when a real angel showed up, you didn't have to say, are you an angel? You know, they had to say, fear not. The word angel means a herald. And it denotes and expresses royal majesty. Angels are royal heralds and attendants that flow out into the world, carrying and executing the declarations and decrees of the king. And we're going to get to this in a second. Angels ascending and descending means God's royal power is on the move. You see, messengers are coming up. Messengers are going out. Attendants are going out. And so, what he sees, first of all, is a stairway. But on this second thing, he sees the royal power of God, the holy majesty of God, the power of God, the angels coming out of the very throne room of God, going out into the world all over and then coming on back and then going on out. You know, this huge, almost like a heart pumping angels out and bringing them back in. And the third thing he sees, see what it says, is, there over him stood the Lord. Now, if you have another translation, there are translations that translate this, there over it. I mean, there has been some question as to whether it's saying the Lord stood over it, meaning the ladder or the stairway, which means he'd be at the top, or whether it's better to translate it over him. And I trust Robert Alter, who's this great Hebrew expert, and others who believe it's over him. And what that means is this. Not only did Jacob see a stairway, not only did Jacob see a stairway filled with angels coming and going, we'll get back to the meaning of that in a second, he saw the Lord descend the stairway and come and stand right over him in a posture of intimacy and nearness, right over him. And the Lord said three things. They're exactly what he needed to hear. First of all, the Lord, see, Jacob was friendless, friendless. You know, the only person that loved him in the whole world, his mother, Rebecca, he was never going to see again. So he's utterly friendless, and the Lord says, I will be with you wherever. Secondly, he's utterly friendless. into uncertainty, out in the wilderness. He's utterly defenseless. And the Lord says, I will watch over you whatever. And then lastly, he's penniless, and he's got no inheritance. And it looks like his destiny is, you know, that God had promised him couldn't possibly happen. And God says, no, I'm going to bring you back. I'm going to give you a land. In other words, I am going to bless you. And he says, I will bless you. I will do what I had said. I will accomplish it. Nothing will stop me. I will bless you whatever. I'll go with you wherever. I'll watch over you, see, whatever. And I will absolutely bless you and give you all the things that I promised. And what does this mean? Well, it means two things. This vision tells Jacob he's wrong about heaven. First of all, this vision says heaven is an open book. And secondly, it says it's an open door. First of all, this vision tells us that the power of heaven is open to the world. Jacob and you and me often feel that God is remote, that all these, everything that's happening down here is just, you know, it's tragic and it's random and it's awful and God doesn't care and God's not involved, right? Heaven is a closed book. I understand what's going on here. This vision says that that is an illusion, that God's royal power is on the move. He's out there. He's present. He's working. He's everywhere. His kingship is flowing out in the world and he is working things out, as he says, to eventually bring perfect justice and peace and love at the end of history. And he is doing it, but we just can't see it. See, just for a second, the veil is removed. The scales fall from the eyes. And he says, I want to show you what's really going on. I'm everywhere. I'm all over the place. My kingdom power is everywhere. I'm not remote. I'm not unconcerned. I'm not uninvolved. Just for a second. You remember the place in 2 Kings 6? It's this almost funny place where Elisha has a servant and they're in this besieged city. And the servant's scared and Elisha is quite calm and confident. And the servant says, how can you be so calm? And Elisha says, oh Lord, open his eyes. And for a second, the servant's eyes are open and he saw all around the city chariots of fire. See, the chariots of the Lord, the angels of God. What we're told here is you and I can't see. We can't see it. We're blind to it. But God is working. That's what it's saying. God is not remote. Heaven is not a closed book. The power of God is out there working in the world. That's the first thing we're told. When you go to the top of a high, high, high mountain, really high mountain, you look down and you can start to see, you know, there's a stream that I saw and there's a road that I was on and there's a valley and I had no idea they were connected. I had no idea how they related to each other. I had no idea. And the only reason you can see the picture is because you're up high. You're really up high. But the point here is nobody's up high enough over history except God himself to see how this connects to this and why this has happened and why that's happened and how they all fit together. Nobody can see it. And God's just simply saying it. Just because you can't see it doesn't mean it's not happening. So the first thing is heaven is not remote. It's not closed. See, it's not a closed book. Or let me, pointing to this fact, let me say it to you carefully because I want you to hear it. What this is really saying is you're not going to understand why things are going all that badly sometimes in our life or in history or in your life. But that doesn't mean that God's not working. And I want you, let me do a little logic on you. If you have a God who is great enough and infinite enough that you can be mad at him for not stopping the suffering. See, people are always mad at God. Why doesn't he stop the suffering? That anger presumes he's infinite and great and powerful enough to stop it, right? Okay. But if you have a God who is infinite and great enough for you to be mad at him for not stopping the suffering, then you have to have at the same time a God who is infinite and great enough to have a perspective on it that you don't have and to have reasons for it that you can't see. You can't have it both ways. Do you understand? You can't stay mad. It's natural to be mad pretty regularly at heaven saying, why did you let this happen? But if you think you can't stay mad because if you can be mad at a God who's great enough to be able to stop it, you've also got a God who is high enough and great enough to be able to see it in ways that you don't. And it takes a certain amount. It takes pride to stay mad at God for the suffering and evil in the world. You have to be very proud over a long period of time. Initially, it's just the visceral... a visceral... why are you letting this happen? But it takes a proud heart, or at least a thoughtless mind, to stay mad. If he is God, of course God's going to know more than we are. Of course God's going to be up higher. Of course God's going to be able to see things that we can't possibly see. We're down here. So the first thing is heaven is not. The vision is saying heaven is open. It is not closed. Its power is going. The second thing we learn is heaven is not just a closed book, an open book. It's also an open door in this sense. It's not just open to the world. It's open to Jacob. And this is astounding. When Jacob wakes up, what does he say? Wow, that was great. He's afraid. He says, how awesome. Which, by the way, the old King James Bible says, how dreadful is this place. He's scared. He's trembling. You know why? He doesn't get it. The angels always refer to the holy, royal majesty of God. And you remember, you know, Moses says to God, show me your glory. And God says, no, it'll kill you. You just go over here in the corner and you can sort of see my back parts. You know? Isaiah goes in to the temple and sees God high and lifted up and he sees angels all around and he feels like he's coming apart. He says, woe is me, I'm undone. I'm a man of unclean lips and I dwell in the midst of a people of an unclean lips. Of unclean lips. And so, and yet here, Jacob has not asked for God. He hasn't called out to God. He hasn't repented. And God comes right to him, unsought, and stands right over him. God is not standing at the top of the ladder saying, Jacob approach and Jacob's coming like this. What, Lord? No. God comes down with all holiness and majesty, unasked for, stands right over him like a father or a mother, stands over a sleeping child and says words of love and assurance. And look, they are absolutely unconditional. Isn't this astounding? Jacob's at the bottom of his life. He's done the worst possible things. Everything has fallen apart. And there's not a word of condemnation. How could this be the holy God we see in Isaiah 6? How could this be the holy, how could this be? Jacob wakes up and says, why am I alive? You know, essentially. And that's a good question. Heaven, we're told here by this vision in this dream, is open. It's not closed. And it's not only open to the world, but it's open to Jacob. And the good question right away comes, and his question is, how could this be? And he comes up with the answer. And the answer is, you see, he uses a term that you and I don't know about, but we're going to see. It's a technical term. He says, wait a minute. This is the gate of heaven. This is the gate of heaven. This is how the gate of heaven works. Now, what's he talking about? See, he's starting to get the secret. What's the gate of heaven? When the narrator gives us this term in Genesis 28, he is deliberately drawing our minds back to a story he's already told us, a history he's already given us in Genesis 11. In Genesis 11, a group of people get together, and they build a tower, and it says in Genesis 11, verse 4, the top reached to heaven. Very, very, very same description of the tower and the stairway. Secondly, as you know, probably, that tower was named the Tower of Babel. And scholars tell us that the word Babel and the word Babylon, which is the derivative of it, means in ancient Near Eastern dialects, the gate of heaven. Babel means the gate of heaven, or the gate of the God. And the reason that Jacob said, this is the stairway to heaven, is the Tower of Babel was not just a tower. It was a ziggurat. Do you know what a ziggurat was? All over the Near East, a ziggurat was a temple in the form of a pyramid, and up the side of the pyramid was a huge stone stairway to heaven. They were not just building a tower in the Tower of Babel, they were building a stairway to heaven. And we know about the Near East that that was how the temples were built. And what was a stairway to heaven? A stairway to heaven was a temple, a vast stone stairway, and it was a place where everyone came to ascend to the God. You brought your sacrifices. You did your rites of purification. You did your prayers, and you ascended to the gods, spiritually, and you went up, and you compelled and attracted their people. And ziggurats were always built in very important places or they became very important places. I mean, a stairway to heaven would be a place where all the important people lived so that you could ascend and you could bring the blessing of the gods onto your family and into your life and into your town and so forth. But now you begin to see why Jacob was astounded and why his vision was so revolutionary. He says, so this is the way the gate of heaven works. Because don't you see, every other religion, every other temple, every other stairway was a stairway to heaven from the earth. It was built by human beings. It was built so they could ascend to the god and it was at a place chosen by the human beings. This is a stairway from heaven. This is a stairway chosen by god. This is a stairway of grace. It's not a way to ascend up to god and get the blessing through important people. It's a stairway from god chosen by god in sheer grace where he comes down into nowhere places into the lives of nowhere, messed up, broken people, sheerly by grace. He comes to you. You don't go to him. He comes all the way and stands right over you and gives you unconditional love. This is absolutely different than any other religion was ever conceived and still is. Every other religion is a stairway to heaven. The gateway to heaven, the gate of heaven, is a stairway up. And god stands up there and if you are good enough, you get up to him. But the gate of heaven that god reveals to jacob is a stairway down. It's a stairway from heaven that god descends and stands right over you by grace. So that's how the gate of heaven works, he says. But that still doesn't answer a question, does it? We still got a problem. And what's the problem? How could a holy god do this? Look at jacob. You know, we can understand Moses coming up to Sinai and say, show me your glory and god gives him a glimpse. Or Abraham saying in Genesis 15, I need assurance of this promise and god says, then I will appeal to you. You know, cut some animals and put them in pieces and I will pass through the pieces. In other words, every other place, you know, it's normal when we see places in the bible where people come to god and god reveals himself. But this is weird. Jacob is absolutely undeserving. He's not even seeking for god. He's not even talking to god. He's completely on the run. Yet god comes absolutely in grace with all his holy angels right into his life. How could that be? And the answer is, the answer comes many centuries later in a little passage that you'll never understand unless you link it up here with Genesis 28. It happens in John chapter 1 verses 43 to 51 and here's how it goes. There was a guy named Nathaniel and Nathaniel had a friend named Philip and one day Philip came to him and says, Nathaniel, we found the Messiah. We found the Messiah, the liberator, Jesus of Nazareth. And Nathaniel says, Nazareth? He says, God doesn't come, God does not come down into nowhere places like Nazareth. And Philip says, come and see. So as they're walking toward Jesus, Jesus sees Nathaniel coming and he says, he says, hello, hail, behold, he says, an honest man in whom there is no guile. And as Nathaniel comes up, he says, yeah, all my friends say that. I'm transparent and plain spoken. I, you know, but how do you know me? And Jesus says, know you? He says, I saw you under the fig tree. And Nathaniel's eyes get big as saucers. And he says, Rabbi, you are the son of God. You are the king of Israel. Now here's what's interesting about this. We have no idea at all what Nathaniel was doing under that fig tree. We don't know who he was there with. We don't know what he was doing. Maybe he wasn't there with anybody. We don't know what he was thinking under the fig tree. But whatever it was, was so private and so significant that the fact that Jesus mentioned it blew away all of his intellectual doubts about the divine origin of this man. He looked at him and said, how could you, how could anyone, you are the one. Anyone who knows what happened under the fig tree, you are the one. And here's what Jesus says. And it always gives me goosebumps. He says, You believe in me because I told you I saw you under the fig tree. You shall see greater things than this. Verily, verily, I say unto you, you shall see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man. I am the stairway that Jacob saw. I am the link between heaven and earth. And this is the answer to why the stairway that Jacob saw, the gate of heaven, works in a completely opposite direction from every other conception of any other religion. It works in the opposite direction. You know why? Look, Jesus does not say, you will see angels ascending and descending to the Son of Man. Jesus is not standing at the top of the stairway and say, what are the steps? What are the steps on the stairway? The steps are the requirements. Steps to God. And every religion has them. You know, not to put too fine a point on it. But, you know, there's the five pillars of Islam are steps to God. The Ten Commandments of Judaism, steps to God. The Eightfold Path of Buddhism to Enlightenment, they're steps to God. And every other religion says, there the steps are, go. Is Jesus doing that? No. Jesus does not say, you will see angels ascending and descending to the Son of Man. Jesus says, you will see angels ascending and descending on the Son of Man. What does that mean? He's the steps. Every other religion has a step, has a series of steps, and it's a what. It's something to do. But we have a, the real gate of heaven is a who, is a person. He fulfilled the requirements. He did the steps. He lived the life you should have lived. He died and took the penalty we should have taken. He did it. And that's the reason why Jesus is saying, let me tell you what you will see. If you understand who I am, you will see heaven open. If you understand me, if you understand what I did, if you understand I didn't just come to found a religion, I didn't just come to say what the steps were, I came to be the steps. I didn't come to show you the stairway, I came to be the stairway. You will see angels ascending and descending on the Son of Man. And when, and only when you grasp that, that I am the axis mundi, I am the link between heaven and earth. Heaven and earth intersect over my dead and resurrected body. I have opened a cleft in the pitiless walls of the world. I have blown a hole through this concrete slab between the ideal and the real. I'm the ideal, but I've become real. I've come down and I've done everything for you. Only when you understand that, when you understand who he is, who the Son of Man is and what he came to do, then heaven will be open for you. What does that mean? Let's go back to the same two things we've been saying all along. First of all, it's only when you understand Jesus Christ that heaven becomes an open book when it comes to suffering. Now, I don't mean you're going to know why bad things happen. All I mean is this. Jesus is saying that the royal power of God, the angels, moving up and down into the world, happen over him. And what that means is, only this. Only Christianity tells us that God came down and suffered. He suffered unjustly. He suffered tragedy. He suffered apparently senseless things. And because, but, but, as he suffered on the cross, don't you see? Out of physical death, he brought real life. Out of material poverty, he brought real riches. Out of worldly brokenness and weakness, he brought real strength. And when you and I face physical death, material poverty, and brokenness and weakness, only if we think of Jesus will we say, ah, but that's how the power works. That's how God's angels, his royal kingship flows out into the world. His redemption works through the troubles. His redemption works through denial, through self-denial, through sacrifice, through troubles is the way in which I become, more like Jesus. I mean, it's not a total thing. But the fact is, Jesus says, only through me will heaven ever be open about why things are happening the way they're out in the world. Number one. But number two. When Jesus says, you will see heaven open, and angels ascending and descending on the Son of Man, he's really saying, until you understand that I am the stairway, I'm not just pointing to the stairway, I am the stairway, you will never really have an encounter with God. You won't see heaven open. It'll be closed to you. I mean, so this is the secret. I know this. Are there not people out here tonight that know about God, but you've never had an encounter with him? You might believe in God. You might believe in Christianity, but you've never seen heaven open. It just hasn't happened. You haven't had the experience of his love and his holiness and his grace. You haven't had a sense of him right over you like this. Standing right over you and speaking words of unconditional love. You haven't experienced that. You know why? I'll tell you why. Because if you think Jesus Christ points to the steps, in other words, if you read the Bible, like Aesop's fables. you see him living and dying for people as your example, you say, yes, I need to live a loving life like Jesus. All you're ever going to get is a kind of general kind of inspiration at best. But if you see him not ascending the steps as an example, but being the steps, if you see him not as an example to you, but a substitute for you, if you see him living and dying for you, if you see him giving himself for you, look at Jacob, look how lonely he is. You know why he's lonely? Because of his malice, because of his pride, because of his lying. Sin always isolates you, but Jesus Christ took the ultimate cosmic alienation and loneliness on the cross. That is the penalty, the ultimate penalty of sin, cosmic loneliness. My God, my God, you've forsaken me. Why did he do that for you? Do you see that? Do you sense that? Does that move you? When it does. See, only when you see him being the stairway for you, not just being an inspirational example, but being the stairway. Does cognition become experienced? Does just believing about God become knowing him and experiencing him? Do you see it? Jesus says, if you understand the angels ascend and descend on me, not to me. See, every other religion has a God. The angels ascend and descend too. And there's steps and you've got to do it. But this is the only religion that tells you that God himself came and fulfilled all the requirements for you so that he can come into your life by sheer grace, just by asking. That's the reason he can stand over Jacob and speak words of unconditional love into the life of somebody who didn't even look for him. Now, let me conclude this way. Let me just suggest three things quickly in application. Number one, this text tells us that any place is the gate of heaven. See, one of the points of the passage is to say that there is no such thing as a place where God's not working. And if you are a Christian believer, believer, you must not dichotomize your life. You must not say, well, on Sunday I'm a Christian, but the rest of the day, the rest of the week I'm not. Or in here, I, you know, I sense God, but out there I don't. Don't dichotomize your life. Any old place is the gate of heaven. God is working anywhere. His power comes down into anywheres, into everywhere. That's one thing. Don't dichotomize your life. God wants you to practice his presence everywhere because his presence is everywhere, number one. Number two, second thing we learn is, yes, God, any old place is the gate of heaven, but especially times of being totally forlorn, totally alone, and totally weak. Those are especially the times where God comes down and reveals himself. One of the greatest things about this passage is, well, why does God come to Jacob when he didn't ask? Why does God come to Jacob when he didn't pray? Why does God come to Jacob when he wasn't even living a good life in any way? Why does God come to Jacob? And the answer is, God is attracted to his brokenness. See, it can't be that God comes down just despite Jacob's weakness and brokenness. He must be coming because of it. He's that kind of God. And here's what's so wonderful. Jacob has been dressing up. Jacob has been having to look and look to other people and say, I need your blessing and your approval, so he has to be somebody else. But you know what? Everything has fallen apart now, right? The emperor has no clothes. He's laid bare. And God comes and looks at him and he sees him to the bottom. He's asleep, you know, in a way. He's completely defenseless. He can't put up any facade. All the facades are away. And God looks at him at the bottom and loves him to the sky. And that's what you and I need. And I want you to know that no other father or mother, no other husband or wife, no other king, no human being can possibly take our complete weakness. They're too weak to bless us if we show them all of our weakness. Really. But here's the one, the one father, the one mother, the one king, the one lover, the one friend. Here's the one who can come down and look at you all the way to the bottom. No facades. See all of your weakness and all your brokenness and actually be attracted to you because he's the God who's actually attracted to the broken. He comes because, you know, there's a place in Psalm 25 verse 11, I think, where it's where David says, pardon my sins, O Lord, because they are great. And Jonathan Edwards wrote a sermon I'll never forget. But he says, notice, David does not say, pardon my sins, O Lord, despite the fact that they are great. He says, pardon my sins because they are great. And Jonathan Edwards says, God does not simply come into your life in spite of your sin and misery and pain and brokenness and weakness. He comes because of it. He's that kind of God. of grace. Lastly, do anybody here feel like, I could never keep this up? I could never be this? Christianity sounds like it's too much work. Look at Jacob's response. You know what's interesting about his response? It's so bad. God comes and says, I love you. Is there a single if? Is there an if anywhere in what God says? Is there any ifs? I love you. Not if. I love you. And Jacob says, I'll serve you if you do all the things you just said. He says, if this and if this. If this, then you'll be my God. Don't ever do that. How can you come to Christ with somebody who's given himself utterly to you without you giving yourself utterly to him? But, does God drop Jacob after this? Of course not. I want you to see that even though your responses to God will always be half-ass, he's not going to give up on you. He's not that kind of God. Because Jesus Christ took our penalty. Because he is our stairway. Heaven opens over us. If you see, and to the degree you see, what Jesus Christ did for you, you will see heaven open. Have you seen heaven open? You will, if you take hold of the Son of Man and look to him. Let us pray. We ask now, Father, for the next part of our service, that you would help us confess our sins. And to a great degree, our biggest sin is to not live as if you're as gracious as we know you are. We hide our sins because we don't really admit how gracious you are. We hide from other people because we don't really admit how much you've loved us. The sin underneath all of our sins is a refusal to grasp the gospel of grace. And we pray that you'd help us to confess that and know the relief and release and power that comes when we do confess that. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
