TITLE: The Death of Jesus Christ
SCRIPTURE: 1 Peter 2:23-25; 3:18
TOPICS: Death Atonement Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: Splendor in the Furnace; 1 Peter, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-death-of-jesus-christ/

============================================================

Just come with me to 1 Peter 2. It's written in your bulletin. We're going to look at the last part of chapter 2. And then there's also a verse in chapter 3, which summarizes the part that at the end of chapter 2, about the death of Christ, it summarizes that teaching. So in the bulletin, I have it printed together because I'd like to look at the section at the end of 2 and the verse in chapter 3 together. So even if you have a Bible with you and you like to mark up your Bible or something, it might be easier for you to just take the bulletin and read that because the great verse in chapter 3, verse 18, is such a perfect distillation of what Peter was saying earlier about the death of Christ. This is Holy Week coming up. On Thursday night, we realized that Jesus had his last supper with his disciples. On Friday night, on Friday, Jesus died. On Saturday, he's in the tomb. So the death of Christ is what this season is all about. So I'm going to read to you 1 Peter 2, 23 to 25, and then the great verse in verse 18 of chapter 3 together. When they hurled their insults at him, he did not retaliate. When he suffered, he made no threats. Instead, he entrusted himself to him who judges justly. He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree so that we might die to sins and live for righteousness. By his wounds, you have been healed. For you were like sheep going astray, but now you have returned to the shepherd and overseer of our souls. For Christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. He was put to death in the body, but made alive by the Spirit. That's God's Word. For Christ died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. Now, what we've got here is, in not just this verse, but in this passage, but actually, in a sense, even in this verse, an absolutely complete, comprehensive statement of what the meaning of Christ's death is, and not just what it means theologically, but what it means practically, not just what it means philosophically, not just its nature, but what effect it should have on us practically immediately today, tomorrow. So I'd like to show you three things that this passage tells us about the nature of Christ's death, and two things about the practical implications or results of Christ's death in our lives. Three things about the nature, two things about the result. I'll just tell you what they are ahead of time, and then we will go through them. It tells us that Christ's death was forensic. It says, it tells us about that Christ's death had a forensic nature, and then secondly, that it was final in its nature, and then thirdly, that it was voluntary in its nature. Forensic, final, voluntary. That's the nature of Christ's death that's revealed here. What are the results? On the one hand, to bring us to God, but on the other hand, that we might die to sins and live to righteousness. It's all there. Let's take a look. First, let's look at the nature of Christ's death. Forensic, final, and voluntary. Now, the word forensic, it's not a real common word, but if you look it up in the English language dictionaries, you'll see that it means the legal or the judicial. And historically, Christians have understood that there is a forensic nature to Jesus' death. Jesus' death is not just a great example. Jesus' death is not just a great moral influence on us. Jesus' death has a forensic nature, and here's what we mean. Take a look. This is the same verse, in a sense, that, or it's the same teaching. Jesus died once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring us to God. This is identical to what Paul says in 2 Corinthians 5, 21, where he says, God made him sin who knew no sin that we might become the righteousness of God in him. Same thing. It's just stated a little bit differently. And here's what I mean. And this is what it means. On the central day of history, at the central moment of the central day of history, at the kairotic moment, as the Bible would put it, there was a transfer. At one time, and at one time only, God treated someone who was righteous as if he were unrighteous. if he was unrighteous. Now, even though there can be some alteration here, usually, and it certainly is true in this case, the word righteous and unrighteous has a legal meaning in the Greek. One is dikaios, one is adikaios, and what it means is to be right with the law or not right with the law. If you're right with the law, there are no liens against you. There are no claims against you. You're free to come and go and do what you wish. If you're not right with the law, that means you owe. Who knows? It might mean you owe taxes. It might mean you owe time. It might mean you owe your life. There are liens against you. You're not free. You're not right. You're unrighteous. See, that's what the word means. In English today, the word righteous and unrighteous generally has a kind of, you know, a righteous person is generally a slightly snobby and slightly condescending, somewhat condescending moral person. That's not what we're talking about here. And what it tells us is that Jesus was righteous, but on one particular day, at one particular moment, God treated him as if he were unrighteous. That means our liabilities were transferred to him. If you want a rough analogy of it, it would be something like this. Imagine that the IRS is coming to shut you down because what you owe is twice what you have. And what if a friend of yours came, she walks in at the last minute and says, I'll tell you what, I am worth exactly what you owe. And therefore, I will pay it. And the IRS people say, fine, if that's how you like it, great. We just got to, that's fine. And so over they go to her place. And they, of course, she's worth exactly what you owe, which means she's ruined. They take the paintings off her walls. They take the jewelry off from around her neck. They take the furniture out of her house. They throw her out in the street. She's worth exactly what you owe. And in a sense, you have this metaphor. She's righteous, tax-wise, but she is treated as if she's unrighteous. Her liabilities have been transferred. Your liabilities have been transferred to her. And she is gutted. She's been gutted. This is what the scripture says on that great kairotic moment at that day happened. There was a legal transfer. When it says the unrighteous was treated, the righteous was treated as unrighteous, when Paul says he made him sin who knew no sin, that didn't mean that Jesus Christ became actually sinful, does it? It couldn't mean that. Did it mean he became selfish? Did it mean he suddenly became wicked? Of course not, because all the way to the end, all the way through the end, what do you have Jesus doing? He's forgiving his enemies. He's commending his spirit to the Father. It tells us right here that at the very end, he didn't become wicked. He didn't become sinful. He entrusted himself to the one who judges justly. And so this doesn't mean that he became actually sinful. It means he became forensically sinful. It means he became legally sinful. He became unrighteous legally, but he was actually righteous. That's what it says. He didn't become unrighteous actually, actually legally. He became unrighteous legally, and he was gutted for you. What does that mean then? Ah, then what happens? What is the reverse of that? He died once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God. Or the way Paul puts it, that you might become the righteousness of God in him. And that means, and people don't get it, and they will still not get it, and so I will continue to repeat it. If Jesus didn't become actually sinful, but became legally sinful on the cross, that means that when you believe, you don't become actually righteous, you become legally righteous first. That's the first thing that happens. People don't get that. How many times will people say, I'd like to become a Christian, but I've got to clean myself up first. I'd like to become a Christian, but my motives aren't right. I'd like to become a Christian, but I've got to get my life together first. What are you talking about? You want to bring yourself to God? You can't. You want to make yourself righteous? That's not the way it works. It means that when you believe your sins are imputed to him, his righteousness is imputed to you. He became actually sinful, legally sinful for you. doesn't mean that you not become actually righteous as time goes on. The minute you believe you're justified by faith, that means you're made right legally. And in your heart is planted a seed. And this is the reason why justification and sanctification always go together. The seed is a seed of the Holy Spirit that comes in with love and gratitude for what he's done. And you grow bit by bit into actual righteousness. But that's not how it starts. It says in Romans 4, God justifies the ungodly. There's no more radical statement in any religion on the face of the earth. There it is. The forensic nature. Jesus Christ died once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, to bring you to God, which means to make you righteous in him. That's the first thing we're taught. Now, the second thing, and it goes right along with it. See, if the death of Christ is legal, if the work of Christ is forensic, then it's also final. Because it says, for Christ died for sins once for all. Once for all. Now, this first part of the sermon, the first part of the teaching here, is fairly theological. Fine. It'll get plenty practical in a moment. But for a minute, let's keep on going. Ordinarily, you know that I try my very, very best to discuss those things which all Christians have held in common for centuries. It's very important to stress the essentials. And therefore, I don't usually pick on other denominations or other churches where we differ. But in this case, it's instructive, very instructive, to talk about one of the great differences between churches over the years. And that's one of the great differences between the Catholic and the Protestant churches over the years. Of course, I'm a Protestant. I like being a Protestant. And it's because I think in this place, the Protestants have a more biblical approach. Let me just show you what I mean. Once for all. That once for all has been a huge divide between Protestants and Catholics. Protestants and Catholic churches over the years. Let me not say Protestants and Catholics can believe whatever they want. But I'm saying the Protestant versus the Catholic Church. Look, the main difference between the Protestant and Catholic Church has to do with the instrumental means of salvation. The instrumental cause of salvation. In Aristotelian terms, the difference between an efficient cause and an instrumental cause is this. The efficient cause, Aristotle would say, of the sculpture, of the statue, the efficient cause of the statue is the sculptor. But the instrumental cause of the statue is the chisel. You got the difference? The efficient cause, that which the power of it and the means and the purpose is the cause of the statue. The efficient cause is the sculptor. But the means is the hammer and the chisel. Now, Catholics and Protestants have always understood the same thing. And always agreed on what the efficient cause of salvation is. Catholics and Protestants all agree together, God is holy, that God is righteous, that we are sinful, that we have fallen short of those standards, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. He came to earth and he died, the righteous for the unrighteous. We all agree with that. We all believe that, to bring us to God. And therefore, the only way we can come to the Father is through the Son and the work of the Son on our behalf. So that's the efficient cause, the work of Christ. We all agree. But what's the instrumental cause of salvation? And here's where the Catholics and the Protestants differ. The Catholics say the instrumental cause is the sacraments. And the Protestants say the instrumental cause is an act of faith. It's faith. Put it this way. The Catholics say that the way the grace of God comes is you continually take the sacraments. You come and take the Lord's Supper. You take the Eucharist. And the grace of God is Christ is infused into you again and again because every time you take the Lord's Supper, Christ is sacrificed afresh. The sacrifice continues. You repent and you renew that. And the grace is infused in you and you're right with God. But you've got to keep it up. Because, you see, as time goes on, you're always sinning and therefore you have to come back and you've got to renew that. Otherwise, you lose your salvation. Because, you see, the sacrifice of Christ is ongoing and your repentance and your reception of salvation is ongoing. And it continues and you've got to keep it up. Protestants say, but wait a minute, wait a minute. Christ died once for all. And therefore, when we believe, when we receive him as Savior, we are saved once for all. Huge difference. Major difference. Because, you see, now what Protestants say, what do you do when we take the Lord's Supper? You're not renewing your salvation. You're renewing your intimacy. You're not renewing your legal relationship. You say, how can you do that? in Christ Jesus, but you're renewing your intimacy, you're renewing your fellowship. Huge change, huge difference. When Jesus died on the cross, what did he say? Oh, he said a few things, of course. The seven words of the cross, he said a number of things. Mother, here's your son. Son, here's your mother. That's one of the things he said. He said, I thirst. He said a number of things. The one I'm referring to is in John 19, verse 30, where he said, it is finished. Once for all. And the word, it is finished, tetelestai, means it's completely paid. I have satisfied all the requirements. It's done. I do not continue this work, and you do not continue this work. You receive it completely. That's the reason why Jesus, you know, that's the thing. That's the issue. Once for all. Now, do you believe it? Let me get practical here for a second. You can't say, ah, no, I didn't realize that. Oh, that's the difference between the Catholicism and the Protestantism. And, of course, there are great practical implications, but I'm done talking about that difference. I'm not here to try to beat up on one particular branch of the Christian church that I think is maybe wrong-headed. I'm not going to beat up on it, but here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to beat up on the ones that I have here. Because if you believe that the work of Christ is finished, it's finished. There is nothing more to do to make you acceptable. There's tremendous implications for that. And I hope the one thing, those of you who have been here for a while and been listening to the teaching, I hope one of you, by now you're beginning to realize that this is the issue morally, theologically, psychologically, and spiritually. This is the issue. Your problems come, my problems come, because we do not grasp, we do not rejoice in, we do not practice the fact that it's finished, that Christ died once for all, that there's nothing more to add to the work of Christ. There's nothing more to add. Look, look at the implications in several areas. Let me give you a few areas. One of them is pretty easy, and that is conscience. Do you believe it's finished? How do you deal with a bad conscience? See, a lot of you say, I believe, you know, the Protestant thing, I believe what the Bible says, I believe it is finished, and yet you're in trouble with your conscience. Now, look, the world has one way to deal with a conscience, and the way the world deals with a conscience is it does everything it can to try to beat it up, you see, and try to numb it. One of the ways you do it is you inject it with Novocaine, and you say, who's to say what's right and wrong? You know? Another way to do it is to blame other people for it. Another way is to talk about your own weakness. And so the world's way is to try to say, well, you know, to minimize the conscience. But then there's another way, the religious way to do it is to play the conscience's game. So when the conscience comes to you and says, and you call yourself a Christian, and here you are going to church, look at what you've done, you see. Like I said, the world's way to do it is to say to the conscience, well, who's to say what's right and wrong? Shut up. And what is the religious way to do it? What's the legalistic religious way to do it? You look at the conscience, you say, well, I had a good week last week. I had a great week. And look at all the things. And I've taken care of my sister for years and years. I'm a good person. In other words, you start to look at your record. Your conscience will always win that game. Your conscience, your duck soup. Your toast. Because it'll say, oh, yeah, look at what you've done to your sister. Yeah, but look at what you've done with your brother. So, oh, yeah, you had a good week last week. But what about last month? You'd never win. So the world says, shut up to the conscience. You know, it relativizes it, tries to avoid it, tries to run away from it, tries to anesthetize it or whatever. And the legalistic religious kind of person, what do they do with the conscience? They say, well, I am okay. I'm doing better. I'll do better next week. I did okay last week. And it'll always kill you. The gospel trumps the conscience. The gospel comes in and says, it's finished. Which means, you turn to your conscience and you say, you know what? You're right. That's bad. What I did was very bad. I'm glad you're here. If you stop bothering me, then, you know, I won't be. I need you to send me back to my father for a renewal of fellowship. But wait a minute. If I hadn't done this thing you're talking to me about this week, if I hadn't done it, if I'd done things right, that wouldn't really make me any more acceptable. Well may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all and thousands more. Jehovah knoweth none. I don't think I did so. And I was going to say, you know what I was trying to follow with you. Well, may the accuser roar of sins that I have done. I know them all and thousands more. Jehovah knoweth none. That's what the Christian says. Hey, conscience, I'm glad you're here. I need you to get me back in fellowship with my father. But I'll tell you one thing you cannot tell me, and that is that he won't have me or he doesn't love me because everything that's necessary for him to love me is finished. It's all been done. Do you know how to deal with your conscience? Do you do? Listen, just because you say, hey, I'm a Christian. I'm baptized. I'm here. I belong to this church. Doesn't mean you don't deal with it the world's way or deal with it in the old religious legalistic way. Deal with it the theologically correct way, the gospel correct way, the right way. Once for all. Well, let me give you a couple other examples. But you see, all the way along, you have the world's way, you have the legalistic way, and then you've got this way. You have the gospel. Here, let me give you another example. It's finished. It's finished. Disappointment. A lot of us are always, a lot of you, a lot of us are constantly wrestling with discouragement. Things, projects, hopes, dreams, and we're wrestling with discouragement, almost wrestling with despair. Why? We put it to you this way. Many of our deepest disappointments are due to the fact that we're trying to be what only Christ should be for us. Many of our deepest longings for success are actually efforts to try to do what only Christ can do for us. In other words, there's a kind of closure that we haven't reached, even though intellectually up here we say it is finished. At another level, there are ways that we feel like we're not acceptable, and I'm still working for closure. And if I could just get this, if I could just get this, if I could just get this, then I'd be right. You're trying to finish the work that Jesus says is finished at a very, very profound psychological level. A very profound psychological level. What are you going to do? Because you'll never find the closure the ways you're trying to go. You'll never find it. You're trying to, you're trying to finish. Oh, you know, you may not be thinking of it that way at all. The reason why, this is the reason why, you know, here's a married couple, and why one of you is not worried about money. And then when one of you, when we have financial problems, one of you says, don't worry, don't worry, honey, it's going to be all right. You seem to be so strong, you see. And the other one gets devastated by money problems. But then the other one, whenever you have a relational problem, one of you is devastated. You know, we're not right. We're not talking properly. What's the matter? And the other person says, don't worry. Hey, it's going to be okay. What's going on there? What's going on is underneath all of that is there are ways in which we feel we've got to still finish the work of Jesus. There's ways in which we still feel we're not really right. We're not really righteous unless we've, or unless we're financially secure. And your financial security becomes your rightness, becomes your righteousness, becomes a way of getting that closure. Or maybe a perfect relationship, the perfect marriage. All of your life, you felt like, we've got to have a perfect marriage. You had an ideal. And you don't have a perfect marriage. And you are so bitter against the other person, and half the time you feel guilty about yourself. Why? Other people have imperfect marriages, and they're doing okay. Why do you have to have a perfect marriage? Because every one of us, every one of us learns ways to try to finish the work. Jesus says, it's finished. I've done it. And so many of your deepest disappointments come because so many of your deepest desires for success are ways for you to get closure and to do for yourself what only Jesus Christ can do for you. In the gospel, you look at discouragement this way. You look at the thing that's not coming, and you say, I don't need you. You can't run me. I am not an animal who runs on instincts. I am not a robot who runs on programming. I am a person. And all these things that used to control me no longer control me because it's finished. Let me give you one more example. And I don't think I'm able to go into it in the detail I like to, but if you understand the work of Christ has been finished, it's once for all. You have to rest from your works. You have to stop trying to earn your own salvation. It affects everything, your conscience, your attitude toward discouragement. I'll give you another one. Humor. Humor. Kipling talks about, quote, the mirth that knows no bitter springs. The mirth that has no bitter springs. And what Kipling's talking about is, again, let me give you three approaches. There is a kind of mirth. There's a kind of humor that the world is capable of, but it's got bitter springs to it. It's a cynicism. It's a kind of prowess. of humor, it's put-down humor. In so many cases, the comedians, in many cases, take a position where they chop at everything. They put themselves, in a sense, in a kind of superior position. An awful lot of the world's humor is like that. I put you in a superior position, and I go after everything about you that's sacred. I cut at you. I make you ridiculous. There is a mirth that arises from very bitter springs. And then, of course, there's the religious, the legalistic religious approach, in which there is no humor at all. If you take a look at legalistic religion, you find humorless people. Remember that place in the Men of La Mancha where it says, He carried his dignity as if afraid of breaking it. And that's the way an awful lot of, that's the way so many religious people are, people who are trying to earn their own salvation, because they are very, very fragile. See, the difference between people in the world who are trying to earn their salvation and people in the church that are trying to earn their salvation is people in the world have relativized the bulletins from the law of God about the requirements for holiness, but the people in the church have not. And so, on the one hand, you're trying real hard to finish the work. You're trying real hard to earn your salvation, to be a good person, but you know an awful lot about what God requires. And as a result, you're deeply and radically insecure. And you don't have much of a sense of humor. That's not funny. You don't say that all the time, but that's how you feel. And people around you know there's hardly anything that you find really, really funny. But a Christian who understands that it's finished, that the verdict is in, that I no longer have to worry that much about people thinking me cool, the real heart of humor is the ability not to take yourself very seriously. You see, there's a kind of mirth that arises out of bitter springs where you're taking yourself very seriously so you get to jump on people. And there's another kind of mirthlessness that arises out of the fact that you feel very insecure about yourself. But a Christian is somebody who knows that how they look isn't that important. They don't take themselves that seriously. See, self-absorption will always lead to either cynicism or humorlessness, but self-forgetfulness makes you playful. And you know, we've talked about this before, a Christian is very different. If you ask a person in the world, do you believe, they might say, that's private. And if you ask a legalistic person, do you believe, they'll say, well, of course. And if you ask a Christian, do you believe, remember what the Christian says? You know, a Christian says, yes, and isn't it astonishing? Me, a Christian? What a joke of all the people. Look at me. Who would have thought me a Christian? See, if you look at yourself and say, well, of course I'm a Christian. I mean, I've always been. I mean, I've been raised. I mean, I've learned this way. I'm this is the kind of person I am. You probably aren't. And it's one of the reasons why you've got a mirthlessness about you. If you know it's finished, you don't hold your dignity as if you're afraid of breaking it. And you can laugh. Ah, and of course the gospel makes you confident because why? The verdict is in. You're not afraid. The gospel also makes you mighty compassionate because when you look at the homeless person in the street, in rags, no resources, no friends, nothing to recommend himself, you look and you say, Lord, apart from Jesus Christ, that's what I look like to you spiritually and morally. You know that that person's your brother in a very profound sense. And therefore, you see, the gospel makes you compassionate and yet at the same time it makes you very, very, very tough-minded. It makes you, gives you a playfulness and at the same time makes you far more serious than people in the world without the gospel can bear to be. Far more serious. You talk about death. Christians can talk about death all the time in a way that other people would really make you, it really makes you upset. Why? Because Christians have got something that enables them to face death. They've been brought to God by the gospel. If you can look the justice of God in the face, then you can spit in death's eye and tell him a joke. It is finished once for all. Do you understand the implications of that? Do you understand the profundity of that? Okay, and then lastly, of the three things, the nature of the gospel, the nature of the cross, the cross is forensic, I'm sorry, the death of Christ is forensic in nature, it's final in nature, and then it's voluntary. Look, the voluntariness, when they hurled their insults at him, he didn't retaliate. When he suffered, he made no threats. Instead, he entrusted himself to the one who judges justly. What's that mean? Well, let's put it this way. Jesus Christ. who died voluntarily. He stood there, and he sat there. He not only took their threats, but he took the suffering of the cross, and he could have gone, but he didn't. He stayed. He's the only person who ever voluntarily died. Well, somebody says, no, that's not true. There's people who've chosen to die through suicide. There's people who've chosen to die to save other people's lives. We have wonderful stories of heroism. No, no, no, no. There are people, besides Jesus, who have chosen the moment of their death, yes, or they have chosen the method of their death, yes, but they didn't choose their death because they had to die anyway. Jesus is the one person who did not have to die. You see, death is an executioner. I know plenty of people don't believe that. They say that death is just natural. The biologist will tell you, I was reading an article by a man who was completely rejecting the Christian idea that death is a punishment. Ah, no, he said. He says the biologist will tell you that life is impossible without death. Unless things die, there's no way for those of us who are alive to live. And therefore, death is just very natural. But the poets know better. That's why Dylan Thomas says, we rage against the dying of the light. I was reading about a Japanese poet named Issa, a famous 18th century poet. And of course, the Japanese believed that, their culture believes that everything is, the world is due. That was, the world is just due. And our individuality is sort of an illusion. And when you die, you're just like the dew drop going back into the ocean. And it's perfectly natural. Perfectly, death is natural. And Issa, when he lost his family and most of his, his wife and most of his family, he felt that that wasn't fair. That wasn't right. And he wrote a little poem that ends like this. The world is due. The world is due. And yet, and yet. Which means, the loss of their personal individuality in me doesn't feel natural at all. It feels like a violence. Death is an enemy. Death is a penalty. Death is a punishment. We know that. And therefore, all of us have to die because we're all sinners, but not Jesus. Jesus is the one who death had no rights over. And therefore, for Jesus Christ to go to the cross and die, he was the only person who ever died, not as a victim, but in a supreme act of authority. He didn't have to stay. And listen, when God poured out his wrath, we've talked about this the last couple of weeks. I'm not going to get back into it. God poured out his wrath. He poured endless agony into Jesus Christ because that's the penalty for death. Endless. You say, how could it be endless? Wasn't it three hours? All I can tell you is, if the penalty was endless, the penalty for sin is to be endlessly cut off from God and to have the agony that comes with that. Therefore, somehow, what Jesus experienced must have been endless. He must have felt it to be endless. He must have felt it endlessly. There was an endless, infinite suffering that was poured out into Jesus' heart and into his body on the cross. And here's my question to you. What kept him there? What kept him there under that? The nails? He's the creator of the universe. The chains? He's the creator of the universe. At any second, he could have stopped. At any moment, he could have left. What kept him there? What bound him to the cross under that unbelievable pain and suffering? Here's what it must have been. His love for you. Nothing else. There's nothing else strong enough in the universe to keep him there. You know what it's like to be under pain. You know what it's like when someone starts to cut on you? You have to have a bunch of people hold you down. You know, we're going to have to dig in and get that bull out of your leg. Okay, well, everybody hold on to me because I know you want to do the right thing, but it's going to be hard. Oh, and so you start, they hold you down. What held Jesus down? What kept him there? His death was voluntary. He says, no man taketh my life from me. He says in John chapter 10, I lay it down of my own accord. Now, somebody says, wow. Well, you know what the effects of that is? What are the results? How should this affect you? And I'll tell you how it should affect you. In two ways that seem to be paradoxically opposite, but they're not. Look it. It says on the one hand to bring us to God. That's the first result. But the second result is that you might die to sins and live to righteousness. Just hear me out on this one. Do you see on the one hand, the death of Jesus Christ, the doctrine of the cross will cure your soul. legalism, whether it's too much guilt or too little of a sense of spirit of repentance. No matter where you are, the cross will deal with you. Look, because on the one hand, you've sinned, you've fallen, and you say, how could God continue to love me after what I've done? After all these things, how could he stay with me? After all these things. Oh, do you think Christ's little itty-bitty love is no match for what you've done? Look what it's already put up with for you. Look what it's already borne up under for you. A tidal wave, wave upon wave of infinite agony and suffering such as no one in the world has ever known. He's already done that for you. He's already put up with that for you. What are you going to give him to wear him out, huh? Don't you see? This is strong love. This is unbreakable love. He sets his love on you, and it doesn't matter. The door is always open for return. There is no condemnation for you. His love is so strong, it's unbreakable. It's infallible. It is already put up with infinity for you. Now, what are you going to do to break it? You can't. So when you fall down, there is nothing like the cross. The cross comes back and argues with you when you say, oh, you couldn't, you know, I'm too unworthy. You couldn't receive me back because of all that I've done. And Jesus looks and says, all that you've done. Do you know what I've already put up with? You're telling me that this is going to be too much for me? I love you. I gave myself for you. But on the other hand, here's what's so astonishing about the cross. On the one hand, once you've fallen, the doctrine of the cross lifts you up and comforts you with a profundity that no other truth can possibly do. But on the other hand, when you're thinking about sinning, when you're thinking about doing something that you know is against his will, there is not a shred of encouragement in the cross for you to do it. As a matter of fact, don't you see what he said? Paul, Peter says here, the reason Jesus died, the reason Jesus became sin for you, the reason Jesus took this unbelievable agony was so that you would die to sins and live to righteousness. Now, you know that word sins? Notice it's got it. It's plural. Usually in these texts, you see Jesus died. We want you to die to sin. It means die to the power of sin, die to the guilt of sin. But here it says Jesus died so that you would die to sins. That means specific actions. It means tomorrow. The dishonesty you could do, the impurity you could do, the insensitivity you could do, the cowardice you could do, don't because Jesus died for you. It's another way to put it as this. If he died so that you would be holy, if you realize what he's done for you, this is what the cross, this is what he's saying to you from the cross as you think about doing something wrong. He's saying, haven't I been hit enough? Don't you think I have enough nails in my hands? Are you going to put your hands around my throat too? I died so you wouldn't do this. Will you deliberately seek to frustrate and disappoint the very point of all of my sufferings for you? Will you hit me too? Will you add your fists to the ones who are smacking me and breaking my skin open and saying, prophesy who hit you? Jesus died so you wouldn't sin. This is what's so astonishing. Oh, look, when you do sin, you never say, I think I'll hit Jesus one more time. I think I'll put one more nail. I think I will just stamp and trample on the very point of his life. This is what his life's about. This is what all of his career's about. Like, you don't say that. Of course you don't say that. What do you say? You say, well, if you had my husband, you would too. He would say, well, you know, expert opinion differs. That's why the cross is here, to bring you to your senses. Because you don't want to think of what you're doing like that. But it forces you to. Oh, my gosh. Think of it. This is what the genius of the cross. If you've fallen down, there is unbelievable comfort. And if you're thinking about going somewhere away from his will, the cross comes to you with the most infallible, infallible, powerful arguments against it. It doesn't do it by saying Christ's love is conditional. It doesn't do that. It doesn't say, oh, Christ's love is so wimpy that if you sin, you might wear it out. No, it says because it's not wimpy, because it's infallible, because of what he's endured for you, how can you do this to him? Hey, do you hear what the cross is saying? Christ died. to God, that you might die to sins and live unto righteousness. To bring you to God. Let me conclude by asking a question. The question is this. I'm going to actually read it just so I don't get it wrong. Do you have something that will enable you? Do you have something tonight that will enable you to stand before God with your head up and no shame if you were to meet him tonight? If you, listen, whatever you see at the very lip of your own death, what the world looks like and what life would look like if you knew that you were to die tonight at 11 o'clock, whatever you see from the lip of your own death is what's really there. You know, as Samuel Johnson once said, you know, the prospect of imminent death concentrates the mind wonderfully. What you see at that moment is what really is true. That's what's really important. What have you got to face God with your head up at that moment? The only way to do it is through the cross and to listen to the cross speaking. And you know what? Here's why. When you look at the cross and you see what Jesus did for you. He stuck with you when it was hard. A big part of what it means to be a Christian is there are periods of time in which to obey Christ is impractical and doesn't feel very good. And so how do you get through those times? It doesn't seem to be fun. It doesn't seem to be practical. It doesn't seem to be very satisfying. What do you do? You look at Jesus who stuck with you through a time that wasn't very satisfying. And you say, if you could put up with that for me, I can put up with this for you. You know, the last line of the text says, he was put to death in the body but made alive in the spirit. Don't you know to obey him and to follow the way of the cross sometimes feels like a death, but it always, always, always, always leads to a resurrection. The cross leads to a resurrection, I tell you. Take it in. Let it speak to you. Listen to it. Let's pray. Father, we thank you that this week we have, almost every day we're going to have an opportunity to think about your death. Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, we pray that you will help us to understand your death in such a way that we die to our sins and live to righteousness in such a way that we have humor, that we have joy, that we have sobriety, that we have strength in the face of disappointment, that we have bold, clear consciences. Help us to see how great a salvation you have given us, for how shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation? We thank you that you have given it to us, and we pray that you will enable us not to neglect it, but to use it to your glory. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
