TITLE: The Disciples Meet Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Luke 24:36-49
TOPICS: Redemption Salvation Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: The Real Jesus Part 4; The Lord
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-disciples-meet-jesus/

============================================================

Luke chapter 24, verses 36 to 49. While they were still talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them and said to them, Peace be with you. They were startled and frightened, thinking they saw a ghost. He said to them, Why are you troubled? And why do doubts arise in your minds? Look at my hands and my feet. It is I myself. Touch me and see. A ghost does not have flesh and bones, as you see I have. And when he had said this, he showed them his hands and feet. And while they still did not believe it, because of joy and amazement, he asked them, Do you have anything here to eat? And they gave him a piece of broiled fish. And he took it and ate it in their presence. And he said to them, This is what I told you while I was still with you. Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me. In the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms. And then he opened their minds so they could understand the scripture. And he told them, This is what is written. That Christ will suffer and rise from the dead on the third day. And repentance and forgiveness of sins will be preached in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. You are witnesses of these things. I am going to send you what my father has promised, but stay in the city until you have been clothed with power from on high. And this is God's word. Now, we've been looking at the accounts in the Gospels of the appearances of Jesus Christ after he died, after he was risen. The resurrection narratives, they're called. And we're particularly looking at these three that Luke mentions. Luke chooses three. And we've looked at the first two, and now we're looking at the last one. And what we see here is that Jesus Christ is teaching the disciples and us that there is a resurrection for them and us that we are to wait for. There's a resurrection that we wait for later. And there's a resurrection that we can experience now. Now, here's the significance of this. Tertullian, an early church writer and leader, said, The blood of the martyrs is seed. The blood of the martyrs is seed. And the reason he could say that was because one of the reasons that Christianity grew explosively through the Roman Empire and took over in a matter of decades was because of the way in which Christians faced suffering and death. On the one hand, virtually no one faced suffering and death and difficulty like the Christians. Almost nobody. The Stoics, they kept a stiff upper lip. That was a philosophy, a philosophical school in those days. The Stoics kept a stiff upper lip. But the Christians didn't just have a negative. They didn't just stop crying. They laughed. There was a joy. They had a positive. They went singing to their deaths. And yet, and yet, on the other hand, there was no escapism about the early Christians. It's one more, one more reference. I did it last week. One more reference. There was an awful lot of, a couple of weeks ago, there was an awful lot of musing about religion and an awful lot of musing about theology on the front pages because of the 39 people that killed themselves. They were members of the Heaven's Gate religion. And one of the points that continually came out was these people hated the material world. They hated the physical. They wanted to escape it. Desperately wanted to. Most of the men had been castrated because they were trying to escape that pull toward physical desire and materiality. They had withdrawn from everyone. They withdrew from their families. They withdrew from the outside world. But on the, you know, the videotape they made before they all committed suicide, they said, there's nothing for us here. There's nothing here. And, of course, the whole idea, and this was brought up pretty well by most religion writers, was their understanding of the physical world and the material world was so escapist that they looked at their bodies as nothing but containers. And that's why they were able to kill themselves. So they were escaping. They were trying to get away. They were trying to withdraw. You don't see that at all with the early Christians. With the early Christians, what you see is this incredible engagement. When there were great plagues, when there were great plagues that swept through some of the great metropolitan areas of northern Africa in the second century, where everyone else was running away, let's get away, the Christians were willing to go in there and pick up the sick people, and they were willing to tend them. There was an engagement with the pain of the world. See, there was a hope but a realism. There was a joy, a real joy. Early Christians, they acted like they were on top of the world when the world was literally on top of the world. with the pain of the world. They weren't trying to escape at all. That's why Tertullian said, the blood of the martyrs is seed, because one of the reasons the Christians were so attractive, one of the reasons why Christianity appeared so valid and so true to onlookers was they said, look at how these people live. Look at their attitude toward the brokenness of the world. Look at it. Where did it come from? It came from these two resurrections. Jesus says there's a resurrection in the future we wait for, and there's a resurrection in the present we experience. And it's both of those, an understanding of both of those, that made the Christians what they are. And actually, I would have to say, therefore, it must be a disorientation. There must be a lack of understanding of both of those, that leads to the fact that the Christian church doesn't look like that now. We're not remarkable. And therefore, you may think we understand the resurrection, but we must not. Now, let's take a look at these two things. And I want to warn you, so that nobody gets scared, that I'll spend 90% of the time on the first of the two. So, around 1130, nobody's suddenly saying, oh my goodness, he's just getting to his second point. Just, you know, I know some of you. So, there's two points. First of all, Jesus says there's a resurrection in the future, and understanding that is what leads to this kind of life. But then secondly, there's a resurrection we experience now, so that the understanding of the resurrection in the future becomes operative. See, the resurrection of the future that Jesus talked about, that concept is revolutionary. It's paradigm-busting. It's unique. It is unique. It destroys all human categories of thought. It's absolutely revolutionary. But it's only an intellectual concept. It's only the knowledge of something in the future. And it isn't operative in our lives unless the knowledge of the future resurrection becomes operative through the experience of a present resurrection, a spiritual resurrection now. So, let's look at those two. 90% on the first, and then briefly at the end on the last, so we can see how it does become operative. Jesus Christ is teaching in this passage, maybe better than any other passage in the Bible, about the nature of the resurrection. That if we believe in him, there's a future for us. If we believe in him, there's the same thing that he entered into, the same reality, the same new creation that he entered into, we enter into. And he's trying to teach us about that. He's not here just trying to teach us about the truth of the resurrection, but he's trying to teach us about the nature of the resurrection. And we see that when we begin by looking at three things, three things that happen. It's a fascinating passage. He comes in, and here's the three things. The first thing is, he passes through walls. It says, while they were still talking about this, Jesus himself stood among them and said, peace be unto you. Now, notice the word is very carefully chosen. It doesn't say he walked. He didn't say he came among them. It says he stood. In the book of John, chapter 20, the very same incident is mentioned. The very same incident is recounted. And there it mentions that the doors were locked. John says the doors were locked, and that makes perfect sense because, after all, you know, the Christian movement had just been purged. Its leader had just been executed. It made perfect sense that they would lock their doors. And suddenly, Jesus stood among them. Remember, on the way to Emmaus, the two disciples were looking at Jesus and were told, as he broke the bread, they recognized him, and he disappeared. Thin air. And now he appears out of thin air. It doesn't say he came. He stood. There he was. And so, he passed through doors. He passes through walls. That's the first thing we learn. The second thing is, however, he immediately says, I have sensory engagement with the world. I can touch. I can see. I can hear. I can be seen. I can be heard. And I can eat. See, the first thing he does, almost immediately, he doesn't say, look, I got stuff to tell you. He doesn't get on to other teaching. He says, I've got to show you the nature of my resurrection. And he says, touch me. Feel me. I am not a spirit. I am not a ghost. In the old authorized version, he says, a spirit hath not flesh and bones as I. And then, the most remarkable thing, I think, is he says, is there anything to eat? And they bring him something to eat. It's a fish. And he sits down and eats the fish. Now, when I was a kid growing up, I was always told that when you're sitting with a guest at a table and they're eating, don't stare at them. But I doubt that that was possible that day. I think that he was stared at. It says he ate it in their presence. So, you see, he's touched. He's feeling. He can be felt. He can eat. And then, thirdly, so he passes through walls, but he can touch and he can taste and he can see and he can smell and he can eat and he can be seen. touched. But then lastly, we're also told it is still him. He says, it is I myself. He says, it's still me. It's not so much a brand new body. It's a renewed body. It's not a new self. It's a renewed self. It's still me. I'm still the one that knew you. All of our past together is my past. All of our memories, all that we have done together, it's still me. Now, what is he saying here? He says, this is your future. I am the firstborn from the dead. I am the firstborn in the new creation. This is what is in store for you. Now, what is he saying? First of all, the first thing we learn, I just, I'm just going to take a minute or two on this. One of the things that this story tells us is this is more evidence that this really happened. Some of you are here and you're saying, well, how can we trust things like this? And of course, I can't go into all the reasons. We have a class after the morning and after the evening service. Every week that we have classes, it's called Credibility of Christianity. And if you, it's always rotating, it's always going through. And if you have questions like, how do you, can you trust the Bible? How do you know these things are true? Go to those classes. Ellery Aziel teaches it in the morning and Jeff White teaches in the evening and they're great places to go. However, let me just point this out. It's very difficult for most people to believe, and it really stretches the credulity to believe that the resurrection accounts are complete lies, that the apostles made them up and they wrote them down and then they went out and died, died for their, for their hoax. It's not very likely. Therefore, in this century, most scholars, especially in mainline Protestant denominations, this is what their theory has been. They say, well, the way we can understand these resurrection narratives is, you see, the early Christians, the disciples had spiritual experiences of God. And later on, either they or some of their, their descendants or their successors, they, they wrote the, these spiritual experiences down as sort of physical experience, physical encounters. They, they, they took their spiritual experiences and they kind of gave them a physical or material form. So you see, Mary Magdalene, she experienced after Jesus' death, the personal love of Jesus. Well, but when it was written down in John chapter 20, it was a story about her literally, physically hearing him call her by name. And see, that's it. They had a spiritual experience. Jesus wasn't literally risen from the dead. The tomb isn't empty. His, you know, his body still lies a molder and in the grave. However, they had spiritual experiences and later on they kind of wrote them down as physical encounters. And this doesn't make much sense in this case, because what I want to know is how do you have a spiritual experience about Jesus eating fish and chips? I mean, what, what, what, what would lie behind this? How do you get a spiritual experience of Jesus sitting down saying, give me a piece of fish? What does this represent? What wonderful spiritual experience does this represent? Listen, everything about these texts shows us this. The physical encounter came before the spiritual experience. The physical encounter came before the faith, before they had faith, when they're still scared, when they're still scared spitless. They have a counter with the material physical Christ. Jesus is here to tell them, look, I'm really here. There's absolutely no way to explain this incident, what would lie behind it. No, no, no. It's absolutely reverse. Jesus sat down, he ate a fish, he passed through a wall, but he has flesh and bones. Now, this is the main thing he's teaching. Take a look at your own heart and look at your own mind. This is a category buster. There is no philosophy, there's no religion, there's no human category for this. No human category at all. First of all, we think you're either a spirit or you're a body. And if you're a spirit, you can pass through walls, but you can't eat fish. And if you, if you can eat fish, then you've got to deal with the same kinds of problems that most of us with bodies have. And that is there's sort of limitations on your movement. But that's not what the Bible says happened to Jesus. See, Paul understood this. In 1 Corinthians 15, he says, so it will be with the resurrection from the dead. The body that is sown, buried, perishable, will be raised imperishable. The body that is sown in dishonor will be raised in glory. The body that is sown in weakness will be raised in power. It is sown a natural body, he writes, and it is raised a spiritual body. Not a spirit, not a body, a spiritual body. Jesus Christ comes in and he's breaking all the dying. He drops. He dados his stomach as he runs. He does Thank you. not a spirit, not a body, a spiritual body. Jesus Christ comes in and he's breaking all the categories because what you've got here is something that is absolutely incredible. And when I say it's unique, it doesn't really enter into any other human philosophy. What we're being told is the spiritual penetrated the physical. And it's not just like there was a physical container with a spiritual inside. No, no, no. I know that's what you're thinking. I know that's what I'm thinking. The ideal became real. The Bible says, and there's no other religion would dare say this, that the Son of God has permanently taken to himself, within himself, so it is really him. It's not like, hey guys, I'm in here. And I'll discard this pretty soon. It is me, myself. The Son of God permanently has a perfect physical body. The spiritual and the real, therefore, in the Christian understanding, have been wedded so that, now listen, in the economy of God, neither the physical nor the spiritual are more real than the other. They're equally important. They are equally valuable. They're equally wonderful. They're equally glorious. They're equally real. They're equally important. And there is no other philosophy or religion on the face of the earth that understands that. Now, if you say, I don't get it, how in the world are you either a spirit or you're a body? How can you be a spiritual body? You can be a spirit in a body. You can't be a spiritual body. How can you do that? And the answer is, this is like so many other things in Christianity. It's like the three in one of the Trinity. It's like the human and divine of Jesus. It's like the sovereignty of God and the freedom of human beings and the way in which he deals with history. This is one of those places where Christianity combines two things that don't seem like they can go together until you understand that the only alternatives to them are absolute dead ends. Yeah, it's hard to believe in this, and it's impossible not to. And those are your only two alternatives. Let me show you what I mean. There's two basic contenders that come against Christianity and this whole attitude of the physical. And you're going to have to choose between Christianity today. You're going to have to choose between that or one of these two. Let me tell you what those other two are. First of all, you have secularism. And secularism says, and this is the most common in a place like New York City, secularism says the physical is all that is really real. We can talk about spiritual. When it comes right down to it, this is all that's real. When we die, we rot. Everything is a natural cause. There is no spirit. There is no soul, really. There is no supernatural. There is no eternity. There's no heaven or hell. This physical is all we have. Now, you know what happens? If you want to know the implications of this, that the physical is more real than the spiritual, the physical is the only really real thing, if you want to know the implications of this, you've got to go read an article by Tom Wolfe in the December 2nd, 1996 edition of Forbes. Forbes magazine ran an article by Tom Wolfe, December 2nd, 1996, so not that long ago. And the name of it is, sorry, your soul just died. And what he lays out is devastating. What he says is, neuroscience is telling us things that most of us in the population don't, we're not really aware of yet, and we don't really want to believe yet. But here it is. If there's no soul, if you are only physical, you may feel there's such a thing as love. You may think your choices are free choices. You may think some things are terribly evil, like rape and ethnic cleansing, those things are wrong. But they're not. They can't be. Because feelings of love, feelings of morality, and even the belief that we're making free choices, these are always, listen, all these things are nothing but chemical events in your brain determined by the genetic code, your genetic code being brought to you by natural selection through evolutionary biology, and that's that. And Tom Wolfe pulls out the fact that if the physical is all we have, there really is no difference between a human being, a slug, and a rock. And you may feel there's a difference, but there's no basis for it. It's all illusion, and when it catches up to us, we're going to be in despair, and it's already happening. Now, you can say the physical is all that there is. The physical is the most real. And you will eventually find yourself absolutely trapped. And if you don't feel trapped, it's simply because you will not, will not think out the implications of what you really understand, the implications of where you stand. But on the other hand, now there's another alternative. And the other alternative is growing all the time. There's that great, that entire wall of it in the Barnes & Noble, you know, there over on Broadway and 86th Street and all that, or 82nd Street. You have all the new religions. You have the new age religions. And you have all, actually, you also have a resurrection of many of the older religions. And why? If you go to all the religions, especially the eastern ones, but even the western ones, every religion of Christianity says the spiritual is what's real, not the physical. is absolutely illusion. It's an illusion that you have a body. It's an illusion that there's a physical world. But even the other western religions will say the physical is temporary. Eventually we're going to get out of it. We're just passing through. Eventually we'll get into a spiritual eternity. Now, here's what happens and what inevitably happens. Now, people aren't usually this consistent, but if you really believe that, you're into heaven's gate. Sure you are. What you're really saying is, why try to change the world? Let's just escape it. Why not kill myself? But you know why? Because why should I show that kind of respect to myself? This isn't really me. And listen, history has shown that religions in general that say the spiritual is real create a passivity, an indifference to suffering. When you see Jesus, you don't see him walking in and either needing to eat the fish or not wanting to eat the fish. And because he doesn't need to eat the fish, he's resurrected. He's passing through walls. He doesn't need to eat the fish anymore because he's not trapped in nature because nature is not the only reality. But on the other hand, he wants to eat the fish. He doesn't say, oh, how primitive, the physical. I can't wait to take you away from all this. Oh no. John chapter 2. Remember the first miracle of Jesus Christ. When Jesus Christ does his first miracle, it's going to be a sign. It's going to show him what he's all about. And what does he do in the first miracle? Does he raise the dead? Well, what does he do? Does he feed the 5,000? Does he, you know, does he cast out a demon? What does he do? You remember what he does? He makes incredible wine for a tremendous party. What does he do when he says, here's how I want you to remember me. Get up a big, great cup of wine and a loaf of wonderful bread. And that's how I want you to remember me. See, Jesus Christ doesn't need to eat the fish, but he wants to eat the fish. Because Jesus says, your future is a physical future. I created body and soul, and I'm redeeming body and soul. And as a result, your attitude toward body and soul is that they are equally important. And listen to me, if you don't believe in Christianity in that way, or if you, like most of us, even though you may believe in Christianity, you don't think out the implications of the doctrine of the resurrection. You slide. We tend to slide toward secularism, or we tend to slide toward spiritualism. And you'll, eventually you'll be in despair, or you will be in indifference and passivity. Christianity is unique, revolutionary. Now you say, okay, but what does that really mean? It means four things. If you believe this, and to the degree you believe this, you will be different. You will be like those early Christians, because the doctrine of the resurrection leads you to fight. It leads you to rest. It leads you to love, and it leads you to fear absolutely nothing in a unique way. It leads you to fight. It leads you to rest. It leads you to love, and it leads you to fear absolutely nothing. Let me show you. First of all, it leads you to fight. Now what do I mean by fight? Christianity is a fighting religion because Christians, they don't look out there and say, oh, look at all those people dying from the plague. Well, it doesn't matter. We're just passing through. And this world is very temporary. Christians do not sit around and look at, they don't look at squalor. They don't look at injustice. They don't look at hunger. They don't look at poverty and say, well, you know, we're just passing through. These people are just passing through. No. Jesus Christ was willing to suffer physically, not to help us escape the physical, but to rehab the physical. Do you know what Jesus is doing when he comes to earth? He's not here to escape the physical. He's here to rehab it. He's here to transform it. He's not here to help us escape the reality, but to transform the reality. Christians, therefore, if you're going to follow Jesus Christ, you rehab the world. You don't escape the world. You don't eschew the world. You rehab it. That's what Jesus was doing. Jesus was willing to come and do that, and that's the reason why Christians, C.S. Lewis is the one that said, Christianity has always been a fighting religion. Like, for example, you know, we have a missionary, Beth Amon. She's in Cambodia. What is she doing? Well, now, she's using her gifts. She's not church planting, though that's crucial. That's worth dying for, but what's she doing? She's a doctor, and she's rehabbing eyes. She's doing eye care all over Cambodia in a culture and a society where the medical care is horrible. She's seeing things she's only read about in books, and in the name of Christ, she's going around and rehabbing eyes. Now, is that something a Christian should sacrifice for? Is that something a Christian should lay her life out for? Is that something a Christian should risk her life for? If you don't think so, you don't understand the doctrine of the resurrection. Eyes are worth rehabbing. their lives by moving into dangerous communities to try to make them safe communities and decent places to live? What do you think Jesus Christ did? He didn't just risk danger, physical danger. He experienced physical danger so that he could rehab the world, the physical, the body. See, a spirit has not flesh and bones. And therefore, we are a fighting religion. That's the first thing. Christianity makes you fight. We're not indifferent, but now, okay. By the way, just quickly, you can make a good case for the fact that modern science did not arise out of Eastern religions, and it did not arise even out of the Western religions like the Greeks and the Romans. Modern science arose out of Christianity because it was the first religion that loved trees enough and loved bodies enough, you see, and rejoiced in those things and took them seriously and said, we got to understand this. And we have to see what God has done. We have to look at the wonders of creation. We're not here to escape it. So, first of all, Christians fight. We're not passive toward the brokenness of this life. We're engaged. But now, secondly, ah, we fight as opposed to spiritualism, but we can rest as opposed to secularism. And here's what I mean by that. You know why people come to New York City? Because if you want to really get material experiences, this is the place to go. You come here to get rich so you can have material goods. You come here to have sex. So you can have all kinds of sexual experience. Look, I know. I'm a pastor, so what? I know. I listen. Okay? People come here for the material. They come here for beauty. They come here to be beautiful. They come here for fitness and beauty. And they come here to see beautiful people. They come here for the material. And you know what? There's a franticness because you've got to get it. There was a beer commercial some years ago that you never forgot. Some of you might even be able to remember it. Some of you are old enough to remember it. It was a beer commercial that went, you only go around once in life and you've got to grab for all the gusto that you can. And that's why people are running around in New York. They're saying, I've got to get it. But you know what's interesting? You never can get it all in. And you know what? You get it for a while and then you begin to lose it. Christians, if you understand the doctrine of the resurrection, you will absolutely relax. And here's the reason why. Your future is a sensory future. Your future is a physical future. Let me explain. Kathy and I wish we could dance. We've never been in a physical condition to dance. And we certainly never will be again. You know, if we had any chance, we might have been able to do it for a little while. You know, if we wanted to dance, if we wanted to do athletic things, there was a little window and we missed our chance. We'll never do it now. Never? Never? Even Johnny Erickson. Remember the Christian woman who's a quadriplegic? She's been in a wheelchair almost all of her life. Even she knows that she's going to dance. Our, we will miss nothing because our future isn't a future where you go off into some kind of netherworld. Jesus stood among them. He didn't float among them. He had feet. His feet touched the ground. And this is the reason why Johnny Erickson says, I will dance in the kingdom of God. You're not going to miss anything. Okay, let me go on. Some of you have never had a good marriage. A, some of you have never been married. And some of you worry that you have, maybe you never will. And there are reasons why. Some of you are just being conscientious. Some of you just say, I want to marry somebody who's going to be my moral and spiritual partner. And you can't get married. And it doesn't seem to happen. And maybe it will. Maybe it won't. Some of you have been married and it was a terrible marriage. And now you say, well, at my age and after all this, I'll never have a good marriage. Never? No. The Bible says that there is a wedding feast waiting for you if you believe in him. And that wedding feast will have real wine at it. And there will be real arms around you. Look, we don't even understand all that that means. But we know this. Jesus says, I have waiting for you the wedding feast of the Lamb. And the best marriages in the history of the world at their very best moments are just dim echoes of what you are all going to experience through me. Never? Don't say that. Jonathan Edwards has this great little, Jonathan Edwards used to write little things down about heaven. And there's one place where he says, the new heavens and new earth. He says, if it's really true, looking at Jesus' resurrection body, all other religions say we're going to lose our individuality. We're going to lose our physicality. Christianity is the only one that says, we're going to go. We have five senses right now, but maybe he says we'll have a hundred senses in the future. Maybe we'll have a thousand senses. we now have suddenly found a surgical procedure that will give him sight. And before the surgery, he says to you, tell me, what is color like? What is light? I've seen nothing but thought. What is color like? What is light like? And you try and you try, but when he finally opens his eyes and he gets those new eyes, the day after the surgery, he opens those new eyes. He weeps because no matter how much you try to describe it, the glory of the reality of it was just too much. There was a part of the world that God created, the world that God created, that he just had never taken in before, and he just couldn't believe it. And he says, I've never seen anything like this. And Edwards is probably right in saying, you've only got five senses right now. You're tomatoes today compared to what you're going to be like. What will it be like? What will the glory and joy be of a hundred senses? Of a thousand senses? Now, what does this mean? You are going to miss nothing. Live without regrets, my friends. Don't say, I never climbed a mountain. Don't say, I've never danced. Don't say, I never had a happy marriage. Don't say, I never experienced this or experienced that. I never, I never, I never experienced that. Oh, if I could experience that. Don't you dare live life with any regrets. And you and you alone who understand the doctrine of the resurrection can live like this. You can live lordly. You can say, I'm going to do the right thing and I don't care what I miss out on because I'm missing out on nothing. Nothing. But you're not saying, like every other religion, sour grapes. Yes, I'm missing out on sex. Yes, I'm missing out on this. Yes, I'm missing out on riches. Yes, I'm missing out on success. Yes, I'm missing out on these things, but they're no good. They're not important. We're going to get beyond all that. That is a cosmic, theologically huge version of the old fox and the sour grapes Aesop's fable. Christians say, yes, I haven't experienced that. I haven't experienced that. I'm not going to cut corners to get there. I'm not going to kill myself to get there because those things are important and I will miss none of it. You see, it gives you rest. It makes you fight and it gives you rest. Think about that. It makes you unbelievably active and then completely peaceful. Not quite done. Thirdly, love. It teaches you love. The doctrine of the resurrection makes you incredibly active, but then turns around and makes you absolutely, you know, at peace. At peace. But then, ah, not yet. I'll tell you why it makes you an incredibly loving person. Here's the reason why. In secularism, when you die, you're over. And ultimately, there isn't any difference in the end between a person and a slug and a rock because personality is done. Your individual personhood is over. It's gone. And therefore, ultimately, it's insignificant. On the other hand, in the spiritualism, the idea that you kind of move on to another world or to another plane. Listen, listen. Oh, no. Jesus takes you home. Jesus does not say, as he says in John 14, he says, I go to prepare a place for you. He does, in my father's house. There are many mansions. There are many rooms. He doesn't say, I go to prepare a dimension for you. I go to prepare a plane of consciousness for you. He's taking you home. You know, you're not going to float there. You're going to dance there. You're not going to, you're not going to kind of vibrate there. You're going to eat there. You're going to drink there. You're going to learn there. You're going to love there. You're going to hug and be hugged there. And that means you are still going to be you. Now, you know what this means? Jesus keeps saying, it is I, it's me. And they look and they always see him. Now, you know how that works? See, they always say, it's me. He says, it's me because he's changed. But when they look carefully, they say, oh my gosh, it's you. Now, this is the closest I can get to this. He's continuous. He's still him. Imagine that you babysat a 10-year-old kid and you really love that girl. And what if you didn't see her for 15 years and she walks up to you and says, hi, do you know me? Absolutely not. You won't know her. And then she says, it's me. And she gives you her name and you look and you say, I knew you could be like this. It is you. I knew you'd be pretty. You know what the difference is? You know why I didn't recognize her? Because it was still her. But you see, an adult is a child unfolded. It was all in there. The seed was in there and now there's a flower. Okay? The acorn was in there and now there's the mighty oak. The child was there and it all came out. It all unfolded. Now, what this has got to mean is, this is telling us that we are going to know each other in heaven. More than that, it means... friends, invest in that, fan it, fertilize it, water it, invest in people because people last and relationships last. And what this means is when we get to heaven, you're going to look at each other and you're going to say, look, it's me. And you're going to, they're going to look at you and they're going to say, I always knew you could be like this. In your best times, I saw flashes of this, but only in your best times and only flashes. And now look at you. Now listen, that is the picture of heaven that we've got. Jesus says, it's me. Look. And what does that mean? That means personal relationships are of infinite value. There is no other view of the world. There is no other view of life that says your relationships will last forever. And the investments you're making in people, you see, the investments you're making in people now, they are going to explode. All the potentials of your heart and of your soul and of your body are going to explode in full force when you get there. And this is the reason why C.S. Lewis makes that wonderful, wonderful remark at the end of his sermon, The Weight of Glory. He says, it's a serious thing to remember that the dullest and most uninteresting person you talk to may one day be a creature which, if you saw it now, you would be strongly tempted to worship or else a horror and a corruption such as you now meet, if at all, only in a nightmare. All day long, we are in some degree helping each other to one or the other of these destinations. It is in the light of these overwhelming possibilities. It is with the awe and circumspection proper to them that we should conduct all our dealings with one another, all friendships, all loves, all play, all politics. There are no ordinary people. You have never talked to a mere mortal. Nations, cultures, arts, civilization, these are mortal. And their life is to ours as the life of a gnat. You got it? People mean something. The person next to you will live forever. The person next to you has got certain potentialities. They're either going to go out or they're going to blossom. And your part in them will lead to incredible joy on that day. And look at you, the things that you want to be, the things that you know in Christ you should be. Don't worry, afraid. It's going to happen. Have hope. The most messed up Christian, the most messed up person who becomes a Christian, the sky's the limit. Invest, love, relationships means everything. Now there's one more. And the last thing is, don't be afraid. That's what Jesus says, don't be afraid. He says, I'm a ghost. No, I'm not. See, they're afraid of the realm of the dead. And the whole idea, the whole idea behind the resurrection is that now that you know that he's back, you know your debt is paid and death can't do anything but make you better. You see, the reason that Jesus Christ's resurrection means so much to us is if he had died like us just to pay his own debt, then he'd be gone forever like we are. We died to pay our debt. He died to pay his debt. If that's true, then he'd never come back. But he came back, which means he died both innocent and as a substitute. He died for us. And the reason, no matter what you believe intellectually, the reason you are afraid of death and everybody's afraid of death is because deep down we know that on the day of death, we will get a payment due notice on the way in which we've lived our life that we do not have the ability to pay. But the Bible says, Paul says, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? He's mocking death. How can he do that? He's making fun of death. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? And he says the sting of death is sin. If you're a Christian and you see Jesus Christ walking in, you know that he paid for you. And that means you should be afraid of nothing because the worst thing that can happen to you today would only make you incredibly beautiful is death. I mean, if you're not afraid of death anymore, you don't have to be afraid of anything. You walk around in a lordly way. Do you believe in the doctrine of the resurrection? Are you living a fighting life? Are you living a peaceful life? Are you living an incredibly loving life, cherishing personal relationships? Are you living a fearless life? If not, you need to meet him now. And you know how you meet him now? Look at his wounds. You notice how he says, he says, it is I, look at my hands and my feet. Now, why would his hands and his feet prove anything? Only if it was his wounds. Listen, a lot of you have never met him personally. He's just a kind of cipher to you. He's just a concept to you because you've looked at his example. You've looked at him, his teaching. You've looked at him generally. You've got to look at his wounds. You have to look at him dying for you. You have to look at him dead for you. Well, you say, how can I do that? And the answer is, every single time. and then the persons are perplexed. They're very upset. Very upset. Remember the women? The women. The tomb is empty, and they're upset. Remember the two on the road to Emmaus? He was crucified, and they're upset. And right here, he shows up and he says, peace to you, and they're upset. Now, here's what goes on. This is how you meet Christ. Jesus Christ comes into your life with redemptive action, and you think it's bad for you. You think it's hostile. He comes in the empty tomb, the crucifixion. He shows up, peace with you. The way he always comes to you is he starts up by trying to put something in your life that disturbs you, upsets you, and is driving you toward him. Someday, if you find him, you'll look back. I mean, even Jesus Christ, isn't it amazing? Even Jesus Christ could be glad of his wounds. They were horrible to receive, but he was glad of them because of how God used them to redeem. And you, every Christian I know, eventually you will be glad of your wounds because you will know that the things that are troubling you right now, that are pushing you toward God, are really redemptive. He will push toward you. He will, with bad things in your life, he'll push you toward him. Then you have to look at his wounds and how you read the scripture. Every single time you're taken to the scripture, the angels, the angels said to the women back in the first part of Luke 24, they said, remember what he said. They didn't even give their opinion. Remember what he said. Jesus to the, in the road to Emmaus, he says, look at the scriptures. Jesus to the disciples says, look at the scriptures. If you look at the scriptures, especially the gospels, read about him dying, you will meet him. And then you will be people of fight, of peace, of love, of fearlessness. It's possible. Go to him.
