TITLE: The Lord’s Supper
SCRIPTURE: John 13:18-30
TOPICS: Sin
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-lords-supper/

============================================================

John 13, verses 18 through 30. And Jesus said, I am not referring to all of you. I know those I have chosen, but this is to fulfill the Scriptures. He who shares my bread has lifted up his heel against me. I am telling you now before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe that I am he. I tell you the truth, whoever accepts anyone I send accepts me, and whoever accepts me accepts the one who sent me. After he had said this, Jesus was troubled in spirit and testified, I tell you the truth, one of you is going to betray me. His disciples stared at one another at a loss to know which of them he meant. One of them, the disciple whom Jesus loved, was reclining next to him. Simon Peter motioned to this disciple and said, Ask him which one he means. Leaning back against Jesus, he asked him, Lord, who is it? Jesus answered, It is the one to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it in the dish. Then dipping the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas Iscariot, son of Simon. As soon as Judas took the bread, Satan entered into him. What you are about to do, do quickly, Jesus told him. But no one at the meal understood why Jesus said this to him. Since Judas had charge of the money, some thought Jesus was telling him to buy what was needed for the feast or to give something to the poor. As soon as Judas had taken the bread, he went out. And it was night. This is God's word. The subject of the passage is about, is sin. But it's also, in particular, it's how Jesus Christ deals with sin at the Lord's Supper, at the table. Now, somebody may be here saying, Oh, gosh, I come here hoping for a lift, you know. I come here hoping for some help with the problems of life, and I get another tirade from sin. I should have known better. This is the church, after all. And, look, for a moment, consider the possibility that hearing what the Bible says about sin might be the very thing that you actually do need for your problems. You know, the late, great psychologist Bruno Betelheim, who wrote a book, pardon me, Carl Menninger, who wrote a book, I think they're both late and great, but anyway, Carl Menninger said, Whatever Became of Sin? And he and a number of other psychologists recently have a very interesting thesis. They say there may be nothing more practical or more urgent to recover than the concept of sin. Some of these folks are saying, Here's the irony. In the name of helping people deal with guilt, we got rid of the concept of sin. It was a way of trying to help people deal with guilt. So instead of the concept of sin, we have maladaption, and we have hostility, and we have failure to cope, and we have addiction, and we have alienation, and all those things. But the irony is, these psychologists say, that the very effort to help people with guilt by getting rid of the concept of sin now may be actually hurting them, because without a concept of sin, what can you do about the indelibility of guilt? Without a good concept of sin, an understanding of sin, how do you repent? How do you get forgiven? How can you be cleansed? In fact, Otto Rank, now Otto Rank, an old Freudian, uses the Freudian language, which is a little bit out of date now, but Otto Rank puts it this way. He says, and this is a remarkable statement, the neurotic type suffers from a consciousness of sin just as much as did his religious ancestor without believing in the conception of sin. And this is precisely what makes him neurotic. He feels himself a sinner without a word for it. Pascal put it a little better, but no less poignantly, a few years before that, when he said, and we quoted this in the bulletin a couple weeks ago, Pascal says, nothing offends us more than the doctrine of sin, yet without this mystery, the most incomprehensible of all, we are most incomprehensible to ourselves. See, maybe there is nothing more practical than sin, the concept of sin, because otherwise, how do you deal with the things that bind you? That's what they're saying. Nothing more practical, because there's no way out of the indelibility of guilt unless you understand sin, unless you can define sin, unless you know what to do with it. And this passage is about sin. But it's also about sin in a particular situation, at the Lord's table. Now, forgive me, Leonardo, but for a moment, we're going to have to get rid of the Da Vinci painting in our mind, because in that Da Vinci painting of The Last Supper, you've got everybody sitting upright, you know, and they're all going like this in different degrees. Well, the point is, that's not the way it was. The way these folks would have been sitting at the table is they wouldn't have been sitting. They would have been all lying on camera. toward the table. And that means, you see, when you would eat together, you were up close. To eat at the Lord's table meant that you were, he was close to you and you were close to him. And you were extremely visible to him. It's a place of intimacy. And that's the reason why Jesus Christ, when he meets you at the table, where he says he is most present, he notices things. He notices things. Why is it that three times he brings up the subject, now there's only two times he brings it up in this passage, but if you read the entire chapter 13, you'll see three times he drops the broadest hint, somebody at this table is a betrayer. Why does he keep bringing it up? Because when Jesus Christ comes to meet us at the table, he will not overlook sin. He's going to say something about it. And therefore, every time you come to the table, it's right for us to say, Lord, is it me? Am I the betrayer? Who is it? Is it me? Now, I suggest that there's two very important truths in this passage, which we have got to use in order to examine ourselves as we come to the table this morning. The two truths are this, that sin is a betrayal of the Lord and that the Lord at his table loves to melt betrayers. Sin is, the Lord is betraying the Lord. That's what this teaches. But on the other hand, that when you get to the table, how does the Lord deal with betrayers? He seeks to melt them. He seeks to melt their heart. Look, on the one hand, this passage teaches us that sin is betrayal. There's a lot of ways that the Bible talks about sin. We're constantly getting different images or paradigms or models, and here's one of them. What does the word betray mean? And I would propose here today that you'll best understand it if you see it has two aspects to it. The first aspect of the word betray, the word betray literally means to deliver, to get something off your hands. The word betray shows up a lot of times in the Bible, and usually it's in the old authorized version, it's translated deliver. And it really means to take something off your hands, to get rid of your obligations. Joseph, remember Joseph? He was a snotty kid, and his older brothers all hated him. So they betrayed him. They sold him into slavery. They got rid of him, so they didn't have to listen to his stupid stories any longer. Delilah had Samson as a boyfriend. He was a problem. She was continually trying to betray him into the hands of the Philistines. What this means is, to betray means to take someone and to remove their power over you, to do something to obviate that power, to do something to take that power out. Judas, we're not totally sure what Judas's motives were. We certainly know there's a lot of people of the speculate, but from what we can tell, this is what Judas was doing. Judas felt that Jesus' claims to be king were dangerous. Maybe he thought they were socially, politically dangerous. Maybe he said, the Jewish independent movement is going to be scuttled by this man's ridiculous claims of not just being a great leader, but the king of the universe and the judge of all the earth and the cosmic son of God. And therefore, we've got to take this guy out. Or maybe, maybe he was offended by Jesus' personal claims of lordship over his individual life. We saw last week that Jesus doesn't just say, I'm your teacher. He says, you call me teacher and lord, and you're right, for that is what I am. And Judas was wrestling with that and saying, well, it's one thing to be my teacher, but it's another thing to say, I'm your teacher and my king. Nobody has the right to tell me what to do. Judas betrayed Jesus. What does betray mean? It means to put Jesus in a condition where Judas no longer had to deal with Jesus' power and authority and control of his life. The Bible tells us that the essence of sin is what? Is the essence of sin the violation of the law, murder, rape, and robbery? Of course, those are sins, but the essence of sin is something more subtle and more deep and more profound. The essence of sin is to say to God, I don't need you, and I don't want your grubby hands on my life. I want to get rid of the power you've got over me. I don't mind you around if you're just a teacher, but not teacher and lord. In the prodigal son, remember the prodigal son parable? What does the young man do? He asks his father for his wealth now, and he says, all I want you to do is give me what is mine and leave me alone. Sin is simply the determination to be independent of God. When Billy Joel says, leave me alone. Get out of my life. This is my life. When you say that to a person, that's rude. If you say it to God, it's the essence of sin. And when I was in college, when I was wrestling with these very claims, I began to see, like Judas, something that really began to horrify me. As the closer I got to Christ and the more I looked to see what he really was like and what he taught, I began to realize, like Judas, that Jesus would not stay in the role of a consultant. Jesus doesn't say, I'm your teacher. He says, I'll be your teacher and Lord. See, a consultant, a teacher is somebody, you consultants know that, is somebody who, you know, you ask for their advice and they give you a report and then you can do what you want with it. You can put it on the shelf or you can follow it or you can put part of it on the shelf and follow part of it. I began to realize, like Judas, that Jesus didn't want to just be a consultant, wouldn't stay in the role of consultant, but he wanted to be my CEO, not my consultant. And during the process of that wrestling, there was a, Tim Rice and Andrew Lloyd Webber, I don't know what happened to Tim Rice, but I know what happened to Andrew Lloyd Webber, wrote a rock opera called Jesus Christ Superstar. And in that rock opera, there is a mocking, jeering song called Herod's Song. And Herod, in the song, is getting rid of Jesus. At the very end, he doesn't sing the very last words of the song, he shouts the last words of the song. Remember what he says? He says, get out, you king of the Jews, get out of my life. And I used to make my skin crawl when I heard that because I realized I could hear the true accents of my own heart in his jeering snarl. I realized that's exactly what my own heart wanted to say if it had the guts. And I suggest this to you, that if you don't recognize the true accents of your heart in that jeering snarl, get out, you king of the Jews, get out of my life. If you don't know that that really is something in your heart, that that is the most deep and profound tendency and impulse of your heart, you don't know your own heart. This is the teaching of this passage implicitly. It's the teaching of the Bible explicitly. It says in Romans 8, 4, it says the natural heart is enmity toward God. It will not submit to the law of God. Indeed, it cannot. Now, that is the radical doctrine of sin that many people find too radical for their own tastes. What that means is that betrayal, that an absolute hatred of the power and authority claims of Jesus Christ is something that your heart has to overwhelmingly, inevitably, how it must overwhelmingly, inevitably respond. You see, if you create a kind of false image of Christ, if you develop a view of Christ in which he's your consultant, you can live with him. But if you ever start to get an understanding of what he really claims to be, if you ever get close to the real Christ, if you get close to the teaching that paints you the picture of the real Christ, something underneath is going to make you squirm terribly, your heart wants to do anything it can do to get Jesus Christ out of your life, to get his clammy hands off of your life, to get his authority off of your life. And there's another way to put it. Sin, therefore, is paranoia. Sin is spiritual paranoia. Because, you see, what Jesus Christ comes to you to say at the table as we're going to see in a second here, what he says to Jude is, what he's saying to you is he's saying, my dear friend, I want your glory. You must obey. You can't pick and choose between my laws. You have to obey all of them. You have to let my word and my spirit, you must submit completely to my word and my spirit if you're ever going to achieve that glory, my beloved. And what does the human heart say? Get away. I can't breathe. I need my options open. I need my freedom. Sin is paranoia. Sin is insanity. Sin is betrayal. But now, that's only the first half. I said, sin is betrayal. And the first half of betrayal means I've got to get this person's power off of my life somehow. I've got to put this person in a condition where he can no longer control me. But the second half of betrayal is you're doing this to somebody to whom you owe that power. If you say to somebody, I don't need you and I owe you nothing. Get out of my life. That's impolite. If it's true that you don't need or owe him anything. But if you do need and owe him everything, then this is betrayal. Look, these things are illegal. Didn't you hear? You know, there's... it the president of this university here in Manhattan, that was accused of plagiarism. He was a scientist. And a woman came by later on and said, this man was part of a study group, and I was part of that group, and this man took the research the group did and published it as if it was his own. Do you remember that? Every so often that comes up. What's that called? It's called plagiarism. Why is it so heinous? Why is it illegal? Why does it ruin careers? Because what a person is doing is they're betraying. They're betraying the group. What they're doing is they're saying, I don't need you, and I owe you nothing, when they need and owe them everything. It's taking authority that is not yours. It's assuming prerogatives that you don't have a right to. It's a refusal to acknowledge your debt. That's plagiarism. That's illegal. That's betraying somebody by saying, I don't need you when you do need them. Saying, I owe you nothing when you do owe them everything. See, that's the second half of betrayal. Not only are you trying to get rid of somebody and get their power off of you, but these are people, this is somebody to whom you owe this submission. Or here's another example of it, and that's treason. You see, if during a war you capture somebody from the attacking country trying to overthrow and shoot down and kill your people, what do you do with them? If you're in a battle and there's somebody from the other country, what do you do with them if you capture them? You put them in a prisoner of war camp. Because you see, they're trying to get rid of your power, but on the other hand, they're from the other country, and therefore you put them in the prisoner of war camp. But what if you find somebody from your own country trying to shoot down your officers? What if you find somebody from your own country trying to overthrow your government? You execute them. Why? Because that's treason. Well, what's the difference between treason? Aren't they both trying to do the same thing? What's the difference? The difference is the person from your country is refusing to acknowledge his or her debt. Now look, if plagiarism, if treason are so bad, these things are ingratitude, an unwillingness to acknowledge debt, then how much worse is the cosmic betrayal and the cosmic treason and the cosmic spiritual plagiarism and the cosmic sin of not giving to God his due? What does it mean to betray the Lord? What it means to betray the Lord is simply to act as if you have got rights that you don't have. To say, get out of my life when you really owe him everything. If you're moderately religious, instead of saying, I owe you everything, I am completely in your debt, you have not understood what you really owe your Lord, and you're betraying him. Look, a couple years ago, here's the story. There was a young couple that moved into a house, rented a room. There was an old elderly lady who had no heirs, no children, and she owned this huge house, but she had neither the physical capacity nor the economic wherewithal to maintain that house. And she took them in as tenants. And you see, people for many years have been telling her, you need to move out of that house, you need to sell the house, you need to do something with that house, but it's dangerous for you to be there. But she would not admit her inadequacy. She wouldn't admit her weakness physically, she wouldn't admit her weakness economically. And this young couple moved into the house, and they lived there for 12 years as tenants. They had three children, and they stayed in that one little room during those 12 years. And they were so faithful with her. They took care of her when she was sick. They ran errands for her. They maintained the house. They repaired the house. They improved the house. There was no way she could even have stayed in the house, and yet she continued to keep them in that strange little room. One day, after the many years, a distant cousin of hers came to town, sat down and saw the situation, and really had a tongue lashing, gave her a tongue lashing, boxed her ears. And after that, she came to this young couple with tears in her eyes, and she said, you know what? I've been a fool. The only reason that I've been able to live in this house is you. The only reason that this house has got any value to it is you. Otherwise, it would have deteriorated. The only reason that I'm alive today is you. I have no rights over this house. I have no right to own it. I have no right to run it. I'm completely indebted to you, and yet I have continued to keep you, the tenant, and I have continued to keep the prerogatives of the owner. And you have been so uncomplaining, and you've been so patient, your patience has melted my heart. I'm going to do as I should have done a long time ago. I'm going to do justice today. I give you the... this house. Let your family fill it up. Decorate it as you want. Let the house be filled with your lives and with your joy. And all I need, all I ever needed was one room. Let me be your tenant. Let me live in this room. And there was a lot of hugging. There was a whole lot of kissing and weeping. And this older lady felt the burden of the house at last fall off of her back when she admitted it really wasn't her house. When she admitted she couldn't run this house. When she admitted she couldn't be the owner. And when she acknowledged the fact that these people had, that this couple had earned the house. That this couple was due the house. what does it mean for you today to acknowledge your debt? It means to come to Jesus Christ and to say, my dear Lord, I asked you into my life some years ago. Maybe I've tried to deal with you, but I see today that the only reason that I'm alive today is because of you. The only reason I've been able to live is because of you. The only reason that my life has any value is because of you. And yet I continue to live a life in which I tell you what to do. I continue to say, get your grubby hands off my life. I continue to say, see a lot of you, right friends, have not, a lot of you Christian friends have not said, Lord, get out of my house. But what you've said is, Lord, stay out of those rooms. This is my house. This is my life. You don't tell me what to do over there. You stay over here. You stay over here. I can run this thing. When will you come to him with tears in your eyes and say, my life would be of no value without you. I owe you everything. I deed to you the house. Let me stay on as the tenant. And what a burden will happen when it falls off. And when you begin to finally realize, yes, he's my Lord. That's what I need. I need to show him and to give him what is his due. I've been betraying him. Now look, one other thing. If you come here today and you recognize that you have been betraying him, some of you Christian friends are just simply, some of you are sad, some of you are full of self-pity, some of you are depressed, because you have not, through an act of the will, been continually saying to Jesus, reminding yourself of what you owe him. You see, spiritual plagiarism, betrayal, is a form of, is basically ingratitude. If you don't every day by an act of the will remind yourself of what you owe him and what he's done for you, you're going to have the depression, you're going to have the anger, you're going to have the self-pity. Why are you dying on the vine out there? Admit the fact that you have been betraying him, at least to that degree. Some of the rest of you will admit that there are certain whole rooms, whole areas of your house, of your life, that you're saying to the Lord, you stay out of that. That is not yours. Get your grubby hands off that part of my life. And when are you going to see that you have really betrayed him? He deserves the whole house. Now, if you come to the table here, what can you expect from him? What do you expect? What does he do to Judas? There's a betrayer at the table. Well, what does he do? Does Jesus Christ get up and say, you know, especially, for example, when John asks him, who is it? Does Jesus Christ get up and say, men, there's a traitor at the table, there's a scum, there's a disease, there's a louse here, and that's the man. Is that what he does? We're told that Jesus Christ continually brings the subject up and even at the end gives Judas, personally serves Judas some bread. And we're also told that nobody at the table knew who the heck the traitor was. Why is Jesus so discreet? Why is he so careful? Why won't he tell anybody else? Because he's not trying to shatter Judas. He's trying to melt his heart. He's not trying to condemn Judas. He's trying to convert Judas. He's not trying to keep Judas from partaking. He's trying to get Judas to understand what the meal means and what he's doing. And he says to Judas, I see you and I love you. Come on. You know, when I play chess with my little children, how do you play chess with a little kid you love? You say, the kid starts to move and you say, do you really want to make that move? Do you see where my queen is? Do you see what's going to happen if you move there? You will be devastated. Do you see where you are? Everybody gets here then like if we call her brother. And so the queen is собой, and she many things like the queen. So, help me. Help me. You really want to make that move? Do you see where my queen is? Do you see what's going to happen if you move there? You will be devastated. Don't make that move. I see you, and I love you. Don't make that move, because if you do make that move, you're going to lose. What is Jesus saying to the betrayers at his table? He doesn't say, get out, you king of the Jews. He doesn't say that. Get out of my life. He would never treat us the way we treat him. Never. What is he saying? He says, I see you, and he does it in the most discreet way. He doesn't tell your friends. Some of you are at this table with some really bad things in your life. Some of you wouldn't want anyone else to know just how consumed with anger you are today. Some of you wouldn't want anyone to know how consumed with envy you are today. Some of you wouldn't want anyone to know how consumed with fantasies you are today, which is basically envy. Some of you wouldn't want anyone to know just how wracked with guilt you are about something. Get this. He won't tell anybody. This is the loving Savior. He's here, though, to melt you. He's saying, I see you, and I love you, and I want you to get rid of these things. He is not saying, don't partake. He's saying, understand what it means to partake. Drop the things in your life that are keeping you from full submission to my authority. I am your life. Do you hear him? Don't you dare stay hard under the love of the Savior who burns bright and hot for you. Don't you dare. You say, oh, but my heart is, I'm scared, I'm scared to really obey him, to really step out and obey him and trust him today. I'm scared of it. I don't have the courage for it. Dear friends, courage is not the absence of fear. Courage is the determination to do what you fear. And he is saying, I'll take you by the hand and I'll lead you right there. What should you say to him today? You should say, your patience has melted my heart. I deed to you the entire house. So come to the table with me. Let's pray. Our Father, as we prepare your supper, prepare to eat your supper, here's what we ask, that you would enable us to see what it means to look at ourselves today, because every single one of us knows to some degree or another we're betraying you. We haven't been grateful to you, and as a result, there's a lack, a corresponding lack of joy in our lives. Some of us have certain areas of our life that we have simply shut the door against you and said, stay out of that part. No, I don't want your power there. Father, help us today to open those doors to your son. Father, there are some people here today who perhaps realize that they have never, ever given themselves to your son, have never let him into their lives at all. Enable them to do that too. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
