TITLE: The Parable of the Seed: On Hidden Power
SCRIPTURE: Luke 13:18-21
TOPICS: Discipleship and Spiritual Growth The Holy Spirit Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: The Parables of Jesus 1994
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-parable-of-the-seed-on-hidden-power/

============================================================

I'd like to bring some announcements here to you before we proceed and get into the teaching. We're going to draw our teaching. It's short. That's promising, you say? Luke chapter 13, verse 18 to 21. Then Jesus asked, until it worked all through the dough. This is God's Word. I keep noticing how when Christianity is ever treated in the newspaper, when it's treated on TV, when I hear people talk about it, in New York in particular, Christianity is discussed and seen as a cultural or intellectual position, a set of cultural or philosophical ideas. And so people tend to talk about Christianity something like this. They say, well, you know, there are various positions, there's various points of view on the nature of God and the nature of the soul and morality and ethics and the meaning and purpose of life. And there are these various positions and the Christian position is one of them. And so when people come to Christianity around New York, I've noticed, they kind of come at it like that. They try it on the way somebody tries on a dress, you know, looking to see whether it brings out your best parts and hides your worst parts. And so people come to Christianity and they say, I've got a set of intellectual and personal needs and issues and problems. And I'm looking at Christianity to see what, whether or not it seems to address these personal and social problems that concern me. And I like this that it says, and I like this that it says, but I don't know that I agree with this over here. And that's how people approach Christianity very often. And I must say that many people come into the church that way. They assume the position, they try, they adopt it. In fact, there's many people who've always been in the church that way. But Paul, in 1 Corinthians 4 verse 20, St. Paul in his letter, the first letter of the Corinthians says, the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. Now this, this is awfully basic, but every time I say it to myself, it hits me again. The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. It is possible, Paul says, in a sense to adopt Christianity in word. That means to say, I accept the position, I accept the point of view, I accept the ideals, I accept the beliefs. You can accept it very well. You can understand it very well. You can even defend the faith to other people and yet not have received it as it really is as a power, a power. Paul says, I am not ashamed of the gospel. Why? For it is what? A great idea. It is a tremendous message. Well, it is. You see, it is a great idea. Christianity, it has a philosophy. It has a point of view on everything. In fact, it revolutionizes your view of everything. Christianity. But the philosophy, but the idea is an expression of the power. Christianity is in essence a power. There are people in the church. There are lots of people in the church. There have been people in the church for years that have it in word, but not as it really is. And therefore they don't, they're not really Christians. Not as a power. What do I mean by that? I'll tell you what I mean. Do you look at your life? Do you ever look at your life and say, look at that. Look at that in my life. Look. It's amazing that that's there or that that's not there anymore. Look at that. It's amazing that that's there. It's inexplicable. It's inexplicable that that's true of me now. It's inexplicable except with reference to the intervention of some power that's come in. Do you understand that? Can you look at your life and say, this is absolutely inexplicable with reference to natural causes? How can I do this? How can I do this? How can I do this? Do you understand that? Can you look at your life and say, this is absolutely inexplicable with reference to natural causes. How could I be like this? Isn't it amazing? Now, if you don't speak of yourself that way, if there's nothing remarkable about your life, if there's nothing inexplicable in terms of natural forces and powers, you're not a Christian. Paul says the kingdom of God is not in word, it's in power. People come in and they say, I believe this and I believe that because they approach it that way. They say, well, I like this kind of part of, I know Christianity teaches this and I like that, but Christianity also teaches this and I don't know about that, but I can take a little bit of that. Well, maybe I can take the whole thing. Well, they don't come at it as it is, a power. Now, see, Jesus, without using the word, is saying the same thing here. He is saying Christianity is a ruling power. It's not just a set of ideals. It has a set of ideals. Christianity is not just about forgiveness. A lot of people say that's what Christianity is about. It's about the love of God and how he forgives. It's not just about that. That's wonderful. It leads to forgiveness. But boy, if that's all I have, if all Christianity is, is saying, now God will forgive you. You just, as long as you really are sorry and you really try your best, God will forgive you. God save us from that. God save us if that's Christianity. To think that I'm out on my own with Jesus Christ as the worst possible thing he could be, an example. God save me from Jesus as an example. If that's what he is and that's all he is, an ideal. I'm down in the dust all the time. I'm constantly feeling terrible. Jesus as an ideal is the worst thing possible. God save me from him. But if Christianity is a power, if it's Christ's power come into you, if it's Christ's life come into you, then you're a Christian indeed. Now, what does Jesus tell us about that? I mean, that's the point. That's the point of the parables. The kingdom of God. Christianity is a kingdom. It's a ruling power. The kingdom is not in word, but in power. Now, Jesus in these two parables, very tiny little parables, they're really not parables, they're metaphors. They're called parables in many of the books, but they're really metaphors. He tells us something about the nature of this power. And the two things we see is all we're going to look at here this morning. The two things that we see, there's plenty of other things we could say. The two things we see about the nature of this power are very important for us because I've just told you that you may be a person thinking you're a Christian, but you've got word only and not power. Well, how do you know? How do you receive this power? And how can you tell if you're a person in word only and not in power? Well, let's take a look. Check yourself out. Jesus, first of all, tells us that Christianity is the power of life. And then secondly, he tells us that Christianity is the power of growth. This power that comes into our life is a power of life. It's an organic power. It's a living power, a seed. But then secondly, it's the power of growth because both the seed and the yeast grow. And so, let's just take a look at these two things because if you, Christianity is hidden power. It's growing power, not necessarily explosive power. Yeast and seeds don't explode. You see, they ooze. They work. They take time. But they're living power. It's not the power of dynamite. It's not a chemical power. It's an organic thing. Now, I just said it all, but now let's break it down. First, the power that the Bible talks about that must come into your life if you're a Christian. The power of the kingdom is the power of new life. What it means to become a Christian is not just simply to get a set of ideals or even just simply to, which is very important, by the way. It's part of being a Christian. Of course, you change your mind. Of course, you have a new set of ideals. And being a Christian isn't just getting forgiven, as wonderful as that is. Being a Christian, entering the kingdom of God, having the kingdom of God enter you, same thing, is to be raised to a new order of life. Now, let's look at that first metaphor. You have here a seed that goes into the dirt. Now, if you were thoughtless, if you didn't reflect for a minute, you would think that the dirt, of course, is a lifeless thing. The seed is a living thing. Not exactly. And those of you who've studied it all in this area, those of you who've got any background in earth sciences and so on know that real dirt, good dirt, can grow things because it's already filled with organic chemicals. It's organic. It's got lots of stuff in there that's organic. But when you introduce the seed and a tree begins to grow, what happens is you're being lifted to a higher order of organic life. Now, this is exactly what it means when the Bible tells us that we're born again. You're not a Christian if you're a Christian in word only, but in power. What's it mean? You've got to be, you got to receive a seed. That's what Jesus is saying. And the Bible everywhere tells us what that seed is. First Peter 1.23, you have been born again, not of perishable seed, but of imperishable. Through the living and enduring word of God, the word preached to you. James 1.18, here's another part of the New Testament. He chose to give us birth through the word of truth that we might be the first fruits of his creation. John 3, unless you're born of the Spirit, you cannot enter the kingdom of God. Or 2 Peter 1.4, through his great and very precious promises, you are participating in the divine nature, and so you escape the corruption that's in the world. Now, what are they all saying? Same thing. What it means to be a Christian is not just to get forgiveness and not just to receive ideals and adopt a set of principles. It is to be born again. Now, to be born again means to receive eternal life, to receive a seed from outside. John 3 calls it the Spirit of God. 2 Peter 1, we just saw, calls it the divine nature. The life substance of God, in some way, comes in from outside and breaks in. See? In 1 Peter, Peter calls it an imperishable seed. That's what Jesus is talking about. Now, what does it mean to be born again? You see, a lot of people think born-again Christianity is a kind of Christianity, but don't you see? Everything the Bible says is the only kind of Christianity. Without it, there's no power. There's word only. And the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. It's not a kingdom. You're not in the kingdom. So, what does this mean? It means that you are raised from a lower level to a higher order of life. Now, let me put it to you a couple ways. An animal is a higher level of life than plants. Why? Because the vegetable order of life is a kind of life. And yet, to an animal or to a human being, to live at the vegetable level of life is not to be living at all. We call it a living death. In other words, the level of life for a lower level is like just existence for the higher level. A person might be on life support. The person might have no brain waves. The person, we call them, are in a vegetable state. They're alive, but not really in the full sense of the word life when it comes to being applied to humanity. That person's existing, but not living. Each higher order of life is so much above the next lower level, the next lower level that life at that lower level is like existence, not really living. And the Bible says that when you receive eternal life, when you're born again, you are pushed into a higher level of life compared to where you just were. Where you just were was mere existence. Let me just give you a quick example. How do you take a look at plant life, animal life, and human life? I've done this before, but I'm going to pull it out in a little bit more detail. In thinking, in willing, and in feeling, in thinking and acting and in feeling, you can see each order of life is far higher than the one before. So far higher as to almost call the one before mere existence compared to the next higher. Let me show you. For example, thinking. Plants, anything that's alive is capable of sensation. That's what all the books tell me. I'm not, you know, scientifically trained. All the books tell me anything that's alive has sensation. In other words, it has some way of sensing what's there. But plants can sense some things, but animals, of course, have the five senses. Plants can't see or hear. So there's a lot of things that are there that plants can't sense. Okay, so you move up to animals. They've got the five senses. But when you move to human beings from the animals, there are all sorts of things because animals aren't rational that they can't sense. Is there any difference between justice and injustice? Is there any difference? You're a human the difference? Animals can. Something that's there. Justice, injustice, something that's there, they can't sense. Beauty, ugliness, right, wrong. See, justice, tragedy. Animals can't sense it. Human life is so far above animal life that if a human being is living at the animal level, we say that person's in a living death. If an animal is living at the plant level, we say that animal, in a sense, is in a living death. Right? Why? In the area of thinking, sensation, each order of life sees more of what's there. Okay, let me take you in a second way. Let me compare the orders of life in a second area. Not thinking, but willing. Acting. Do plants act? Yes, they can respond. They respond to stimuli. But their responses are completely automatic. Animal responses are a little less automatic. Human responses are even less automatic. In other words, the higher the level of being, the higher the level of life, the more you're able to actually have a kind of self-mastery. The more you have what we call volition, the more you have the ability to choose, the more you have the ability to reflect. The lower forms of life just respond, instincts, response, you see, biological response. But the higher orders of life, as you move on up, they have more and more self-mastery, more and more ability to choose. And then last of all, thinking, willing, feeling. We wouldn't say that plants have any feelings at all. We would say that animals seem to have the rudiments of feeling. But can an animal grieve like a human being can grieve? Because a human being knows the difference. Remember we said these things between justice and injustice, between beauty and ugliness. Can an animal rejoice the way a human being can rejoice? No. In other words, higher orders of life bring about themselves with them higher orders of thinking, of acting, and of feeling. When you are born again, you are pushed into a new order of life that is higher than the order of life in which you were. In comparison to where you were, you were dead. Do you understand that? That's the reason why the Bible continually says, You were dead in your trespasses and sins. I brought you alive. You were just dirt, but I put in the seed of God's life. And now there's all this vegetation, there's all this, you see, there's all this new life, new, a higher order of life. How so? I'll just summarize it, but we'll get back to it in a second. A person who has eternal life sees things that before you didn't know were there. Divine realities, the holiness of God, the love of God, the substitutionary atonement of Jesus Christ, heaven, hell, these things, you see. They're there. And they weren't there before. They were just maybe ideas, phantoms, you know. Maybe, and they were boring maybe, or they were, maybe they were even nonsense. But when you're eternal life, they're there. There. You're at a new order of life. Or secondly, secondly, you have the ability to break habits that you never had before. You see, before you get into eternal life, before you experience that life, there's all sorts of ways in which you felt like a slave, all sorts of things that you felt you couldn't change. You were reacting instead of acting. But now you find yourself able to do things you couldn't do before, able to break habits you couldn't break before. New order of life. And then thirdly, feeling. You feel the love of God in your heart. Let me tell you something. It's wonderful to have a dog love you. That gets something. We've got a cat. I didn't like cats. I've come to like this cat. This cat sleeps at my feet at night. There's a hole in your heart. There's a room in your heart that when an animal comes and loves you and you love it, it opens that room. Nothing like a child. Nothing like a spouse. But nothing like a God. Those things are nothing like God. It opens. Your heart was built for the love of God. And not until you, not just believe it, not just think about it, not just, you know, say, well, it's a possibility, or even I believe that God is alive. Not until it's shed abroad. for. A whole new order. A whole new order of life. Have you experienced that? In other words, what Paul says, what Peter says, what John says, and what Jesus is trying to say right here. Being a Christian is to have the foundations shaken of your life. Becoming a Christian is to have your life turned inside out. Has that happened to you? That's the most thoroughgoing question I can ask you. Has that happened to you? Or do you have the kingdom of God in word only and not in power? Now, secondly, the second thing we see here is the importance that this power, though organic, as I've tried to show you, it's the power of a new order of life, this power, secondly, is the hidden, gradual, secret power of growth. Both the seed grows and the yeast it grows. It's very interesting because the power of the yeast and the power of the seed is kind of deceptive almost. For example, here's the seed, a mustard seed. If you've ever seen a mustard seed, it's very, very small. That's the reason that Jesus has brought it out. It's much smaller than an acorn, much smaller than a walnut, much smaller than a tree. It's something that would grow a tree. Most seeds that grow trees are a lot bigger. Jesus shows us the tiniest seed, saying, boy, there's no way that a tree would grow out of this. Let me ask you, if a mustard seed were to have a head-on collision with a slab of sidewalk concrete, who would win? Well, the sidewalk every time. And we also know if you stick a seed underneath the sidewalk, give it a few years, and there's no contest. The seed will crack the concrete. That's the power of gradual growth. The seed is organic. It brings out life. The slab is inorganic. It's a whole higher order of being, you see. And, of course, if you just have a collision, people feel like, I'm a Christian. If I become a Christian, I want my problems to just roll off me. See? I want them to crack, and I want them to roll off of me. Anyway, instead, we have the hidden power of the kingdom of God. We have the power of inevitable, gradual, secret, but relentless growth. And that comes into you. You're a partaker in the divine nature when you're born again. Well, you see, the yeast is the same thing. The yeast is another wonderful metaphor for what actually happens. The yeast comes into the dough, and it doesn't replace the dough, but it transforms the dough into its likeness. It comes up, and it takes the dough with it. In the same way, the Spirit of God, the new life, comes into your life, and it doesn't replace your personality. You don't become robotic. You see? You don't go automatic. You're still you. You've got your temperament. You've got your personality. You've got your gifts. But the attributes of God himself, his love, his wisdom, his power, his strength, his holiness, come inside you and rise and take you with it. And you really become yourself. The attributes of God in your personality, the yeast in the dough, on it goes. Now, what does this mean? It means the way you know that you are a Christian is not necessarily that all of your problems have cracked and fallen off. It may take a while for that mustard seed to destroy that sidewalk, but it will. It will. Well, how do you tell that you have this life? Are you growing? It's pretty simple. Let's go back to those three areas in which you can see the higher order of life. Are you growing in your thinking? Are you growing in your acting? Are you growing in your feeling? It's pretty simple. Let's look at the thinking. Remember what I said before? Here's how you tell that you have new life. The ideas become more than ideas about God. His holiness isn't just a concept. His love isn't just a concept. Jesus dying on the cross isn't just a concept. These become realities that thrill you, that search you, that disturb you, you see, that burn you, but they become real, solid. Let me tell you, the way you know that you're a Christian, the way you know that this life is advancing in you, is there are things that are more there than they've ever been. The death of Christ is more than... is more there. Do you know what I mean? Experienced Christians, you know what I mean. These things that you used to have to hold on to, they're more and more there. The there-ness of them. You can't avoid them. You see them. You can't imagine life without them. They become more and more there. They affect you. Secondly, and this follows, how is it possible that a Christian is someone who grows, as I said before, in self-mastery? You become more and more a human being the more you grow as a Christian because you can choose. You're not just a creature of your instincts. You're not a plant. You're not an animal. You're not even just a non-Christian human anymore. Here's why. Why? The more God's wisdom gets more real than the threats of life and you don't worry. Why are you worried? Because the threats of life are more real than God's wisdom. Why are you bitter? Because the mercy of God is not as real as what people have done to you. What Jesus has done for you isn't as real as what people have done to you. And that's why you're bitter. Your bitterness leaves to the degree that the there-ness of what Jesus has done for you grows. If what God has, what Jesus has done for you becomes more real than what people have done to you, you forgive. Why are some of you down so much on yourself? You hear the criticism. But what Jesus has said to you, I love you. I gave myself for you. What Jesus has said to you becomes more real than what other people have said to you. And you know what happens? You're not bitter anymore the more you grow in Christ. You're not depressed, not as much, gradually, bit by bit, the power of the seed. And you become more of a human being, more of an individual. You're not controlled by your circumstances. You're not controlled by what people say. You're not controlled. You're not an animal anymore. You're not a vegetable. You're not just stimulus response. You're responding to who God is. And you're more human than you've ever been. You're growing in this life. It's rising and it's taking you with it. It's making you something great. Last of all, you grow in your feeling. You grow in your feeling. I already kind of alluded to this, but I'll tell you something. The more you understand, as I just said, the more your thinking grows, the more you're able to see the realities of God, the more your behavior changes and you're able to have control of your life. But also, the more you see the great things that God has done for you, the more your heart gets so huge and gets so soft. Listen, when you realize what the gospel teaches, that because of what Jesus Christ did on the cross, God accepts you. He delights in you and he loves you no matter how weak you are. If you believe in him, no matter how weak you are, he delights in you and he loves you as much as the most glorious saint in heaven today. It means that his love and his honor for you knows no diminution, knows no degrees. He loves you as much... God loves you as much as he loves his own son, the Bible tells us. Jesus says, I want you to love them even as you loved me. When that sinks in, you realize your heart was made for this. There is no greater emotion than to get your heart wrapped around that. There is nothing else like it. You have never known what feeling is until you feel that, until you feel that. Don't you see how lyrical the gospel is? I'll go so far as to say how romantic the gospel is. As a messenger of the gospel, I can look at you right now and I can say, it doesn't matter in what condition you walked into this room, you can leave a different person. Utterly changed because something has come into you because you've received it today that will change you forever. I can say that. I can say no matter what you've done, no matter how you feel, no matter what your record is, you can be utterly different today. Somebody can... God can plant his seed in you. And it will grow more and more and more unto eternal life, the rest of your life, all unto eternity. Do you see? Are those things happening to you? Christian friends, can you see progress? You know, on the one hand, I want to say to you, to those of you who are discouraged, don't be so discouraged. What do you want? Do you want things to crack? I mean, you're American, so you're impatient, right? You know, everybody who's not an American knows this about Americans. Do you have any non-American friends? They know how impatient you are. They know you want things done tomorrow. You know, but the point is, do you understand, those of you who are discouraged, that this is hidden in gradual power? But on the other hand, those... you spending time in the Word? Are you spending time before God? Are you using the gospel to get near Him in prayer? Are you spending time with the people of God? Are you spending time in worship? You see, this growth needs to be happening. Is it happening? Why not? Why is the kingdom of God in your life so much in Word and not enough in power? Listen, last thing. You know what it means to have this planted in you? The way it can be planted in you is this. Jesus Christ is the, dying on the cross was the greatest example of power we have in history. You know why? There is no greater power than to abstain from power in order to serve. There is no greater power than to abstain from power in order to serve. If you've got the power to crush somebody, but out of love for them, in spite of what they're doing to you, you put your power underneath them to serve them instead. It takes tremendous power. There's no greater power than to refrain from the use of power. And that's the reason why the cross was the greatest act of power in history. You know why? Because the most powerful human being that ever lived, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Righteous One, when He was beaten for us, when He was mocked for us, when He was scourged for us, that voice that created the world said nothing. He didn't lift a finger of His power. And because He became weak, we can get His strength. If you're willing to acknowledge how weak you are, if you walk in, if you walk out here saying, I'm not that bad, I don't need it that bad, I'm not dead needing life, I'm not a sinner needing righteousness, I'm not a sinner needing forgiveness, I'm okay, I just need a little bit of help. If you won't acknowledge your weakness, you'll never get His strength. That's the deal. He got you strength by becoming weak for you. And you can only get His strength by acknowledging your weakness to Him. And if you acknowledge what He did on the cross, that great transfer, our weakness goes to Him, His power goes to us, can happen now. You have to say, I want Jesus Christ to be my Lord and Savior. I don't know exactly what that means, but I'm not going to stop till I find. Can you say that? Will you say that? A mustard seed doesn't look like much. Right now, for some of you, the gospel looks ridiculous, but it can change anybody. It can change anything. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask that You'd make it possible for us to understand these great truths in these tiny little parables. This great power is in this tiny little gospel. That though we are more wicked than we ever dared believe, we are more accepted than we ever dared hope through Jesus. That little tiny seed of a statement inside it, that little tiny seed of a statement.
