TITLE: The New City 2002
SCRIPTURE: Exodus 19:2-8; 20:1-3; 24:7-11
TOPICS: The Church (Unity, Fellowship, Leadership) Salvation Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: The Gospel According to Moses: Discovering the Lost Language of Salvation
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-new-city-2/

============================================================

After they set out from Rephidim, they entered the desert of Sinai, and Israel camped there in the desert in front of the mountain. Then Moses went up to God, and the Lord called to him from the mountain and said, This is what you are to say to the house of Jacob and what you are to tell the people of Israel. You yourselves have seen what I did to Egypt and how I carried you on eagles' wings and brought you to myself. Now, if you obey me fully and keep my covenant, then out of all nations you will be my treasured possession. Although the whole earth is mine, you will be for me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words you are to speak to the Israelites. So Moses went back and summoned the elders of the people and set before them all the words the Lord had commanded him to speak. The people all responded together. Father, we will do everything the Lord has said. So Moses brought their answer back to the Lord. And God spoke all these words. I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. Then he took the book of the covenant and read it to the people. They responded, We will do everything the Lord has said. We will obey. Moses then took the blood, sprinkled it on the people, and said, This is the blood of the covenant that the Lord has made with you in accordance with all these words. Moses and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and the seventy elders of Israel went up and saw the God of Israel. Under his feet was something like a pavement made of sapphire, clear as the sky itself. But God did not raise his hand against these leaders of the Israelites. They saw God, and they ate and drank. This is God's word. Looking at the book of Exodus and the life of Moses, and tonight we come to a very famous place. From chapter 19 all the way through to chapter 24, God gives the people of Israel the law, the Ten Commandments. And he thunders them from the top of Mount Sinai. Now, right away, I think the average modern person has a problem. You read this, and the average person says, Surely, at this stage in history, we should get beyond religions that are based on the law. God thundering from Mount Sinai and people trembling in fear. The average person says, Surely, we can get beyond that now. Maybe, oh, right then, but today, shouldn't we have religions that are based on love, not law? Isn't Christianity a faith, as often said, that it's based not on law, but on love? Now, that kind of question, it's actually a rhetorical question, so it's not a question. But that kind of statement reveals what I think is widespread amongst modern people, and that is a simplistic attitude toward the law. When modern people think of the law and what its role is in our relationship with God, almost always the answer is simplistic. So if you look out there in the world, you'll see, roughly speaking, two kinds of religion. You see, well, at least an awful lot of people fall in these two categories. I don't want to say everybody's there, but on the one hand, you have an awful lot of people, and that law is the main thing they do in their religion. Law-keeping is almost the totality of what they do. Spend all their time obeying and keeping all the rules in the law. But then there's an awful lot of other people who have a faith and have their religion and have their spirituality, and the law has nothing to do with it. There's no obedience. There's no obligation. There's no duty. Because the average modern person either believes the law is what saves you. The law is what you have to do to be moral and good in order to be saved or to receive salvation or to receive divine blessing or so on. Modern people either think the law is the central thing in religion or else they believe the law is something we have to get beyond. And both of those are absolutely simplistic because the Bible's understanding of the purpose, the spiritual purpose of the law, the reason it was given to us, the Bible's understanding of the spiritual purpose of the law is much more nuanced, you know, much more multifaceted. And we're going to take a look at it right here. In fact, what we've done is, as you see, we've read a part of the beginning of the passage, which is in Exodus 19, where they come to Mount Sinai, a section out of the middle where God begins to speak the Ten Commandments, a section at the end where we have the ratification of the covenant, and in here we're going to see five, I know some of you. Graham used to say, the buses will wait for you. No, actually, it shouldn't be any longer. But anyway, there's five spiritual purposes of the law, five reasons that God gave us the law, and five things the law should do in your life. Now, even before I even start the five, let me show you what the text says the purpose of the law is not. Let me show you what the Bible says the law was not given to do. Verse four and five is amazing to me. In verse four and five, God says this, you saw how I carried you on eagle's wings and brought you to myself. Now, if you obey me fully and keep my covenant, stop. Do you see what comes first, what comes second? He says, I carried you. You know, the image of an eagle, God depicts himself as an eagle, the mighty eagle who swoops down and rescues them, you know. And look at the verb. What did they contribute to their salvation? What did the Israelites contribute to their deliverance? Did they fight their way out? Did they walk? Did they run out? Did they even walk out? No, they were carried out. They were carried, which means they did nothing. They contributed nothing to their deliverance and their salvation. And so God says, I have already saved you. I've carried you on eagle's wings to myself. Now obey. Obey. And you see, this is how God speaks. I have completely accepted you. Therefore, obey. Whereas every other religion on the face of the earth and every human heart in the face of the earth, including everyone in this room, operates on the opposite principle. Every other religion thinks, I do right and I live right. Therefore, I'm accepted and blessed. Every human heart operates on that basis. If I live right and do right, then I'll be accepted and blessed. But right here in black and white, and of course, it's all through the Bible, but this is one of the most stark places. God says, no, I have carried you. I have saved you. I have accepted you. Now, therefore, obey. Not obey and you'll be accepted, but I have accepted you. Now obey. God does not give them the law and then deliver them. He delivers them and gives them the law. And that means the purpose of the law cannot be to get you to heaven. It cannot be to get God to love you and be pleased with you and to bless you. It can't be. And let me give you evidence for what I just said. I said, every single human heart on the face of the earth profoundly operates, absolutely operates on the opposite principle, that if I do good and I live good and right, then I'll be blessed and I'll be accepted. So that when I say the law does not save you, God says has nothing to do with his setting his love on the people and accepting them and pardoning them and liberating them, nothing at all. And when you hear that, it's not we obey and then we're accepted, but we're accepted and we obey, right away you say, well, then why should we be obeying? If we're accepted, if we're loved, why should we obey? And the fact that you ask that question, the fact that you inevitably ask that question shows that your own heart does not understand how God operates. There's at a fundamental level, you don't get him. His grace and his love is utterly counterintuitive and nonsensical to the human heart. So the law was not given to save you. Well, why was it given? Five things. In fact, three of them are in that very verse. So let's get started. The first reason, he says, obey me fully and keep my covenant, then you will be my treasure. The first thing that the law of God is given for is to make us his love. Now, of course, he already loves them or he wouldn't have saved them. But he says, I want you to obey me so that you can be my treasured possession. What does that mean? Well, let me illustrate. When you really fall in love with somebody, when you really start to love somebody, if things are going right, here's what you do. You start to research. No, I don't mean you look into his or her CIA check background, but the research you do is you start to try to find out what pleases that person, what delights the person. You don't use the term, but what you're actually looking for is to find his or her will. You're trying to find out what are the things that he or she most deeply wants that pleases and delights him or her. And then you just give it. Without being asked, you give it. You don't think of it as being coercive, but what you're actually doing is you're trying to find out your worker. them. And the reason it doesn't feel coercive, the reason it doesn't feel coercive is because when a love relationship is truly becoming a love relationship, not an exploiting relationship, in real love, you place your happiness and joy into the happiness and joy of the other. You put it there. You place it there. Do you know what I'm saying? In other words, there being happy is your happiness. There being overjoyed is your joy. And as a result, what you're doing is you're researching to find out what it is that he or she really most wants, what pleases and delights, and you're meeting that. And the more you see them delighted, the more that fulfills you. Do you know what God is doing here? See, when God says, I want you to obey me so that I can treasure you, it doesn't mean so I can accept you. It can't mean he's already done that. But what does it mean? Look at the way the Ten Commandments start. Notice he doesn't go right to the laws. See, in the very middle of the passage, right in the middle of the page, this is the beginning of the Ten Commandments in chapter 20. And God spoke all these words. And he doesn't go right away to, you shall have no other gods before me, no graven images, keep the Sabbath day, honor your father and mother. He doesn't do that. First, he says, I am the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. Now, why does he say that? Let's get right to the stuff. Come on, let's get right to the rules. What are we doing in this little historical background thing? Don't you see what he's saying? He is saying, I've done my part. I've done my part. I have listened to the deepest needs of your heart. I heard you crying out in your misery. I heard you crying out in your oppression and your slavery. And I came to you. Now reciprocate. What I am showing you in the law is what delights me. I delight in honesty. I delight in integrity. I delight in justice. I delight in love. Put your happiness into my happiness and do that by becoming this. And then you will be my treasure. And the word treasure is a very unique and very specific Hebrew word that is very odd. And if I explain it to you, you'll see how wonderful it is. The word treasure means the private wealth of a great king. You see, absolute monarchs, back then, absolute monarchs owned everything. It's amazing. When you became the king, you owned it. You owned the roads. You owned the buildings. You owned the people. Unfortunately, you could have them killed if you wanted to. They're yours. I mean, monarchs, absolute monarchs owned everything in one sense. But in another sense, this word meant his private wealth, special objects of beauty and value that were his own personal possession that probably he kept in his room, that he delighted in, in a special way, higher way that he doted on. And what God is trying to say is, look, I already love you. I've already committed to you. But I want you to reciprocate now. Obey me so we can have a relationship of intimacy, a relationship of mutual delight. Obey me so you can know I'm treasuring you. The first thing the law is, this is radical, I know. The first thing the law is there for is to make you his love. But that's not all. He doesn't just say, obey me fully so you'll be my treasure. But also, he goes on and says a couple other things. Secondly, the purpose of the law is to make you a holy nation, which means to mold you into a radical new community. You see, when God took Israel and he camped them around the mountain, see at the very top of the page, verse 2, he had them all come and camp around the mountain. When God brought them around a mountain, they knew what he was doing. Very interesting. Historians and archaeologists will tell you all that human cities began in Mesopotamia at that time and basically in that place. The first places where you had these dense settlements that we could call cities. The first human settlements that are called cities occurred in that place and at that time. And they all, this is what's interesting, they all were always built, every city was built around a central mountain. Now, in some cases, it was a hill that had a temple put on the top. But in many, many other cases, cities were built around a ziggurat, and a ziggurat was a pyramid or basically a man-made mountain at the top of which was a temple. Why? Because the principle of the human cities, they were all called shrine cities, the principle of the human city was you wanted to live in a place where you could get up the mountain. See, you couldn't do that out in the country. You can get up the mountain, you make your offerings, and it's your chance to get. up the top, and you make your offering, and then you attract the gods. You say, look at what I've done, look what I've given you, come into my life, come on down, and bless me, and make me prosperous, and so on. In other words, the purpose of the human, you might say, the central organizing principle at the heart of the human city was, I will ascend. I will prove myself. Genesis 11, the Tower of Babel, which was a ziggurat, I will make a name for myself. I will come to the city, and I will achieve, and I will, you know, I will, I will attain, and I will ascend, and I will prosper, and I will prove myself. God now brings his people around a mountain, and what is he saying? I'm going to make you a radically different nation. Holy means utterly distinct. I'm going to make you an alternate nation, an alternate society, a new alternate city. But here's what's so interesting. Right away, you see all the differences. Human cities are built around a man-made mountain. This one's built around a God-made mountain. Human cities are built around a mountain that we choose to attract the gods. But God's city is built around a mountain that he chooses to attract us. And the organizing principle of the two cities are the two principles we've already enunciated. The organizing principle around a human city is, if I attain, if I achieve, if I get to the top of the mountain, I will be blessed. I'll be acceptable. Then I'll know I'm somebody. But the organizing principle at the heart of God's new city is a God who comes down, who saves and loves people who don't deserve it and haven't proved themselves, who identifies with the oppressed and the afflicted and the poor. And God says, a society built on that mountain is going to be completely different than a society built on that mountain. A society built around this organizing principle, a God who comes and loves those who haven't achieved, a God who comes down and identifies with the poor and the oppressed, as opposed to the organizing principle who says, I will attain, I will attain. And God says, at the heart of the new city will be something, it'll be absolutely and radically different. When he calls us a holy nation, the word holy means separate, distinct, totally different. And a nation means a completely different society. When you become a believer in God, when you understand you're saved by grace, when you, at least in principle, understand that when you reverse the fundamental principle of your heart, when you come into a city accepted, not coming in to prove yourself, the way you're going to be a person in that city is going to be utterly different. The organizing principle behind the human city, the city of man, is this. How can I use you to enhance me? And the organizing principle at the heart of the God city is this. How can I take what I have to enhance you? Because you see, one city has gods that operate completely different than the God of the Bible. And God says, if your heart has been utterly changed, and the society of those people whose heart have had their, the basic foundational organizing principle of the heart changed, will be a radically different one in every respect. You'll be a holy nation. That means every part of your life, your economic life, your artistic life, your family life, the way in which you handle sex, money, and power will be utterly different in my alternate city. Ah, do you see, God, salvation is not just individually bringing people to heaven, but it's creating a counterculture. It's creating an alternate society, an alternate city in every city of people who operate their, their relationships on a fundamentally different principle. And that's what the law is about. Do you know what the law is? If you read through chapter 20 to 24, and you, and you think of it not as a way to get an individual saved and get to heaven, but as an outline for a fundamentally different, radically different human human community, then you're going to see it's a thing of beauty. Sex, money, and power in God's city are used in non-destructive, non-addictive, non-exploitative ways, completely different than the way they're used in the human city. You can see it reflected in the laws themselves. Let me just give you, let me just give you a little sampling out of chapter 20 to chapter 24. Let's do sex, money, and power real quick. Sex. This was the first culture in history in which adultery was not just a sin for women. It was also a sin for men. Hmm. This is the first culture in which daughters could inherit their family's wealth. Let's go to money. As many of you may have heard, but maybe not to hear the whole story, if you study the law of God about when it comes to money, you'll see something very interesting. Every Israelite was required to give away 10 percent of their income each year to share with the community, to share with the poor, to share with the Levites and the priests, 10 percent. But on every third year, there was an additional offering to the poor that was made, and if you prorated it, it meant that every Israelite was actually giving away 23.3 percent of their income each year, 23.3 percent. Does that seem too radically generous for you? Then you don't want to be a holy nation. You might want to have an individual relationship with God, but you haven't gotten the idea yet that the law of God is a way of turning us into something beautiful communally. Sex, money, let's just do power real quickly. Aliens, immigrants, racial outsiders, the law said if they are among you, you give them all the rights and privileges that all the rest of you have. Why? Because God says, you remember what it was like to be aliens in Egypt? There was no society like this. Deuteronomy chapter 15, God actually says, if you obey all of my legislation, he's talking about his law. Now, it didn't happen, of course, but he's right when he said, if you obey all my legislation and everything I've given you in my law, there should be no poor people in your nation. He says that in Deuteronomy 15. What's going on here? Here's what's going on. The law of God is not just a stairway to heaven. It doesn't save you. First of all, we said it's a way of having an intimate relationship with God, but secondly, it's a way of being molded into a radically unique and different alternate city inside every city. The people who are obeying that law, the people who are seeking to ravish the heart of the one who has loved them and saved them, become part of a society that looks different. And that leads immediately to the third thing. Obey me. Why? Not to be saved. I've already saved you. Why? Number one, that you be my treasured possession. Number two, that you be a holy nation. Number three, that you be a kingdom of priests. Now, that's a weird thing. How could you have a whole nation of priests? Well, think about it. What was the job of a priest? The job of a priest was to bring people to God. You go to the temple, and by the way, the next two weeks, especially week after next. We're going to go in detail and look at the tabernacle and the sacrifices and the priesthood and everything, but the job of the priest was to help people get into the presence of God and see God, see who God is. That's the job of a priest, to be a mediator. Well, what is a kingdom of priests? The kingdom of priests is this. If you're a holy nation, God says, then you will be, as a nation, a nation of priests. It is your nation-ship. It's your community. It's this radically new, beautiful community that is going to show the world who I am. It's going to show the world who I am. Now, I know that's not how you think, but Jesus certainly thought that way. For example, here's what I mean when I say it's not how we think. Listen to this very famous passage. This is Matthew 5. It's in the Sermon on the Mount. Jesus said, you are the light of the world. You heard that? Listen carefully. You are the light of the world. A city on a hill cannot be hidden. Let your light shine before men that they may see your good works and praise your Father in heaven. Many of you have heard that before. What do you think it means? How do you interpret it? Well, normally you interpret it like this. If I live a good life and if I do good works, people will see who God is. Well, that may be true. In fact, I know that's true, but that's not what Jesus is talking about at all. He is saying people will see the glory of God when they see you as a city, right? He says you are the light of the world as a city. You're an alternate city. You can't be a city by yourself. I'm sorry, you can't. Jesus is saying when the world looks into the Christian community and it sees an alternate city inside every city. When the world looks in and says, now listen carefully, inside the church, people get along who outside can't get along. People love each other who outside are fighting each other. Inside the church, people are using their money in radically generous ways. Outside, people hoard it or use it in a way that manipulates. In other words, Jesus Christ says, yes, of course, if you are a person who lives a good life. Of course, in some ways, that's going to show, but that's... to the Father in John 17, when he looks at the Father and he says, Father, make them one, that's us, even as we are one, that's them, the Trinity, that the world might know you sent me. What is he saying? It's the quality of your community. Secondly, if the world looks in and sees Christians loving each other in a way that other kinds of people don't, Christians using sex, money, and power in radically life-giving in different ways, then they'll know who he is. In other words, you all are the light of the world. The trouble with the English language, unless you're from the South, is we don't have a second person plural that's different than our first person plural. When Jesus Christ says, you are the light of the world, he says, y'all are the light of the world. He's not saying you are the light of the world. You, you, you, together you're the light of the world, and only then are you the light of the world. So you see, the law's job is not just to make you have an individual treasuring, mutual delight relationship with God, yes, but secondly, it's to mold you into a community that, thirdly, shows the world who he is. The law is the way to show the world who he is. The law is the way that we are molded into a human community. But that's not all. Fourth. Oh, wait, time out. Time out. I've got to get to four and five, and I won't take long on four and five, but I've got to take time out. Is there any way for you to square what we're seeing here with your current practices? You come to church, maybe even come to church every week, you take notes, you get inspired, you swoop down on the meeting, you leave, you have a couple of Christian friends. Can you square what we're talking about here with that kind of pattern in your life? No. You have to be deeply, deeply involved in a community of Christians who are working on being a holy nation. That means you've got to work with your friends to say, I've got to look at every part of my life, and I have to see how it will be different on the basis of this new principle, this new mountain at the heart of things. In other words, if it's really true I'm a sinner saved by grace, that I'm already accepted, accepted, that I don't have to go into the city and do my work or do my art or make money or date in order to be sure that I'm okay, that I'm something, in order to fill up an emptiness, if I move out in the city with already overflowing and full, if I have a God who's not a God that I have to attract by my good deeds, but a God who has come down and given himself to me even though I didn't deserve it, how should that affect the way I use my money? How should that affect the way I use my talents and my work? How should that affect the way I use the power I have in social relationships? How should that affect every part of my life, every single aspect? Unless you're in a community of people who's accountable to one another to talk about those things, to work those things out, and to exhibit those things in community, you actually can't obey the law. You can't do the things that God is saying, that he's calling you to do. You can't. You just can't have an individualistic kind of New York spirituality, which most people really do. Even as solid Christian, you're not going to get treasured. You're not going to become a new community. You're not going to be the light of the world. Now, fourth and fifth. The fourth thing, the law, the fourth spiritual purpose of the law is it shows you how your heart really works. It shows you how your heart really, truly works. Look at the way the Ten Commandments start. And God spoke all these words, I'm the Lord your God who brought you out of Egypt, out of the land of slavery. You shall have no other gods before me. Well, somebody says, well, that's only the first of the Ten Commandments. What about the rest? Well, let me just suggest to you, I'm not sure you really need the rest. Here's what I mean. Martin Luther, years ago, studied the Ten Commandments a lot more than I did, because he's a lot smarter person than me. And he came to an interesting conclusion. He says, think about this. God boiled everything he needed to say to people about how to live life into Ten Commandments. That's a pretty good job of distillation, okay? Some of you think you're good editors. That's good editing, okay? All right? But, at the foundation of those Ten Fundamentals is a single foundational principle. The very first, before he says, don't kill, don't lie, don't steal, he says this. He says, have no other gods before me. And right after that, he says, make no graven images. And this is what he's saying. take things and you let them become more important than me, and if you are having a problem in any other area of your life, if you are failing to love, if you're failing to tell the truth, if you're failing to be generous, if you're failing in any other way, it's because of this. See, Martin Luther says, if this is the first commandment on which all the other commandments are based, this means this is the problem under every problem, this is the sin under every sin, and that if you're having any problem in your behavior or any problem with sort of intractable, destructive feelings, it's because of this. It's because there is, no matter what you say with your mind and with your mouth, something else is the functional, integrative center of your life besides God. Let me just give you a couple of, you know, quick illustrations of how that works. So number one, for example, let me go from the mundane to the less mundane. Let's just say, have you time, you have a time with, a problem with time management. Oh, you have a problem with time management. You're just so disorganized, you never have enough time to get everything done. So, and you know, it's very discouraging nowadays because it used to be you just spent your money on these day, these planner books, 20 bucks here, 30 bucks here, and then now you're in the Palm Pilots, you know, hundreds of dollars in the Palm Pilots, and you're no better. What's your problem? We say, I just, I'm not disciplined, I'm just not disciplined. Well, okay, but here's the problem under the problem. You can't say no, and why can't you say no? Because you may, you've made an idol of human approval. It's more important what people think of you than what God thinks of you. Let me give you another example. You're stingy. Yeah, I just need to be more, less stingy. I just need to be more generous. But if your money is more important than God in giving you a sense of security in this world filled with the vicissitudes and circumstances and fluctuations, if your money is actually really more the source of your security than God, you're not going to be able to give it away. You know, under the sin of stinginess is an idolatry. Under the sin of being undisciplined in your, you know, in your time management is idolatry. You tell a lie. You don't even know why he told a lie. Well, you say, because I was bad. You know, I'm a bad person. I've got a bad heart, and I lied. I broke one of the Ten Commandments. Yes, but why did you lie? If you look underneath, you'll see it could be because you were scared of how you looked, or maybe you thought you were going to lose money. And something besides Jesus was more important to you at that moment. Something besides God was more important to you than that. It's always the case. You break up with somebody you love. You're going to feel terrible for a long time. But if you're devastated for months and years and years and years, here's what's going on. Idolatry pathologically intensifies normal emotions and makes them intractable and debilitating and devastating. Underneath everything that's wrong with your heart, underneath every wrong behavior that you don't seem to be able to stop, and under every bad set of destructive feelings that you don't seem to be able to stem, there's this. And you know what? Unless you have the law of God, unless you understand the law of God, you'll never understand how your heart really works. You'll never understand what's really going on. So you see, historically, the law of God has been understood by Christians as being an irreplaceable tool for understanding what really makes you tick. So somebody says, and let me get to the last one, somebody says, well, this is interesting, but you're not making me feel any better. And here's the, it's nice to know that I am loved. It's nice to know that God saves me by grace and all that. But now he's calling me into a covenant relationship. He's calling me to obey. And even though I was saved by grace, now I'm going to be calling this relationship, and there's no way I can keep that up. No way. Especially now that you show me that the law requires that I love God with all my heart. You know, now that I see what the law requires, it's not just a set of rules about behavior, but it's actually requiring that I make God central in my life. I'm never going to keep this up. There's a fifth purpose to the law. And we see it if you get to the very end of the chapter 24, it's the very end, and you'll see something very weird that happens. Notice it says in verse 7, then he took the book of the covenant and read it to the people, and they responded, we will do everything the Lord has said. We will obey. Idiots. You know, there's a lot of better they could have said is, we will obey. Most of the time. We will obey. Lots and lots and lots of it. We will obey. Often. But they said, we will obey everything. And of course, that's what he wanted. Of course, that's what he wanted. Of course, that's what he wanted. We will obey. Often. But they said, we will obey everything. And of course, that's what he wanted. Of course. And so what does Moses do? He says, okay. So he sprays them with blood. And though that's weird to us, it wasn't weird to them because this was not a written culture. This was an oral culture and a dramatic culture. And it was not a culture in which you ratified a contract by signing a piece of paper. That's not how it worked. The way you made a contract in those days was you acted out the penalty of breaking the contract. So what you might do is very typical was you might cut a piece, an animal in half and walk between the pieces and say, if I don't do what I have promised to do today, I shall, may I be cut into pieces. And when Moses sprays them with blood, they are saying, if we do not do everything, everything that we have promised, everything in the covenant, may our blood be shed. So what happens? The very next thing that happens is the leaders of Israel are taken up into the mountain and to their absolute astonishment, they see God. Now notice it doesn't say they saw his face. And we're going to look at this next week. God says to Moses, no one can see my face and live. But they're brought into some kind of nearness. They see his feet. And even that's indescribable because they say there was something like, under his feet was a pavement, something like a pavement made out of sapphire. I mean, it's an amazing experience. And they eat and drink. You know what that means. See, in the Near East, to bring someone in and give them hospitality in your home was the ultimate act of fellowship, of friendship, and of intimacy. Saying, I'm bringing you into my home. I'm feeding you. We're talking at the table. This is the blessing of the covenant. He's taking them in. He's treasuring them. How can that be? Well, you say, if they obey everything, that's the blessing. They can come in. They can have that great experience. How can they obey everything? We've already talked about the fact that the very first commandment, which is, have no other gods before me, let nothing else be more important than God to you. Well, come on. How are they able to get in there? And how are they able to stay in there? And the answer is, centuries later, Jesus Christ, on the night he was betrayed, lifted up a cup, and he said something to a group of men who were completely saturated in the book of Exodus. They knew all about the book of Exodus. And he says to them, this is the blood of the covenant. We do it every single time we do the Lord's Supper. This cup is the new covenant in my blood. What's that mean? Hebrews chapter 10 says, let us draw near to God with a sincere heart, with full assurance, having our hearts sprinkled to cleanse us from a guilty conscience. And we're also told in John chapter 118, no one has ever seen God, but the one and only son who is in the Father's bosom, he has made him known. On the cross, Jesus Christ's blood was shed. And what that means is he received the curse so that we could get the blessing. You see, he knows, he sees God. That's what he deserves because he's perfect. He fully obeys God. We deserve to have our blood shed, but he takes our curse so we can have his blessing, which means not only are we saved by grace, not only are we brought into the covenant by grace, we stay in the covenant by grace. And it means you don't have to be afraid to use the law now. You don't have to be afraid to say, I'm going to use the law to mold myself into a glorious new community. I'm going to use the law to look at the deepest things that are going wrong in my life. I'm going to use the law to become the person God's made me to be. I'm going to use the law. You don't have to be afraid because of course you're going to fail. Of course you're going to fall down. You don't have to be afraid because Jesus has taken the curse of the covenant. So you, like them, can come close to God. Not all the way, not yet, but you can eat and drink. Now let me close like this. Five purposes of the law. Notice, to give you a deep intimate relationship with God, to make you part of a radically, a radical new counterculture human community, to make you the light of the world, to show you the deepest inner workings of your heart and to drive you to the blood of Jesus Christ. If you think the law's purpose is to help you get to heaven and get God to answer your prayers and bless you, not only will none of these other purposes be realized in your life, but you won't be saved either. That's what the Bible says. Be part of a church, if not this one, some church that understands its job is to become God's alternate city in this city. You can't lastly, if tonight you realize for the first time that your heart and your mind still completely operates on the old principle, if I live a good life, if I do the right thing, then I'll be blessed, then I'll be happy, then I'll be, then I will achieve, then I'll know I'm okay, then God will answer my prayers or whatever, you know, fill in the blanks. But if that's basically the way your heart has been operating, do you see what a grind everything's going to be? You've come to the city to work, but it's not about the work. It's about you. It's a way of proving yourself. You've come to the city to make money, but it's not about really, you know, business. It's about you. You've come to prove yourself. You're dating people, but it's really, you're really not looking, you're really not trying to love people. You're trying to say, I need to find somebody really hot or really cool or both, and then I'll know I'm all right. Think about what's going to happen there. Think of how you, you're automatically, you're being exploited. You're going to exploit. If anything goes wrong, you're going to fall into all those destructive, pathologically intensified emotions. Reverse the way your heart works. Reverse it. See what Jesus Christ has done for you. Say, Father, accept me because of what Jesus has done. And know that on eagle's wings, he's carrying you. And it changes everything. Let's pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us the law. Now we're not scared. I'm sure the children of Israel, to a great degree, were because they certainly didn't understand what you meant. It's taken centuries to understand it, but especially it's taking Jesus Christ to understand it. In Jesus, we are a chosen people, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, your treasured possession. Now we see it. Now we get it. We pray that these things will be realized not only in our lives, but in our community here as Redeemer seeks to do your business and be the community that you've called us to be. And we pray, Father, that you would help us to understand and apply the truths that you've shown us tonight. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
