TITLE: The Grace of Jesus
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 11:25-27
TOPICS: Doctrine Salvation
SERIES: The Real Jesus Part 1; His Teaching
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-grace-of-jesus/

============================================================

Would you turn in your bulletin to the spot where the passage is printed on which the teaching this morning is based? We're getting ready to go to the table. If you listen carefully to the music, if you've been reading the words here, you see the words of the music and the songs that we're going to be singing during the Lord's table time, we see that the gospel is that the Lord invites us to eat with him. And it's hard for us to know this quite in the same way. To eat with someone in ancient times was very much to let someone into your life. And Jesus is saying, I want to come into your life. I want you to come into my life. Let's eat together. And therefore, it's an invitation to fellowship. So what we're about to look at here is very, very important. Because on the basis of this text, we can actually meet Jesus. We can know him. Let me read you the passage that we're looking at. Matthew 11, verses 23 to 27. We're continuing to look through the chapter of Matthew 11. And Jesus says, For you, Capernaum, will you be lifted to the skies? No. You will go down to the depths. And if the miracles that were performed in you had been performed in Sodom, it would have remained to this day. But I tell you, it will be more bearable for Sodom on the day of judgment than for you. At that time, Jesus said, I praise you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because you have hidden these things from the wise and learned and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for this was your good pleasure. All things have been committed to me by my Father. No one knows the Son except the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son, and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him. And this is God's word. Now, all fall, we're looking for the last several weeks and for a couple more to go, we've been looking at this chapter 11 because it's so relevant to us today. For it begins with John the Baptist sending a message to Jesus and revealing that he is getting offended by Jesus, offended by Jesus' claims by what he says and what he does. And all of Matthew 11 is a response to John the Baptist's question. All of Matthew 11 is Jesus responding to John the Baptist who says, How do we know you are who you say you are? And who reveals that he's being offended by many of the things Jesus says and does. Now, what's so intriguing about how Jesus responds in Matthew 11 is that Jesus does not respond by saying, Oh, John, you've misunderstood me. I'm not offensive at all. You've misunderstood me. No, instead, Jesus responds in chapter 11 by saying, John, the things that I claim and the things that I am are much more outrageous than you have even heard. Let me show you just how outrageous and how offensive I really can be. And Jesus makes some of, it's so interesting, in the face of a person who says, I'm struggling and I'm offended by you, Jesus makes some of the most outrageous and the most offensive statements that have ever been made. And we get to one that we started to look at last week, but today we have to take the bull by the horns and we have to look at it and we have to say that the very thing that made the people of Jesus' day struggle is also the thing that makes us struggle. And right here at the very end of verse 27, he does it. He says, No one knows the Son but the Father, and no one knows the Father except the Son and those to whom the Son chooses to reveal him. There it is. There it is. Jesus says, I alone can show you the way into God. No one knows the Father except through me. No one can really come into the center except through me. I'm the only way into the very center of God. There it is. Now that is still something that if you say that in a subway, just get up and say that someday. Next time you're in a subway. Read that verse and say, Jesus is the only way into the center and see what happens. I mean, that would be offensive enough, but here's one who's actually saying, I am the only way in. Jesus gets up on the subway and says, I'm the only way in. Only way. Now, we have to come to grips with this. What are we going to do with this? We can't pussyfoot around. We can't avoid it. It comes up over and over again. And obviously, Jesus thought it was very important to say because John the Baptist, who's really struggling with doubts, Jesus says, you've got to come to grips with this. I'm the only way to the center, to really know God. What are we going to do with it? Well, here's what I suggest. I'd like to show you the real structure. I'm the only way to the center, and I'll be right back. an illustration we'll come back to once or twice, and it goes like this. If you believe that what Jesus just said, or if you hear Christians say this, and if you say, that's what I hate so much about Christianity, it's so narrow, let me ask you this question. What if a group of scientists decided to assert that they had come up with a cure for cancer? What if a group of scientists published in a magazine or published in a journal, we have found the cure of cancer, what would the response be? Well, there'd be a lot of response, but nobody would say they're narrow. Nobody. It would be in all the papers, but nobody would say they're narrow. Nobody would say, how dare you think that you have the cure for cancer and no one else does? No one would say that. What would they say? Because, you see, the reason they wouldn't say that is because you don't attack the assertion. If you think they're wrong, you have to go to the research beneath the assertion. If you think they're wrong, you have to dig in. You have to do the hard work. It's just too easy. It's too simple to say it's narrow. What you have to say is, look, if their research, if the research, the basis for the assertion, is right, if it's valid, then it's rational to make the assertion. And if the research is mistaken, then it's mistaken to make the assertion, but it's not narrow. And I'm saying, if you look here, Jesus does not just say this in a vacuum. It comes at the end of a lot of things that he's saying. His assertion cannot be attacked directly. You can't just say this is narrow. The assertion is based on, not research so much, the assertion is based on a deeper claim. And anybody who says, I hate this idea that Jesus is the only way in, whether you know it or not, and I'm going to try to show you today so you know it, you're really not really attacking the assertion. What you really should do, and you should be doing, and by being upset, you essentially are doing, is to say, it's that deeper claim that's not valid. I would like to show you what that deeper claim is, why you should believe it, and how you should use it. What is the deeper claim beneath the assertion? And what is it? Why should we believe it? And how do we use it? And we have to do it rather briefly today, because we're coming to the table. First of all, the deeper claim. Now, we started to look at it last week, and I have to confess that I, we started to look at it last week, and I think in some ways last week, I didn't understand the context. The claim begins with Jesus making this astounding statement. He says, All things have been committed to me by the Father. No one knows the Son but the Father, and no one knows the Father but the Son. Now, what we said last week, in summary, and I'm not saying I'm changing my mind, I'm just saying I didn't see all the ramifications until I got to look at the bigger picture. Jesus is saying, I am equal with the Father. When he says all things, in the context, he means all knowledge. He says, All things are committed to me, no one knows, no one knows. He's saying all knowledge is mine. And he says, No one knows me but the Father, and no one knows the Father but me. And here's what he's saying. He is saying, No one, I alone, am capable of understanding and knowing everything there is to know about the beginningless creator, about God. And, God alone is capable of knowing everything there is to know about me. He is putting the knowledge and being and wisdom and power of himself on a par with the Father. That's the reason why Michael Green, now Michael Green, we give Michael Green books out. He's quite an interesting guy. He's a British scholar. He's a scholar. Michael Green says, This is the most astounding claim that anyone has ever made. Now somebody says, No, wait a minute. What do you mean it's the most astounding claim that anybody's ever made? Having other people claim to be God? Not like this. Because, you see, Jesus, in the very way he says it, he says, I praise thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth. It's the Lord of heaven and earth that he claims to have, to be co-equal with. And what Michael Green says, he says, Nobody has ever claimed to be God like this. What he meant, and what he says in the book I was reading, is, he says, In the West, Western religions believed that the gods were personal but not infinite. They were bound up with heaven and earth. They sort of came out of heaven and earth. And they're personal but not infinite. And therefore, Western religions never had that big a deal, never made that big a thing about saying, this or that person was a manifestation of Hermes or a manifestation of Zeus or something like that. On the other hand, Eastern religions say that God is infinite but not personal. Eastern religions say that God is heaven and earth, or better yet, that heaven and earth, the material world, is an emanation of God. And therefore, God is... religions have always agreed that various people are avatars, various figures, various individuals, are manifestations of the consciousness of God, which of course is in us all. So you see, Westerners who had a view of gods as being personal but not infinite, bound up with heaven and earth, Eastern religion, which had a view of God as infinite, not personal, in a sense, who is the God who is heaven and earth, when they claimed that this or that person was God, they were saying something very different than what Jesus is saying. Jesus has the biblical view of God. And the biblical view of God is that he's Lord of heaven and earth. The biblical view of God is that God is personal and infinite, and therefore infinitely exalted above heaven and earth. He created heaven and earth. He, therefore, is beginningless. The biblical view of God is a transcendent God. And this is the reason why Michael Green says no one who ever had the biblical view of God had ever dared to make a statement like this. And Jesus is making with absolute consciousness, absolutely deliberately, talking about his knowledge, his knowledge of the Father and the Father's knowledge of himself as coterminous, understanding all this thing, blatant, nobody's ever made a claim like this, says Michael Green. But why does he make it? Why does Jesus come and say, I'm God? Why does Jesus come and say, God himself has come? And the answer is, up in verse 25, he says, I praise you, Lord of heaven and earth, that you've hidden these things from the wise and learned and revealed them to little children. Yea, yes, indeed, Father, because it was your, it says good pleasure, the better translation is, because it was your gracious will. And here's what Jesus is saying. You've got to put verse 27 and 25 and 26 together, and here's what he's saying. He's saying, I am God. And why am I God? Why did God come? Why did God have to come to earth? Because you didn't need, human beings did not need one more Moses, they didn't need one more Elijah, they didn't need one more Isaiah, they didn't need one more Buddha, they didn't need one more Mohammed. You see, even the doctrine of the incarnation makes no sense unless you understand, at least you can't see it, its purpose, unless you understand that the reason God himself had to come was because we are so weak and so helpless. We are such spiritually little helpless children that one more prophet wouldn't help us, one more teacher wouldn't help us, one more system of ethics wouldn't help us, one more course of spiritual disciplines wouldn't help us. If we're going to be saved, we've got to have God himself come. We don't need another prophet to tell us how to save ourselves, we need someone who will come to save us. We don't need one more person coming and saying, do these things to save yourself, we need someone who can come and actually do them for us. Someone who lives the life we should have lived, dies the death we should have died. In other words, Jesus Christ says, I'm God, but, he says, I haven't come to create a better religion. Some people think, and I, in some ways, maybe I've even given the impression, that Christianity can say Jesus is the only way because Christianity has the only founder who's God and the other founders are just human. But you know what? The claim goes way beyond that. Christianity does not say Jesus is the only way into God because we have a better religion. That's not what it says. Jesus doesn't say this is the best way in. And he says, this is the only way in. No one gets in. What he's really saying is, I don't come to bring a better faith, a superior faith. I come to bring an utterly different faith. I come to bring a salvation of grace. And that's the reason why it is utterly different. He says, I thank you, Father, that because of your gracious will, because of your grace, the world is not divided into the good and the bad. The world is divided into the wise and the children. Now, this is utterly fair. Jesus says, the real division is not between the good and the bad, but the people who think that they're powerful and the people who are helpless. Between the proud and the helpless, not the good and the bad. Who misses grace? Who is grace hidden from? Who, to whom is the way of God invisible? To those who don't think they need grace. And to whom is the way of God visible? To whom is the way of God open? To whom does this come? To those who see they need grace. Little children, carry me. Tremendously fair, but here's what Jesus is saying. Tremendously fair, but here's what Jesus is saying. to be the only way. If you believe that human performance is the way to God, then anyone, there's many, many ways to God, and they all might work, but if you believe that it's the Son of God's performance that's the only way to God, then you have to unite with Him, or put it another way. If you believe that salvation is something that comes from you giving your righteousness to God, then there's hundreds of ways of doing that. But if you believe that salvation is something only that you receive as a gift, something that's revealed, see? You have revealed this, something that comes. In that case, it only comes to people who know they need it, who admit that this has to be the only way. Grace, through what Jesus has done. And therefore, Jesus is not saying, I'm the only way because I'm the best of the founders. Jesus is certainly not saying, I'm the only way because we Christians like to think we're better than others. Jesus Christ says, if salvation is by grace alone, I have to be the only way. And if you don't believe I'm the only way, then you don't believe in my assessment of myself, who I am, God, and you also don't believe in my assessment of you, who you are, a sinner. And you have to come to grips with this. When somebody says, I don't like this idea that Jesus is the only way to the Father. I believe all good people can reach God. What you're really saying is, I deny the research underneath the assertion. I deny the analysis. I don't believe we have to be born again. I don't think we're that bad off. I don't think we need grace and just receive what Christ has done. I don't think we're that bad off. Don't you see what's going on here? Don't you dare say, it's narrow. You have an honest disagreement with Jesus. That's okay. You've got an honest disagreement. Don't call him narrow. Don't call me narrow. Don't call Christianity narrow. You have an honest disagreement. You say, I don't agree with the assessment of the human condition. I think teachers are enough. We don't need a God. I think human performance is enough. We don't need someone to come in and just have us reborn through a supernatural intervention. I don't believe we're that bad. I believe teachers are enough. I believe human effort's enough. Just look at the history of the 20th century. But anyway, that's what you're saying. Honest. You have an honest disagreement. You say, I see that if salvation was totally by grace and we were that sinful and we were that lost, I agree that then Jesus would be the only way. But, you see, I don't believe that. Just realize what you're doing. Here's the great divide between Christianity and religion. If you ask a religious person, why are you different? What makes you different from people who haven't found God? If you ask a religious person, why are you different? What makes you different from people who haven't found God? The answer is, my gracious will. My good pleasure. My goodness. But if you ask a Christian, what makes you different from those who haven't found God? The Christian says, God's good pleasure. The goodness of the Son. A Christian knows that plenty of people who are much, much better, who have much more good will, are not Christians. Christians know there's all sorts of people who haven't found Christ, who are better than they are. More spiritually disciplined, more moral. But it's not an issue. It's not a matter of my good will. It's his good will. Not a matter of my gracious pleasure. It's his gracious pleasure. Now, do you just see what you're doing? You certainly can say, I don't believe Jesus is the only way, but you can't do it without assaulting his assessment of who he is and his assessment of who we is. Okay? There it is. Who he is and who we are. Now, why should you believe this? Now, I'm not here to actually lay all this out. I'm here to give you a principle. The principle is this. Do you not see now that you can't do what we have a tendency to do and say, since I'm an open-minded person, since the claim that Jesus is the only way, it's closed-minded. Therefore, I don't like Christianity. Therefore, I rule it out. Do you not see that's as silly as saying to a group of scientists, you can't have the cure of cancer because it's narrow. You have to do the hard work. Come on. You're being lazy. You have to get underneath and you have to say, I have to show that the very, the research, I have to show that the Christian assessment of human nature is wrong. And I have to also show that Jesus' claims of deity are definitely stupid and silly and wrong. You have to do that, which means you've got to do the work. And that's all I'm trying to say. I'm trying to say, you have to get underneath there. I'm not going to sit down here and tell you about all of the things that, all the evidence for these things. There's a lot of them. In fact, I hope some of you make an impression on you in any way you should go to the class we have after the service both morning and evening called credibility of christianity or you might also want the class called overview of theology they in different ways they both tackle these things but i'm trying to say is you mustn't dismiss them you mustn't it's interesting for example this very verse is something of evidence it's kind of it it the very verse where he says no one knows the father but the son no one knows the son but the father is actually evidence there are people around who say oh my i don't believe jesus claimed to be god i believe that that years afterwards some people wrote these things about him one of the problems is all scholars agree that matthew and luke when they were writing their gospels used a document of sayings of jesus that is very ancient very old very very reliable it's called the q source and the problem is with that theory that all these statements about jesus deity were written many years later is this verse comes from the q source this verse is one it is from the most reliable this verse is from the most ancient sources this verse is a knife in the heart of the idea that you can get out from under the claims of jesus as god by saying well he probably didn't even claim those things no don't you see here's your problem your problem is jesus claimed to be god and if he claimed to be god we have this difficulty what could have convinced all the people around jesus so many of his followers to go against every cultural and spiritual bone in their body to believe he was god as michael green said the last people in the world that would believe a claim like this would be the jews western religion eastern religion but biblical religion is different what could have possibly gotten them to believe such an unparalleled claim a unique claim and the answer is he must have had an unparalleled life he must have had an incredible life to overwhelm what every single bone in their bodies was saying about these claims and so you're stuck in a way you might decide jesus couldn't be god but here you've got this problem and that is what evidence have you got that he was a wicked crazy person no matter what you believe about jesus it's going to be a step of faith it took a step of faith for me to believe that he must be who he said he is but if you decide he's not that's a step of faith too a big step it's difficult how do you account for what happened if he says he's god he must be either god or crazy and wicked and if he's crazy and wicked he shouldn't have had the kind of life that he did but he must have had that kind of life where he couldn't have possibly overwhelmed all that uh you know all those jewish people around him and therefore are you really going to say he was wicked and crazy do you really want to say that if he wasn't wicked and crazy he must be god if he was god he must be the only way don't you dare just say it's narrow but christianity is good the only problem is it's narrow it all comes together it all falls together it's all of a piece if you want to get rid of the assertion you've got to go down and you've got to work on it now last of all we've seen what the deep claim is under the assertion that he's the only way is the claim that christian that salvation is by grace alone and there's a lot of reasons to believe that claim but the last thing i want to leave with you and it's a very important thing as we come to the table is i want you to see something i didn't see until very recently i've studied this passage weeks and weeks and before that i studied it for many years i have a tendency and so do you to kind of read the bible as maybe a theological source book and sometimes you forget to look at the personal context that teaching is almost never just laid out there it's always it always happens in a particular situation and look what it says do you see something jesus christ has just gotten done denouncing the cities his hometown area the little cities around galilee we looked at this in detail last week chorazin bethseda capernaum they'd come out they'd loved him but they had rejected him and jesus christ says woe to you you indifferent little towns you saw this and you wouldn't turn to me it's going to be worse on judgment day for you than for sideman gomorrah and we talked about this last week i can tell you this though we forget what this must mean to jesus let's let's let's let's paint the picture for a second jesus christ is saying my hometown people the people where i grew up they've rejected me and he's also saying they're going to be judged jesus is obviously filled with emotion if you read anything about what the way the gospels you'll see Jesus never denounced without tears except the Pharisees, but he just never denounced without tears he was always saying Jerusalem, Jerusalem if only you knew the things that pertained to your peace I wished like a mother hen to bring you like little chicks under my wings but now it's too late, this is the way in which he would denounce filled with tears, he looks at his hometown and he says I've been rejected he looks at his hometown and he says they're lost he's filled with worry, he's filled with fear he is filled with fear because he knows that this is just the beginning of what's going to happen to him people are going to reject him and finally he's going to be killed then it says at that time Jesus said I praise you Father, Lord of heaven and earth for you have hidden these things from the wise and learned and revealed them to children from verse 24 to verse 25 almost seems like you're in a different world verse 24, thunder and lightning and tears suddenly verse 25 at that time he turns and he talks to God about his grace now this must mean this if Jesus Christ who clearly is right with God turns to the gospel turns to thinking about grace says I praise thee Father Lord of heaven and earth you have revealed these things to the helpless you've hidden them from the people who think they're good and you only give your grace to the people who know they need grace to the helpless little children what's he doing? why is he doing that? why is he doing that? we're overhearing Jesus why is he doing that? don't you see the gospel is not the thing that just gets you into the kingdom the gospel is the only way you can face everything in life Jesus Christ is obviously right with God Jesus Christ is in the kingdom and he's filled with turmoil what does he do to calm himself? he turns around and says Father he praises God for his grace he thinks about the grace of God he says everything is happening by grace it's astounding he brings in supernatural contentment in the midst of the storms of his life and that's the only way you and I will ever be able to face the same things we go out there and we see people rejecting us we see people hurting themselves we're caught up in worry we're caught up in fear we're caught up in resentment what do we do? what do you do? over sleep? over eat? shopping? what do you do? do you just try to get your mind off of it? Jesus says I'm going to look at the graciousness of God until my heart is filled with praise I'm going to consider the fact that the Lord of heaven and earth is now a father if you're willing to become little children the Lord of heaven and earth becomes your father how do you deal with boredom? I've been trying to work on this for at least three or four months do you know what boredom is? boredom is forgetting that everything is grace boredom is forgetting the sun the stars the fact you have a roof over your head boredom is forgetting that the relationships you have boredom is forgetting that the things around you if you got what you deserve wouldn't be there are you a little child? do you understand that everything is by God's grace? do you understand that? you wouldn't be bored turn around and praise God for his grace and the boredom goes the indifference goes you begin to live a life of gratitude another thing I have to work on all the time is a hard heart a loveless heart I see people around me and you know sometimes they're irritable sometimes I just don't care but if I remember it's all of grace what Jesus has done for me if I remember the gracious if I praise him for his grace if I praise him for his grace my heart melts when I think about what he's done for me I can't look at anybody coldly of course I do all the time because I don't praise him for his grace do you see what Jesus is doing? or what about your worry? your worry look at what he gave you on the cross do you think the thing right now that you're afraid God won't give you is happening because you're afraid he won't give it to you do you think he's stingy? if God would give you that if God gives you the gift why would he withhold from you the ribbon? I mean if God will give you that anything that is not coming into your life right now must be a function of his grace God is not stingy what Jesus does you must do turn to him and say I praise thee Father Lord of heaven and earth that salvation is by grace that salvation is for the weak that salvation is for the helpless that everything is of grace that I'm a little child boredom goes see hardness of heart goes self pity worry what is your problem today? what are you looking at? and by the way his grace transform you psychologically, it transforms you sociologically. And it was three or four weeks ago that we talked about this, but you see, why is it that all through this passage, is Jesus Christ is continually talking about the blind and the lame and the lepers and the poor. Why does he say the mark of the gospel is that we minister to the poor, that we minister to the hopeless, we minister to the marginalized, we minister to people like that? Because the way you can tell the difference between religion and the gospel, the way you can tell whether you're just a religious person or whether you've understood grace, is that you know the poor are no different than you. In fact, when you see the poor, you realize that spiritually that's where you are. The poor receive the gospel gladly because they know. Jesus says the difference, the big difference is not the good and the bad. The big difference is the people who know their moral failures and the people who don't know their moral failures. In general, the poor tend to know that they're moral failures. In general, we don't, but we are. And if you don't know that, then you may be one of the wise and learned from whom everything is hidden. Jesus says, if you praise the Lord of heaven and earth, you'll have a heart for the poor. That's why we do the City Vision Fair. If you praise the Lord of heaven and earth, you won't be bored. If you praise the Father, Lord of heaven and earth, you will deal with all these things. Jesus, Jesus turned to the grace of God in order to face life. Are you above it? Let's pray. Father, as we go to the table, we now ask that you would show us that in the brokenness of the bread and the poured-outness of the cup, we see your Son being what we should be. We thank you that you didn't send us one more prophet. You didn't send us one more priest. You didn't send us one more king. You sent us the prophet, priest, and king. You didn't send us one more teacher. You sent us the teacher because you sent us a Savior. And now we ask that you would help us to turn to that and away from our good works. We thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you're a God of grace. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
