TITLE: The Gospel Church
SCRIPTURE: Acts 11:19-30; 13:1-3
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Acts: The Gospel in the City
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-gospel-church/

============================================================

The scripture reading is from Acts chapters 11 and 13. Now those who had been scattered by the persecution that broke out when Stephen was killed traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, spreading the word only among Jews. Some of them, however, men from Cyprus and Cyrene, went to Antioch and began to speak to Greeks also, telling them the good news about the Lord Jesus. The Lord's hand was on them, and a great number of people believed and turned to the Lord. News of this reached the church in Jerusalem, and they sent Barnabas to Antioch. When he arrived and saw what the grace of God had done, he was glad and encouraged them all to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts. He was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith, and a great number of people were brought to the Lord. Then Barnabas went to Tarsus to look for Saul, and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. So for a whole year, Barnabas and Saul met with the church and taught great numbers of people. The disciples were called Christians first at Antioch. During this time, some prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch. One of them, named Agabus, stood up and through the Spirit predicted that a severe famine would spread over the entire Roman world. This happened during the reign of Claudius. The disciples, as each one was able, decided to provide help for the brothers and sisters living in Judea. This they did, sending their gifts to the elders by Barnabas and Saul. Now in the church at Antioch, there were prophets and teachers. Barnabas, Simeon, called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manan, who had been brought up with Herod, the Tetrarch, and Saul. While they were worshiping the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, set apart for me, Barnabas and Saul, for the work to which I have called them. So after they had fasted and prayed, they placed their hands on them and sent them off. Word of the Lord. So we've been going through the book of Acts, and the book of Acts is about the earliest Christianity, the original Christianity. And this text, this passage, it's the end of chapter 11, and the result of what happens in 11 is there at the beginning of chapter 13, is about how the church in Antioch was formed. Now the church of Antioch was one of the most important churches in the early Christianity. And if I was actually going to try to take a look at all of the things that we learned from this whole passage, we would notice a few things. For example, the importance of outreach to new groups of people. Because in verses 19, 20, and 21, as you, I think, can see, up until this moment, when the Christians took the gospel message, they took it to people who already believed the Bible. So they either took the gospel message to Jews, they took the gospel message to Samaritans, who, by the way, also believed in the Hebrew Scriptures, though they interpreted them differently. They took it to the Ethiopian, which we saw in Acts 8, Cornelius, the Roman centurion in Acts 10. But these people were what they called God-fearers. They were Gentiles who believed the Old Testament, the Hebrew Scriptures. But for the very first time in history, we're told here in verse 20, some, however, men from Cyprus and Cyrene went to Antioch and began to speak to the Greeks. Now, the word there is Hellenists, which means polytheists, people who were ancient pagans. They did not believe the Scriptures at all. And they were given the gospel message, and many of them became Christians. And the result of this, you can actually see in chapter 13, verses 1 to 3, which was the very first church in Antioch. And look at who the leaders were. It says they were prophets and teachers. And they list them. Barnabas, who was a Cypriot Jew, bicultural Jew. Simeon called Niger. The word Niger means black. And this man was a black African. Lucius of Cyrene. Cyrene was in North Africa, but the North Africans were not black. They were more like what we would call Arabic. Manan, we don't know much about him, except he was brought up with Herod, which means he was an upper crust person. And then Saul, who we know was not only Jewish, but a professor, essentially, an academic. And so we have, for the first time, we have the first multi-ethnic, multinational, multi-class church, Christian church in history. That's the reason why it was in Antioch that the believers in Christ were first called Christians. You see, up to now, every nationality had their own religion. So, they were just called, I mean, you were Roman, and they had the Roman religion, you were Greek, you had the Greek religion, you were, you know, whatever. However... based on race, and it actually brings in people from different races, and that's why they had to come up with a name, and they were called Christians. We also see that this early church was a praying church, because if you look at verse 2 and 3, you'll learn that this was the very first church that ever strategically sent out missionaries. They got their idea while they were fasting and praying, and then when they got the idea from the Holy Spirit, they then sent them out with fasting and praying. This is a church that prayed, prayed, prayed, prayed. We also see that after the people were converted, verses 25, 26 in there, we're told that they were built up. They weren't just brought to faith. For quite a long time, for a whole year, they were instructed, they were discipled, we would say. We also see, verses 27, 28, and 29, that they reached out to the poor when people had needs. They served people. Now, wouldn't it be nice if there was a sermon that went through all those things that talked about outreach and cultural diversity and prayer and discipleship and caring for people in need? That would be a great sermon, wouldn't it, five points, and we could have done all that, but I'm not going to do that. I'll tell you why. One thing about going through a book like this, Book of Acts, these themes come up over and over again, and we have been dealing with some of these themes, and we will deal with more of them. But I'd like to show you a kind of easy-to-miss key to gospel ministry, an easy-to-miss overlooked key to gospel ministry, and it's what Barnabas does smack almost in the middle of all this. It says, they sent Barnabas after all these people became converted at Antioch, and when he arrived and he saw what the grace of God had done, he was glad and encouraged them to remain true to the Lord with all their hearts. He was a good man full of the Holy Spirit. I would like to spend the whole rest of this time looking at that. It's not one of the main themes of this text. It's something of a less prominent item, but it's a main theme in the Bible, and because of our culture and because of our church's nature, I think we need to hear about this. I'd like to show you what this special ministry was, what it is, this ministry of Barnabas, what it is, why it's important, how to do it, and the key to it all, okay? First of all, what it is. It's just too easy to go by this. It says here that when Barnabas went down to Antioch, the word Barnabas, by the way, the name Barnabas means son of consolation, son of comfort, and when he arrived and he saw what had been happening, he was glad and he encouraged them. Now, if you go to about four different translations, you're going to see four different words or so. For what he does there. And whenever you see a translation is differing on what a word, how to render an English word, it's because the Greek word has a lexical range that's too rich, broad, and multidimensional to be conveyed by a single English word. And when you find something like that, you know this is a word that needs to be pondered. If there's no one English word that can get it across. The Greek word here, and it's a very important word in the Bible, is the word parakaleo. Now, there's two parts to it, obviously. Kaleo means to call. It means to point people toward a goal or a truth. It's to call out. It's a strong word. But the word para, which we actually have in our English language, the prefix para means to come alongside. Like in para, medic, para, legal, that kind of thing. To come alongside, to be sympathetic, to be next to you, to be near you. Now, if you sense a little bit of a tension between the two parts of this word, you're right. And it's one of the reasons why it's hard to get across with any one particular English word. It is a strong, tender word. To call is a forceful thing. It's to say, this is where you need to go. This is what you've got to see. Sometimes the word is exhort in the Bible. But on the other hand, the word para means sympathetic, gentle, tender, identifying with a person, standing almost in their shoes. And so what we have here is a strong, tender word. Word, it's too strong a word. One of the problems with the English word encouragement, it's too strong a word to get across the idea of encouragement. It's too strong for the idea that this is holding your hand. Sometimes encouragement means just holding your hand and being nice. It's too strong a word for that. On the other hand, it's too soft and tender a word to convey the idea of cracking a whip. It's a sympathetic, loving insistence. mixture of truth and love. It's an incredible mixture of truth and love. And you actually can see it a little bit when it says he encouraged them to what? To remain true with all their hearts. It's a mixture of the truth and it's a mixture of the love. And the word encourage is, I guess, okay, because you have the word courage in there at least. But actually, the older English words were better, which we don't use anymore. It's to beseech. There's a great word which nobody uses anymore, or to entreat. So that's what it is. That's the ministry. Now, secondly, let me show you how important it is. You see, in verses 19, 20, 21, you have evangelism. You've got people reaching out and talking about Christ and people finding faith. Down in verse 25, 26, you have instruction. You have grounding. You have teaching. But between the two, Barnabas shows up and does parakaleo, parakletic ministry. This intense, personal, and yet exhortational ministry to people. And you'll see how important it is, because what happens, isn't it interesting? It says he was a good man, full of the Holy Spirit and faith. He encourages them, and a great number of people were also brought to the Lord. That's interesting. He didn't go down to evangelize. He didn't go down to try to preach to them. He didn't go down to try to say, here's... What he did was he went to encourage them. He went to give them the parakletic ministry, this intensity of truth and love. And as a result, everything else went on hyperdrive. The evangelism and the growth and the discipleship, everything else. It was almost something that turbocharged everything else. Let me put it like this. We cannot grow into the people we were designed to be except in this soil. We have to be surrounded by people who are not so cowardly that they just affirm us, and not so impatient and unloving that they give advice too quickly. We need to be surrounded by people who are characterized by truth and love, or we won't grow. Now, do you know why? Let's be honest with ourselves. Come on, let's be honest with ourselves. We're insecure. And some of you are saying, gee, in New York City, I see an awful lot of people walking around that look very self-assured. And of course, since some of you are those people, you know better. It's actually people very often who look very self-assured who are doing it because they're insecure. And here's what I mean by insecure is we're always spinning ourselves. We're always spinning to ourselves. We're always justifying ourselves. We're always making excuses. We're always, you know, we're always saying we're not that bad, or well, we need to change, but we're better than them. And well, you'd be like me too if you had my mother. And, you know, we're always spinning. We're always self-justifying. We're always making excuses for ourselves. And we'll never change unless you get someone like this. You get some, because you see, if a person comes at you with a truth, but it's not incredibly tender and patient and kind and loving and convincing that they love you. If a person just comes at you with the truth, you'll just dismiss them. You've got all kinds of defense mechanisms. On the other hand, if a person just loves you and just affirms you and never comes at you and challenges you, you'll use that for the status quo. Because you see, we're all actually addicts. Our sins, the sin that's most distorting your life would by definition be the one you see the least. Right? Which means you're in denial. Which means unless there's an intervention, unless there's people around who have this incredible mixture of truth and love together, you'll either dismiss them or you'll use them, you know, just to support the way you are. And you'll never, ever change. Now, the reason why this is so incredibly hard and bad is because nobody is naturally in their temperament like this. Some of us, we all fall off the paracletic beam, one side or the other. Our personalities are either tend to be affirming, but we're really not direct enough. Or we're very happy at giving direction, but we're really not very impatient. We're not very patient. We're not very kind. We just want to get it done. Let me tell you the truth. And there it is. So nobody's like that. And yet we die without them. It's not just the fact that we don't have the people. It's also the fact that our cultures, human cultures, tend to not be able to keep these two things together, the truth and love. If you come from a more traditional culture in which the family matters most, and you get your self-esteem out of duty, then if you don't do your duty to your family and the people around you, they'll just shame you. They will shame you. a great deal of love. On the other hand, if you live in our New York City, Western culture, we don't believe you get your self-esteem from duty. We get our self-esteem from our desires. We look at our desires, we see what we most want, we follow our dream, and we want to be affirmed. We want love. We don't want truth. And therefore, every culture either is long on truth and short on love or long on affirmation and short on truth and accountability, and we're dying, or at least we're not changing. We're not growing. As soon as Barnabas shows up and he bathes them with this paracletic ministry, this ministry of encouragement, this ministry of truth and love, people start growing. Good. Things start happening. It's like the fertilizer in the soil. And up comes the stems, and out go the leaves, and out come the blossoms, and down go the roots. All right. You say, let's get down to earth. What do you mean? What does it look like on the ground? Well, this is actually interesting. We don't know. I can't get you much out of the text here. I have to go to the rest of the Bible. But one of the problems with this whole ministry, as important as it is, it permeates all the other ministries. For example, there's no church that has a department of encouragement and a minister of encouragement. And here's five staff people, and what they do is they encourage. I'll tell you why. You know, you don't eat, you know, when you sit down to eat, you don't have, you don't have, here's your meat, you eat that. Here's your peas, you eat that. Here's your mashed potatoes, you eat that. And here's your salt, and then you eat that. No, that wouldn't work very well. The salt goes on the other things. And the same way, encouragement is supposed to salt everything. It's supposed to be out there. It's not supposed to be something that just ministers do. It's supposed to be something that we're all doing with each other. And therefore, it happens all the time in regular conversations. So some years ago, I wrote something about this. I said, for example, if you have this skill of encouragement, then on the one hand, in your conversations, you're not just a parrot, just saying, I hear you saying, I hear you saying, I hear you saying. But on the other hand, you're not a detective firing away with questions. You did what? What did you do? What? You're not a florist. Everything's such a blessing and so lovely. But you're also not a drill sergeant saying, okay, look, here's what you do. You just do this and this thing. If you've got a problem, you do this. You know, tell me about it later, how it went. And you're certainly not a judge. You know, you did what? An encourager in conversation summarizes what the person just said so well that they say, that's what I was trying to say. And then you push back. An encourager is someone who is transparent enough about your own struggles that people feel free to open up, but not so transparent that it's all about you. I mean, do you see how hard this is? And do you see how difficult it is? And let me tell you why I felt the need to actually take one of six or seven things in this text and spend pretty much the entire sermon on it is because I think we live in a cultural moment in which this is harder than it's ever been, as important as it is, and here's why. Real truth and love, this mixture, almost can only happen pretty much in person. Do you know why? Because when you're speaking the truth and love, the love largely comes through nonverbal. It tends to come through your affect and your face and your demeanor and your tone and your spirit. So the love comes not as much through the words as through the nonverbal, and the truth tends to come more through the words. Well, you know what that means? It means you've got to speak the truth and love. You almost always have to do it in person, which means it's not enough to put a little smiley face on your text message. And the fact is that what I'm talking about pretty much can't be done unless you're face-to-face. And I know, I've been here long enough. I've been here going on 24, 25 years. And I certainly can remember, and I know this for a fact, that years ago when somebody moved to New York, after you were here for a year, you had three or four times more face-to-face friends than you do now. Why do you think you have so many fewer? Why do you think it takes longer and longer for you to really develop face-to-face friends? It's because of the Internet. Now listen, the Internet is a friend of information, but the enemy of reflection. It's a friend of weak ties. It's an enemy of deep face-to-face. On the Internet, you can't see a person's facial expression. You can't see that they've lost weight or gained weight. You can't see the bags under their eyes. You can't tell just by the effect what's going on. And you can actually, you can do truth fairly well. do them together. And so we're actually at a time in which it's harder than ever to do this. And yet, think about this for a moment. You know, it says in Hebrews 3.13, some of you may have heard me talk about this before. It's a very famous verse. It says, the old King James says, exhort one another daily, lest you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. Now, deceitfulness means you're in denial. You're deceived about some things that are wrong with you. And the only way you're ever going to grow is if somebody exhorts you. But guess what that word means? I mean, guess what that word translates? Exhort there, beseech there, it means parakaleo. And it actually says, you should have some people daily that are these kinds of people. Not so cowardly that they will not give you critique, but not so unloving that they will give it to you very quickly. You need to find those people, you need to have a cadre of those people in your life, and you need to be able to see them face to face regularly. And I actually think that pretty much everybody in this room, including me, would to some degree struggle to really say, not only that that happens, but even struggle to know how you could make it happen. And yet the Bible says, you'll perish without it. So I brought you to, let's see, I brought you to where I usually try to bring you in a sermon. I've shown you what the Bible says you do, and then brought you to the pit of, just the precipice of despair that you'll never do it. So that you'll listen to the last seven or eight minutes of the sermon, you know. And here's what I'd like to show you. What are we going to do about it? I just said, nobody does this well. Nobody does it naturally. We all need it. All right, then. What's going to happen? How can we get it? Well, what's interesting to me, and I don't think it's an accident, is we're told that Barnabas was really good at it. Why? Because he was a good man full of the Holy Spirit. That is not in any way a mistake. That's not just a throwaway line. The reason he was incredibly good at the paracletic ministry of encouragement, of this truth and love, was because he was filled with the Holy Spirit. And do you know what the Bible calls the Holy Spirit? If you go to the upper room discourse of Jesus Christ, the night before he was about to die, all the things he's talked to his disciples about, you find it in John chapter 13, 14, 15, 16. The story starts like this. It's the night before he's going to die. He spent three years with these guys, trying to get them ready. And he says in John 13, Jesus says, I'm about to leave you. And where I'm going, you cannot come. And the disciples are so clueless. After months of being taught about his death and all this, first of all, Peter says, what do you mean you're going somewhere where I can't go? I will go with you even if I should die in the effort. You know, he knows himself so little. Then Thomas, Thomas says, okay, you know, Jesus says, I'm going somewhere you can't, but you can't go. You can't follow me. And Thomas says, well, of course we can't go because you haven't told me where you're going. In the beginning of chapter 14, he says, well, yeah, all right, but you haven't just tell us where you're going. Then we'll go. Just give us directions. And Jesus looks at them and says, I think it's verse nine. One of the saddest things I think you can find Jesus saying in the Bible, he looks at them and says, have you been with me so long? And still you do not know me. He also knows that they're not ready for the darkness. They're not ready for what's going to happen. They are not ready. So how does he encourage them? How does he fill them with courage? How does he get them there? He doesn't do the traditional or the modern culture's way. He doesn't on the one hand, scold them and shame them and said, do your duty. Doesn't do that. On the other hand, he doesn't do the Western way. He doesn't just affirm them. He doesn't say, climb every mountain, ford every stream, follow every rainbow till you find your dream. You know, he doesn't, he doesn't do that either. What does he do? In order to encourage them, he says, I'm going to send you the Holy Spirit. But he, and okay, the Holy Spirit, fine. But you know what he calls the Holy Spirit? The other paraclete. It's one of the only places in the Bible, one of two places, where the verb form, which is used a lot, paracleo, is put into a noun form. And the Holy Spirit is called the noun. But he's called the other paraclete, which is translated other advocate in most modern translations. You know why? Advocate, you say? Yes. Because the word in the noun form indicated a legal counsel, a defense attorney. And when you think of a defense attorney, suddenly, I think, you begin to understand what this truth and love thing, what this is paraclete. you have an attorney to defend you, on the one hand, is that attorney right with you? Is he alongside of you? Is she alongside of you? Right there with you? Yes. For you? Yes. But not just holding your hand. Oh, no. No. That's not what you need from a defense attorney. You want that defense attorney to be beseeching, to be appealing, to be arguing, to be speaking to the judge and the jury. So when Jesus calls the Holy Spirit the other advocate, who is the first advocate? If this is the second advocate, who is the first advocate? Well, the only other place in the Bible that uses the noun form is 1 Timothy, pardon me, 1 John 2, verse 1, where it says, if anyone sins, we have an advocate, a paraclete with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous one. He is the atoning sacrifice for our sins. Now, here's what this means. Jesus is your first advocate. If you believe in him, he's beside you. He's not just beside you. He's standing in your place, and he's speaking to the judgment seat, the throne. And here's basically what he's saying, in effect. He's saying, Father, my people, the people who believe in me, the people I represent have sinned. And your law says that the wages of sin is death. But here is my blood. I have paid it, and it would be unjust for you to get two payments for the same debt. And therefore, your law now demands acquittal for my people. And that's the reason why he's called our advocate and the righteous one. He's not just standing beside us. He's standing in our place, and he's appealing, and he's speaking to the Father on our behalf. And when the Father sees us, in a sense, this is all trying to get across something that's the reality of which is probably ineffable. But the point is, when the Father sees you and me, if you believe in Jesus, you are a beauty. You are not condemned. You are accepted. You are righteous. That's what it means to say Jesus is the first advocate. Now and only now will you understand how the Holy Spirit encourages. Because the Holy Spirit is the second advocate. Well, what does that mean? Here's what it means. Just as the first advocate speaks for you to God, the second advocate speaks to you for you. Do you understand that? To you for you. What's he doing? The second advocate is talking to you about your first advocate. And he's not just talking. He's beseeching you. He's appealing to you. He's arguing with you. And you want to know what it sounds like? I'll tell you what it sounds like. This is what it sounds like. Here's how the Holy Spirit encourages. Here's how the Holy Spirit gets you ready for anything. The Holy Spirit says, look at what he's done for you. See, Jesus says throughout John's 14, the Holy Spirit, the other comforter, the other counselor, the other advocate will come and he will make what I have done glorious to you. So what he does is he comes and says, the second advocate says, look at the first advocate. In other words, look at how he loves you. Look at what he's done for you. Look at what it cost him to love you. And look at how righteous you are in him. Now, why are you upset? Where is the freedom and confidence that would be in accord with this fact? Are you looking at this fact? Do you see what he's done? Why are you so worried that people have criticized you? Why are you so upset about a loss of worldly power or approval or comfort or control? You've got him. What is wrong with you? Lift up your hearts. What's he doing? He's encouraging you. But he's not just saying, climb every mountain, forward every stream. Nor is he saying, do your duty. He's saying, ground your identity in Jesus Christ. And you'll be able to face anything. Anything. And the only way that you will ever be a person who overcomes your lack of balance, you're either a lover without truth or you're a truther without love, is for you to get the Holy Spirit encouraging you, talking to you about the second advocate, talking to you about your first advocate, the second paraclete talking to you about your first paraclete, and exhorting you and encouraging you to the place where he says, will you just get rid of your sadness? Will you get rid of your fears? Will you get rid of your unhappiness? Will you get rid of your self-doubts? Look at what he's done for you. Look at what he's done for you. And then you can turn around and become an encourager too, because you encourage with the encouragement you've gotten. A great example of this, if you want to see a perfect example of it, years ago, I read a story about something that happened years ago. It was an 18th century Welsh preacher who told the story of how he became a Christian as about a 15 or 16 year old boy. He was in a home with the rest of his family, and they were around the deathbed. a wonderful Christian woman, but now she was dying and everybody thought she was unconscious. By the way, be careful what you say when you're around somebody you think is unconscious. And they were saying, what a wonderful woman, but poor woman, poor woman. Two husbands died on her and she is in poverty. And she's had all these chronic ailments, poor woman. And with that, she opened her eyes, looked around and said, who calls me poor? Who calls me poor? I am rich and I will stand before him bold as a lion. And then she died. And that's one of the reasons why this young man remembered that and told the story a little later. But do you know what happened? What happened? She was bold as a lion looking at her own death. She didn't care. She was fine. She'd been encouraged. You know why? Her second advocate was talking to her about her first advocate. As it was, here's what she was saying. When they were saying, oh, you know, two husbands died on her and she's got no money and, you know, she's been sick and all that. She says, I've got the husband, as it were, she was saying, I've got the one husband that can never die. And I've got the one, I've got the only wealth that you can never lose. And the only disease that could really kill me, which is sin, that's been dealt with by my Savior years ago. So I'm not poor. Stop feeling sorry for me. It is well with my soul. When the Holy Spirit encourages you like that, when your second paraclete tells you about the first paraclete, when your second advocate about your first advocate, then you can be an advocate for others. You can be an encourager. You can speak the truth in love. Listen, please don't be so busy that you don't do this. Please don't be so scared of involvement that you don't do this. Please don't be so cowardly about upsetting people that you don't do this. We need you. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for giving us our, this exhortation. Thank you for actually, O Holy Spirit, speaking to us about our Lord Jesus Christ, even as we were thinking about these things and looking at this text. I pray, Father, that you would make us a community of encouragement, a church filled with encouragers, filled with people who speak the truth and love to each other, so we would not be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. I thank you for this call, this exhortation, this beseeching, and I pray that you would give us the desire and the ability to respond to it and be what you have called us to be. We pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
