TITLE: The Doctrine of God
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 139:1-24
TOPICS: Doctrine
SERIES: Who’s Afraid of Doctrine?
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-doctrine-of-god/

============================================================

A scripture is found on page 8, it's from Psalm 139. O Lord, you have searched me and you know me. You know when I sit and when I rise. You perceive my thoughts from afar. You discern my going out and my lying down. You are familiar with all my ways. Before a word is on my tongue, you know it completely, O Lord. You hem me in, behind, and before. You have laid your hand upon me. Such knowledge is too wonderful for me, too lofty for me to attain. Where can I go from your spirit? Where can I flee from your presence? If I go up to the heavens, you are there. If I make my bed in the depths, you are there. If I rise on the wings of the dawn, if I settle on the far side of the sea, even there your hand will guide me. Your right hand will hold me fast. If I say, surely the darkness will hide me and the light become night around me, even the darkness will not be dark to you. The night will shine like the day, for darkness is as light to you. For you created my inmost being. You knit me together in my mother's womb. I praise you because I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Your works are wonderful. I know that full well. My frame was not hidden from you when I was made in the secret place, when I was woven together in the depths of the earth. Your eyes saw my unformed body. All the days ordained for me were written in your book before one of them came to be. How precious to me are your thoughts, O God. How vast is the sum of them. Were I to count them, they would outnumber the grains of sand. When I awake, I am still with you. If only you would slay the wicked, O God. Away from me, you bloodthirsty men. They speak of you with evil intent. Your adversaries misuse your name. Do I not hate those who hate you, O Lord, and abhor those who rise up against you? I have nothing but hatred for them. I count them my enemies. Search me, O God, and know my heart. Test me and know my anxious thoughts. See if there's any offensive way in me and lead me in the way everlasting. This is God's Word. I'm going to look at a little series of psalms, each one of which is filled with what you could only call doctrine, teaching about God, about truth, about the nature of reality, nature of the universe, human nature. Now, I know that the idea of doctrine, the terms doctrine or dogma today, have almost completely negative connotations, but I would like you to keep a couple things in mind. Basically, doctrine is unavoidable. So, for example, if there's anybody here who says, aha, doctrine, bah, doctrine, I believe we shouldn't press anything on people as doctrine, everyone needs to decide what is right or wrong for him or herself. But you see, when you say that, as we often point out here, that is a doctrine. It's a very European, very enlightenment, very individualistic understanding of reality. And when you say everybody should be like that, you're pushing your doctrine. You're saying this should be the way society is. You think it's liberated, but it's basically a doctrine. Or somebody says, well, I don't know about that. All I mean is this. I think all that really matters to God is that we're good people. I don't think it matters to God whether we believe this or that or this doctrine or that doctrine. All that matters is that we're good people. Well, that's a doctrine. You know, that's called doctrine of justification by works. You know, there is no way to avoid a doctrine-based life. There is no way to avoid promoting doctrine to other people. So if there's no way to avoid a doctrine-based life and promoting doctrine to other people, then let's just work at getting our doctrine down. Let's make it coherent. Let's make it rich. Let's ground it in the ancient wisdom of the Bible. Let's make it relevant and practical for today. And there's no better place to do that than in the book of Psalms. Now, this psalm that you just had read is clearly about God. It's all about God. It's all about the being of God, the nature of God, the attributes of God. It's the doctrine of God. There's three things that David, the psalmist, says here about God, and they seem hard to reconcile with one another. This psalm says that God's being is an inescapable reality, a radical threat, but a transforming delight. An inescapable reality, a radical threat, but a transforming delight. Now, how could that all be true? And if you seek to see how it can all be true together, it gets you into the basic message of the psalm. So let's do that. First, first thing that David tells us an inescapable reality. Now, he shows us this in four ways, and we can survey the psalm. The psalm actually breaks down into four almost completely equal and symmetrical parts. The first six verses tell us that God is inescapably all-knowing. His knowledge is infinite and inescapable. He knows everything about you. He knows everything about what you're saying on the outside or what you're doing, but He even knows your thoughts, verse 2. He even knows your inmost motivations, verse 4. He even knows what you're going to do or what you can do. His knowledge is infinite. So first of all, His knowledge is infinitely, inescapably beyond us. Secondly, verses 7 to 12 talk about His presence. It talks about how God's presence is infinite. His presence is inescapable. It gets very poetic here, of course, in verse 8. He says, if I go to the highest star, God is there. If I go into the deepest depths of the earth, God is there. He literally says, if I make my bed in Sheol, the place of the dead, the grave, God is there. If I go to the east, utter east, where the dawn is, God is there. If I go to the utter west, over the sea, over the Mediterranean Sea, God is there. God's presence is infinite and inescapable. God's knowledge is infinite and inescapable. Then, thirdly, verses 13 to 18, we see the power of God. David talks about the fact that the power of God is infinite and inescapable. And here he's really, again, he goes, he shows the amazing, comprehensive, infinite nature of God's knowledge, His power. First of all, he says, God's power is the source of and therefore sustains and guides every fiber of your being. Verse 15, he makes your frame, that's your body. But verse 13, it says he also makes your inmost being. That's your psyche. That's your true self. That's who you are, your unique gifts and loves and aspirations and hopes. In other words, he creates your identity. So, God's power is the source of and therefore the sustaining and guiding, overshadowing power over every fiber of your being. But the other way, God says it, is God is, His power is over every second of your life story. He knit you together in your mother's womb. And when it says, He saw my unformed body, that's a single Hebrew word for embryo. You were with me when I was an embryo, says David. You're with me in my mother's womb. You're already guiding me. You're already mapping things out for me. You're already sustaining me. You're already caring for me. And then at the end, he says, verse 16, every one of my days is ordained. So, from the moment of conception to the last second of your life, the last breath, it's all been mapped out. The source of all of that is God's power. His power is directing it. His power is guiding it. So, you see, we're surrounded by the infinite, inescapable knowledge of God. We're surrounded by the inescapable, infinite presence of God. He's omniscient. He's omnipresent. We're surrounded by the infinite, inescapable power of God. He's omnipotent. Now, when you come to the last section, which is verse 19 to 24, I'm sure you already noticed this tonight when it was read, it seems dissonant. It seems to be a departure from the others. It seems that David is not thinking about God, and suddenly he goes into a kind of rant, and it's sort of an embarrassing rant. What is all this stuff about hating people? Come on. But actually, this is not a departure. This is not something different. When we come up against the cries like this in the Psalms, there's quite a few of them, where David cries against bloodthirsty men and against the enemies. How do you read those? Do you just consider these primitive and embarrassing? Don't. Here's why. It is right to be outraged against injustice. These are bloodthirsty men. It is right to be outraged against violence, isn't it? That can't be…we can't get over that. I hope you don't get over that. It's absolutely right for him and for us to be crying out to God against violence and social injustice. What is different is on this side of the cross, on this side of… he handled his enemies, having seen how he overcame evil, having seen how he prayed for his enemies as he was dying, we can't pray about our enemies like this anymore. We can cry out to God to do something, but we don't pray like this anymore. But you see, here's David's point. This is not something different than the other parts of the psalm. David says he's not just, we are not just surrounded by infinite inescapable knowledge of God, presence of God, power of God, but also the infinite inescapable holiness of God, the justice of God. There they are. There's this God. And the whole point of the psalm is to say you can't deny it. You have to dress it. You can't get away from it. You have to deal with him. Put it like this. If you take hold of a blade, a knife, it cuts you. Why? The being of the blade is sharper and harder than your being, and the being of your hand, and therefore your being gives way to its being. And David is telling us God's being is the sharpest and hardest substance being in the universe. Everyone must give way to it. Everything must give way to it. So there is the first thing David shows us is the inescapable reality of God. But David is such a great poet, and as a result, he doesn't just give us information about God. He tells us how he feels about that information. He doesn't just give us insights about God. He tells us how his own heart reacts. And here we see deep ambivalence, especially in the early part of the psalm. David understands that if this is God, that is radically threatening. Take a look at verse 6, for example. In verse 6, David says, such knowledge, he's looking at the knowledge of God, such knowledge is too wonderful for me. Now, on the surface, the English translation doesn't really give you the tension that's actually in that verse. It almost sounds like he's saying, oh, it's just so wonderful. You know, it sounds like an exclamation. But actually, David is saying, this is overwhelming to me. This is too much for me. Literally, in the Hebrew, it says, wonderful is this knowledge from me. It's against me. I can't take it. I'm overwhelmed by it. It's too much for me, is what he's saying. And my reading of verse 6 is confirmed by verse 7. Because there, David says, where can I get away? How can I get away from this God who's always there with holy eyes? His face is right there. He sees everything, every one of my thoughts, every one of my motives, everything. Now, when David recoils like this, he's only being human. In some ways, he's very contemporary. So, for example, Scott Peck tells, in one of his books, it's called The People of the Lie. And in that book, he tells about counseling a woman named Charlene. Now, Charlene has a problem with meaninglessness in life. And Scott Peck's trying to help her. So, he's counseling her. And at one point, he says, well, let me ask you a question. Do you believe in God? So, her eyes sort of smoldered a little bit. And she says, well, I used to be very involved in a Christian church. In fact, I used to be a teacher in a Christian church. But she says, I'm not a Christian now. Now, I'll start to quote the paragraph. She says, I just believe in love. I don't know what the meaning of life is at all. Well, said Scott Peck. Well, I said, I'm reading his account. Well, I said, what do Christians say is the meaning of life? Even if it isn't what you believe anymore, at least it's a model for you. I'm not interested in models, she said. Well, surely, I said, you know what Christians say is the meaning of life and the purpose of existence, don't you? She looked at me and said, we exist for the glory of God, she said in a flat monotone, sullenly repeating what she had learned by rote and now was being extracted from her at gunpoint. You know, she's very, very unhappy when she says, yes, I know we exist for the glory of God. Well, I asked, doesn't that help you a bit? Silence, and then she exploded. I cannot do it, she said. There's no room for me in that. I want to live for me. That would be my death. I don't want to live for God. I will not live for God. I want to live for me for my own sake. And Scott Peck ends the paragraph. She's so alone was all I could whisper. says she's not just a modern person, she's a human person. Because look at verse 11 and 12. David is feeling so threatened by the idea of a holy God looking at him all the time, always there, down into the depths of his heart, knowing everything. He starts to say, if only I could get darkness, if only I could cover up. And Charlene and David are only doing what Adam and Eve did. It goes all the way back to the Garden of Eden. Remember, God comes into the garden and Adam and Eve, they cover up, they hide, they feel like I'm suffocating, I can't get my breath. They experience the same cosmic claustrophobia that David experiences, that Charlene experiences, that we experience. Because Adam says to God, when I heard you coming, I knew I was naked and I was afraid, so I hid. Now, you know what he's saying? Adam says, I cannot stand you having unfiltered information about me. I can't stand the idea of you having knowledge of me, of everything, looking right at me, and I have no control over that knowledge. I can't stand it. I'm suffocating. There's no room for me. See, it's the way we are. And nobody has explained this threat, this feeling of being threatened by the being of God, like Jean-Paul Sartre in Being in Nothingness. It tells a great story there. In Being in Nothingness, Jean-Paul Sartre says, and he has this imaginary story, he says, I'm looking through a keyhole, and I'm enjoying it because I'm spying on somebody. I'm seeing them, but they don't know that I'm seeing them. I'm an unviewed viewer. And so I see what they're doing, but they don't even know I'm watching. And boy, am I enjoying it. And then suddenly, I hear a sound, and I realize there's somebody looking through a keyhole at me, looking through a keyhole. And I suddenly realize my unviewed viewing is being viewed by an unviewed viewer. Now, don't expect me to say that again. I won't get it right. But you know what he's saying? He says, I was enjoying myself until I realized that I was being watched by somebody that I couldn't see, and that radically is dehumanizing. That's radically disempowering. If someone can see everything I'm doing, but I have no control over that knowledge, I have no way to filter it. I have no way to control it. If someone sees me that I can't see, I'm disempowered. That person has power over me. And it's dehumanizing. Now, I'm filled with guilt. I'm filled with shame because someone is watching me watch other people. And then he reasons like this. He says, that's why if there was a God, a God like Psalm 139, if there was a God at every keyhole, if there was a God who had absolute knowledge and absolute omnipresence, and he had absolutely unfiltered knowledge of everything I did, that would be the most dehumanizing possible situation. I wouldn't be able to be a free human subject. I would be an object, and therefore that God cannot exist. If I'm going to be a free human subject, says Sartre, this God cannot exist. I must have absolute control over what people see about me, what anyone sees about me, or I am not free. Now, over the years, I've had plenty of years to think about that story. And I think one of the things that bothers me, as brilliant as it is, and as brilliant as he is, I think he missed something. And what he misses is it's not that simple. What traumatizes us is not simply the idea of being known and seen. Because as dehumanizing as it is to be known and seen like that, it's just as dehumanizing, if not more dehumanizing, to not be seen or known. We want to be seen. We want to be known. There's nothing more dehumanizing than to be ignored, to be not noticed, to be not missed, to feel that nothing we do is making any difference, is having any impact, that people don't see it, people don't know it. I mean, there's something very odd going on here, because on the one hand, we desperately want to be seen and desperately want to be known. And on the other hand, we desperately fear being seen and we desperately fear being known. You know, if you're savvy parents and savvy teachers have come to realize this isn't true of all kids, but with many kids, if they're misbehaving, you know what the hardest, the worst thing you can do to them? Ignore them. You'll find with some kids that if they're misbehaving. them to a chair, and if you yell at them, that's nothing so bad as to ignore them. Because what we want deep down is to be seen, to be known. And yet, we don't want to be seen, we don't want to be known. What's going on? What is the real problem? It can't be, Sartre makes it too simple. It can't just be that we hate being seen and known because we want to be seen and known. Why? What's the real problem? Well, let's go back to the illustration. Why does Sartre enjoy looking through the keyhole? Because you know if you get unfiltered information about anybody, you're going to get dirt. Anybody. If you get unfiltered information, information that they can't control, you will find hypocrisy, you will find inconsistency, you will find pettiness, you will find selfishness, self-centeredness, dishonesty. You'll find all kinds of stuff. And when you see it, and you know about them and they don't know about you, you have power over them. When you find those things out they don't want you to see, you have power over them. Listen, think about it. Over the last four hours, what if God sent me in an email all of the juiciest thoughts you've had since 4 o'clock? The petty thoughts, the selfish thoughts, the lustful thoughts, the angry thoughts. And what if I just chose the, you know, the most, sort of the 800 or 900 most juicy things that you've thought since 4 o'clock? And I put them up here on a, you know, an overhead projector. You couldn't bear just what's gone on in your head since 4 o'clock. You couldn't bear anyone seeing that. Why are we afraid of being known? Here's why. We want to be known because we want to be loved. If someone loves you but hasn't the slightest idea who you are, it doesn't work. The only way to be known, to be loved is to be known. But we also know if we're known all the way down into our inmost being, people will see all kinds of stuff. We want to be known because we want to be loved. But that's why we don't want to be known. Because if we really know, we won't be loved. We want to be known because we want to be loved. We don't want to be known because we want to be loved. It's simple. And this is the essence of the human condition. We are radically threatened by the idea of people really seeing who we are, and we are radically desirous of people seeing us. We are stuck. And if you think that this is a wonderful little philosophical conundrum that I've reminded you of, yes, I remember in my liberal arts studies studying something about that, it's a lot more than that. It's a lot more than that. We are all the children of Adam and Eve. Adam and Eve hid behind the leaves. David's trying to hide in the darkness. We want to hide. We want to get away. And we're all working to cover up. You know that. Why do some of you work too hard and you can't not? Why are some of you desperately afraid of committing to anybody and why some of the rest of you are overcommitted? You can never say no. You need to be needed. Why are some of you so worried about how you look and about your weight, etc.? I mean, it's a long list. I won't go through it. You know what these things are, according to the Bible? They're fig leaves. They're ways of covering. They're ways of keeping out. The scan. You don't want the deep scan. You don't want anybody to really look inside. There are ways for you to cover the dirt you know is in there. What's wrong? You know there's stuff that's wrong with you. Somebody could really look through the keyhole and get all the way in. We are stuck. We don't want to be known because we want to be loved. We want to be known because we want to be loved. And we are stuck. Is there any way out? Yeah, there is. David shows it to us. Because David doesn't just say that this inescapable reality of God is a radical threat. But it can be a transforming delight. Now, where does he say that? If you read closely, you will see that the early verses start to give way to something else. In the beginning, he says, this is too much for me, verse 6. Where can I go to get away, verse 7. Verse 11 and 12 says, maybe the darkness will hide me. Maybe I could cover myself with darkness, but that won't work. But there's already something going on. Look at verse 8, 9, and 10. Very dramatic. Where he says, if I would go here to get away from you, you're there. If I would go there to get away with you, you're there. If I would go there to get away from you, there you are. And then he says, and if I would go on the wings of the dawn, if I settle on the far side of the sea, even there, you're there. Even there. there, your hand will guide me, your right hand will hold me fast. Do you see the change? Most commentators over the years have seen a change in tone. If I go over there, you're there. If I go over there, you're there. If I go over there, even there, your right hand guides me. Your power upholds me. Sartre and all of us assume that if God has this absolute power, he will do with it what you would do with it. When we look through the keyhole, when we get the dirt, we have power. That's the reason why we're afraid of people looking deep in our hearts, because we're afraid of being rejected and being exploited. But David says here, what if this God, who has infinite knowledge and infinite power, what if this God used that infinite knowledge and presence and power for us, to guide us, to uphold us, to care for us? What if he used it all for us? Well, then, having an infinitely knowledgeable, infinitely present, infinitely powerful, infinitely holy God would actually be empowering, not disempowering. It would be liberating, not dehumanizing. And David begins to sense that this is the case. But finally, when he gets to verse 17 and 18, here's the breakthrough. And actually, it is an amazing statement, though, again, partly because our word, English word for precious, is so devalued. You know, the word precious is almost a…the English word for precious is just too precious, don't you think? But let me show you what he says. In verse 17, he says, how precious to me are your thoughts, O God. Derek Kidner, in his great commentary on the Psalms, says, this is amazing. The word precious is a word that is used to refer to gold, silver, diamonds, rubies, sapphires, and emeralds, precious stones. This means ultimate wealth. And in the beginning of the psalm, David was recoiling and threatened by God looking at his thoughts, right? See? In verse 2, he says, you know what I sit down when I rise? You perceive my thoughts from afar? This is too much for me, okay? In the beginning, David is thinking about God's looking at his thoughts. But in verse 17, he says, your thoughts, O God…what thoughts? Your thoughts toward me are like gold and silver and diamonds. David is saying…I don't know how to paraphrase this properly. David is saying, greater than all the jewels that lay under the earth, more valuable and precious than all the gold and all the silver there is, is you're knowing me. You're seeing me to the bottom. And when you get down to verses 22, 23, and 24, there we have an amazing statement. When David says, search me, test me, know me, he's saying, I want the deep scan. I'm not afraid anymore. You not only know me to the bottom, but I like it. You not only see all the way down to the bottom, it delights me to have you see me all the way in. Now, how did this happen? Derek Kidner says, something has happened. The commentator says, something had happened. In the beginning, he's scared, like we all are. It's only rational to be frightened. It's only rational to recoil, to say, there's no room for me. I can't breathe. Cosmic claustrophobia. Something got over it. And now he's living transparently. This is what you want. Not to be afraid of the deep scan. Not to be afraid to be known. Drop all your leaves. Not worry so much about what he sees, what anyone sees. How did David get this? And the only answer, here's the answer. You know when Charlene said, there'd be no room for me in that? David says in verse 13, God made my inmost being. He made my identity, my true self. In other words, we said God is sort of like a knife, the ultimate knife. But David realizes that if the being of God, if coming in contact with the being of God takes anything away out of my life, it wasn't really me. It wasn't the true me. Contact with God will not destroy my identity. I'll find it. And here's why. David has gotten assurance that when God looks all the way down into his heart, God is going to love him. David knows that he's not going to be rejected. David knows that though he's going to, that God's going to find bad things in there, he's not going to exploit him. He's not going to reject him. He's not going to reject him. going to be rejected. David knows that God's going to find bad things in there. He's not going to exploit them. He's not going to reject them. When someone looks at you with admiration in their eyes, when someone looks at you and they can tell that they find you beautiful, you don't mind them looking. And David says, greater than all the jewels on the face of the earth is the way you look at me. I love your look. I love your thoughts toward me. Now, how did that happen? David's unstuck. David's unstuck. David loves having God know him because David knows that though God knows him to the bottom, he loves him to the stars. Now, how did that happen? Well, David has an assurance from God that he's not going to exploit or use the knowledge he has. David has an assurance because David's a writer of Holy Scripture. He's inspired by the Holy Spirit. God let him know. But what about you and me? How can we know that? How can we get unstuck between this fear of being known and this desire of him being known? We have a resource even better than David had. Oh, I don't mean the Holy Spirit. I mean this. Romans chapter 1 tells us better than any other place in the Bible, this conundrum that we're in. Romans 1 says we want to get away from God and yet we were made for God. We want to get away from the presence of God and yet we were built for the presence of God. And Romans 1 says the very worst thing that we could possibly get is the thing we most want because the thing we most want is contrary to what we most need to get away from God, to be ourselves, to make room to be whoever we want to be. If you would really get away from the presence of God, if you really let darkness cover you, if you really somehow could get away from the presence of God, says Romans 1, because you were built for the presence of God, it would be a disaster. There would be disintegration, physical, psychological, spiritual disintegration. It would be a disaster if you got away from God. Jesus got that disaster. He received that disaster. All this stuff happened to Jesus. Jesus did get cast out of the presence of God. He said, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Jesus was covered with the ultimate darkness. The sun went out as he died and Jesus was stripped naked on that cross and they stared at him and they laughed at him and they jeered at him. He went through the ultimate dehumanization. Why? Why? Come on. You know why? Why are you afraid of people looking at you through keyholes? Why was Sartre afraid of people looking at you through keyholes? Because you know there's something wrong with you. That's the only reason why you don't want people to see. You know there's something wrong with you and Jesus has paid for it. You know you owe something. You know there's something wrong with you and Jesus has paid for it. And therefore, when David said, like jewels, like diamonds, like gold it is to experience your deep scan, to have you look at me, what does he mean? Well, he had an intuition of what we have in Christ. Because Jesus got the darkness, because Jesus was stripped naked and dehumanized with the look, because Jesus was cast out of the presence, here's what we have. Colossians 1, but now he has reconciled you by Christ's physical body through death to present you holy in his sight without blemish and free from accusation. Or Ephesians 5, Christ loved the church and gave himself for her to make her holy, cleansing her by the water through the word, and to present her to himself a radiant church without stain or wrinkle or any other blemish, but holy and blameless. Do you know what it's like to be utterly sure that the only eyes in the universe that count are looking at you and seeing a beauty? Can you say how precious are your thoughts toward me, O God? Because if you can, to the degree you can, because you knew what Jesus went through for you, and that proves, the cross proves that the knowledge that God has, he is not going to use against you. Because when Jesus Christ looked at us, falling asleep on him in the Garden of Gethsemane, denying him, betraying him, and he stayed on the cross, he saw us to the bottom, and he loved us anyway. Anyway, that is what your heart most needs, and it's the only way to get you unstuck. It's the only way to get you into transparent living. It's the only way to get you into a place where you don't care about the deep scan by God or anybody else then. Now, let me wrap this up like this. Psalm 139 can be read in the abstract. God is omnipresent. He's everywhere. God is always with us in every room. If you go into that room, God's in that room. If you go into that room, God's in that room. He's always with us in that room. sleeping. He knows when you're awake. He knows you've been made out of good. Or it's a gasification of God. God's like oxygen. You know, He's in every room no matter where you are. Well, not if you read Psalm 139 through Jesus. Because the last words, according to Matthew, He spoke on the earth was, Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world. Now, when Jesus says, I'm with you everywhere, if you read the omnipresence of God through Jesus, boy, that means something so much more. For example, when Jesus says, I'm with you and you're suffering, that doesn't just mean I'm in the room when you suffer. Jesus suffered. Lord, Christianity is the only religion that even claims that our Lord knows what it's like to be betrayed, knows what it's like to have the people that love you the most turn on you. He knows what it's like to be tortured. He knows what it's like to suffer injustice. He knows what it's like to lose a child. He's not just in the room with you like a gas. He doesn't just see you when you suffer. Remember, He, the only God of any religion that even claims this, He was with you. He is radically with you. He's not just with you. See, when Jesus says, Lo, I am with you always, the end of the world, that doesn't mean He just happens to be in the room when you suffer. He's utterly with you in that suffering. He suffered so that in your suffering you could know that God has you by the hand. And not only that, He's with you in failure. See, if you just believe, oh, God's everywhere, and you fail, you do something really wrong, you do something really bad, and you wonder, gosh, I wonder whether God loves me. When Jesus says, I'm with you, it means He's with you in spite of your failures. The whole point is, He sees you to the bottom and loves you anyway. He's been to the cross. He knew what you were like when He went to the cross. I mean, He didn't even let hell. He experienced hell on the cross. He didn't let hell keep Him from you. So you think your sins and failures are going to keep Him from you? He's with you. Look, I have to bring this up because it went through your mind. When I was talking about embryos, when I was talking about the fact that God's with us, according to the Bible, from the moment of conception, even in our mother's womb, some of you said, now, what are the implications of that for abortion? Oh, yeah. Now, this is New York City. Some of you have had abortions, many. Many of you have helped other people have abortions. Now, what if you conclude, on the basis of this text and other texts, and I'm talking about this because I have to, because you've already thought about it, some of you, and I've got to help you pastorally. Here, let me do it. What if you conclude, on the basis of these texts, that what you did was wrong? Are you stuck in guilt the rest of your life? It's covered. Everything is covered. See, the idea that God is with you everywhere, He's just watching you fail, He's just watching you suffer. No. When Jesus says it, when Jesus says, I am with you always, lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the world, in your failure, I'm with you because I've covered it. In your suffering, I'm with you because I've experienced it. And you know, when Jesus says to Mary, remember when Mary, after the resurrection, Mary grabs hold of Him, and He says, don't cling to Me, I'm going to the Father, I'm ascending. Some people have thought that when He said, don't cling to Me, He meant, don't touch Me, I'm holy. But, you know, probably not, because of the very, very next paragraph, He tells Thomas to touch Him. Here's probably what He's saying, Mary, you're grabbing onto Me because you want intimacy with Me. You don't want to lose Me again. But don't you understand, Mary, when I ascend to the Father through the Holy Spirit, you will have Me better than you have Me right now in your hands. You know, the first Christians, they knew Him personally, they hugged Him, they kissed Him, they ate with Him. But the Bible says, that was just a, you know, if you hug Jesus, that was just a body on a body. But through the Holy Spirit, it can be a heart, His heart on your heart. Romans 5 says, through the Holy Spirit, His love is poured out on you. You can have absolute intimacy with Him. When He says, I'm with you, it doesn't mean I'm just seeing you, I'm around you, I'm with, you know, No. Read Psalm 139. The inescapable presence of Jesus. He's with you in suffering, He's with you in intimacy, He's with you in failure, because He took the darkness, He took the dehumanizing gazes, He took the nakedness. be brought in, so you could live in the light. Lo, I am with you always, even to the ends of the world. Let's pray. Father, we want to know how to have this same transparent living that David had. We want to not be afraid of the scans of your own eyes or anyone else's. We want to get unstuck, and we thank you for this psalm that tells us that your reality, if we embrace it in the knowledge of what Jesus Christ has done, we will have you with us in a new way, and we won't have to live fearful lives again. We pray, Lord, that you would help us by the Holy Spirit apply this to our lives. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
