TITLE: The Church
SCRIPTURE: John 17:6-11
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-church-2/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture comes from John chapter 17, verses 6 through 11. I have revealed you to those whom you gave me out of the world. They were yours. You gave them to me, and they have obeyed your word. Now they know that everything you have given me comes from you. For I gave them the words you gave me, and they accepted them. They knew with certainty that I came from you, and they believed that you sent me. I pray for them. I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours. All I have is yours, and all you have is mine, and glory has come to me through them. I will remain in the world no longer, but they are still in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, protect them by the power of your name, the name you gave me, so that they may be one as we are one. This is the word of the Lord. The great prayer of Jesus here, which is all of chapter 17, we started last week. We plunged into it last week, and the first five verses are Jesus praying for his mission, in some ways praying for himself, and we looked at this last week. But starting now, starting verse six, the prayer changes. He's not praying for himself. Who is he praying for? Over and over and over again, it tells you, all the way down, by the way, to verse nine. Verse nine, he's talking about, he says, look at the pronouns. Those, they, them, they, they, them, and then down in verse nine, I pray for them. Starting in verse six, all the way to the end of the prayer, he's praying for the church. He's praying for his disciples. He's praying for the disciples right there in the room with him, but also, as he will say in verse 20, those who will believe through their word, meaning us. So, what this means is the rest of the prayer, starting in this chapter, this paragraph, is about the church. So, we need to start looking to see what Jesus says about the church, what the church ought to be, what, therefore, if we're Christians, what we ought to be. And so, let's notice four things tonight, at least in this paragraph. The church is crucial, it's countercultural, it's inexplicably attractive, and it is the company of the forgiven. Those are four things we learn right here, and there'll be more as we go along during the weeks, but let's look at those four. First of all, it's crucial. Now, what do I mean? You can't help but notice that after Jesus prays for himself for five verses, he prays for us for 21 verses. So, 21 verses out of this final prayer. These are like his last words, you know? What do you do when you're about to die? You don't talk about things that aren't important to you. You talk about the things that are most important to you. So, what's the most important thing to Jesus? It's the church. It's the body of Christ. It's the community. And so, most of what is on his heart is the church. And that, why? Well, verse 11, you know, you get some hint of it. Like I said, as we go on in the weeks, we'll see more. In verse 11, it says, I am leaving the world, and they are still in the world. So, I'm leaving. They're still here. And notice how he says, Father, make them one, even as we are one. Give them the truth, even as you gave me the truth. And when we get to verse 18, you're going to see in verse 18, Jesus says, as you sent me into the world, so I send them into the world. So, here's the point. It's very simple. Jesus says, the reason why he's praying and he's so concerned about the church is that he has created a group of people who are now going to represent God in the world the way he did when he was here. He proclaimed the truth. We're supposed to proclaim the truth. He modeled love. We're supposed to model the love of the Trinity. He transformed lives. We're supposed to transform lives through our ministry. You see why this is so important and why it's the main thing on his heart at this point. Now, let's get practical right away. What does this mean for us? Well, let me put it like this. What do we say to the 86% of Americans who, when they're asked, can you be a good Christian and not be part of a church, not go to church? 86% of Americans are asked, can you be a good Christian and still not be involved in church? And 86% of Americans say, yes. Now, what do we say to that? First of all, we need to admit that the term a good Christian is a very problematic term. It's problematic because Jesus himself is the founder of Christianity. Christianity. God is good and you shouldn't call any human being good. So to talk about a good Christian in some ways is a misnomer, but probably when the average American is asked, can you be a good Christian and not be part of a church, probably what they understand is being asked is this. Can you live a good life as Christ would want you to live? Can you live a good life as Christ would want you to live in the world without being part of a church? And these 86% say yes. But let me ask you a question. If at the very end of his life, the main thing on Jesus' heart is the church, if there is a sense in which one of the main jobs Jesus Christ had on earth was to create the church, a body, a community that was to represent God to the world, can you in any way say, oh, I actually think that Jesus would be very fine with me living a very good life as long as they don't go to church? Absolutely not. That's impossible. Or let me just show you how crazy it is. It's like saying, oh, I like Jesus Christ, but I reject the very reason for his whole ministry here on earth, which was to create the church. I really think Jesus is great. When people say, I like Jesus, I don't like the church. Oh, that's okay to say, I like Jesus was perfect and the church is not. Fine. Okay, say that. No problem. There's no arguing there. But to say, I like Jesus and I can follow Jesus and I don't need to be part of a church, I don't need to be deeply involved in a church, the answer there is absolutely not. By the way, I'm not saying you need to belong to a church to be saved. What I'm trying to say is, could you really square this prayer and Jesus' passionate concern for the church? And one of the fundamental purposes of his whole life was to create the church and then say, oh, I'm following Jesus, but I'm not deeply involved in a local church. The answer is no. You can't be following Jesus. You can't not be deeply involved in a local church. Do you see the importance of it? And by the way, that's not just showing up at church and getting inspiration. Jesus Christ wants everybody who names his name and who says, I follow Christ to be part of the local church. So first of all, we learn the centrality, you might say, or the crucial nature of the church. Secondly, though, we're told here the church will always be a counterculture. That means it will be a different culture from the culture around it. That being a Christian is not just a set of beliefs or even a set of behaviors, but the Christian faith creates a whole different culture so you become a very different kind of human being and Christianity or the church has always got to look radically different than the surrounding culture. Now, that's going to take a little bit of time to explain. And where do I get this? Well, look at verse nine. Verse nine says, I pray for them. I am not praying for the world, but for those you have given me, for they are yours. Okay, I'm not praying for the world. I'm praying for those you have given me, for they are yours. Now, at first, it looks like he's saying, I'm not praying for the world. That does not mean I don't care about the world. Jesus is not saying, oh, I don't love the world. I don't care about the world. Who cares about the world? No, we have a famous verse in John, the book of John, maybe the most famous verse in history, maybe the most famous verse in the Bible. It's called John 3, 16. For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son. In other words, if God didn't love the world, if nobody cared about the world, why did Jesus even come? So when Jesus says, I'm not praying for the world, I'm praying for them, for they are yours. He's not saying, I don't care about the world. What he's saying is that the church must be absolutely distinct from the world. And he explains why. For they are yours. This is what makes you and me, if you're a Christian, this is what makes you and me radically different from the world, and it creates its own counterculture. Paul puts it a different way, but it's the same idea. It's the same truth. If in 1 Corinthians 6, 20, Paul says, you are not your own. You're bought with a price. That's the same thing Jesus is saying. They are yours. They're not theirs. If you're a Christian, you do not belong to you. You belong to him. You are not yours. You are not your own. You're his. And you say, okay, I got that. I've heard that before. But I want you to see that that is a radical cultural statement that changes you culturally. So what? Okay. What is the bedrock of Western society? What is the bedrock of modern Western society? We're right in the middle of it. It's New York City. We're like at the center of it. The very heart of modern Western culture is you do belong to yourself. You belong to you. You must be true to yourself. You have the right to decide what is right or wrong for you. And nobody else does. You are your own. hand, you go to parts of the world that are not Western, and they're more traditional, and some of you either are from those societies or you're descended from them, in traditional non-Western societies, you do not belong to yourself. You belong to your family. See, in modern Western society, you decide who you are. But in non-Western traditional society, you belong to your family, and your family tells you what you need to do. Now, let me point this out. Let's think about something. Money. If you say your money actually belongs to your family, you can't get the job you want. You can't do the things you want with your career. You have to decide what is it that helps my family, my tribe, my people. So, in modern Western society, your money is yours. In non-Western traditional society, your money is your family's and your people's. But in the Christian faith, your money is God's. And I want you, if you don't think that that doesn't create three radically different approaches to economics, to business, to the way in which you spend your money, to your attitude toward your money, it does. It's three different cultures. Completely different. The idea that you are your own, you belong to you. Here, Jesus says no. I mean, Jesus and Paul say no. The essence of Christianity is you belong to God. You do not belong to yourself. Let me show you for a second why the Western idea, which is what most of us are probably the most familiar with, the Western idea that you belong to yourself doesn't work even at the human level. Can I show you that? That the radical self-belonging of modern Western society that says you belong to you and to nobody else doesn't even work at the human level. And I say, let's leave God out of it for a minute. Let's just talk not heart vertically. Let's just talk horizontally. There's a great movie made a couple of years ago called Calvary. And in the book, in the movie Calvary, Brendan Gleeson plays a man who goes into the priesthood, the Catholic priesthood later in life. And he goes into the Catholic priesthood and now he's a Catholic priest. And he's got a a grown daughter who's tried to commit suicide. And when he has a conversation with her about it, she says that she has the right to commit suicide if she wants to. And here's what she says. In fact, it's almost a perfect summary of Western culture as opposed to the kind of culture that Christianity creates. And she says, when she's having this debate with him, and finally she says, quote, I belong to myself to nobody else. See, she says, I have the right, if I want to kid myself, I have the right to do that. I belong to myself to nobody else. And her father, the priest, says, true, false. Now that's brilliant, by the way. He's saying true to a degree, but ultimately false. He's saying, yeah, to a degree, true, you do belong to yourself in that you have to be responsible for yourself. You've got to take responsibility for yourself. You can't have other people do things for you. There's things that you must do. But ultimately, and here's how he argues. He says, when you say, well, I have the right to kill myself because I belong to myself to nobody else. He said, wait a minute. What right do you have to darken the lives and to devastate the lives of the people around you who will be devastated if you kill yourself? See, if you kill yourself, well, I belong to myself, so I have the right to do that. Wait a minute. What right do you have to actually devastate and darken? You can poison a person's life forever. The people around you, the people who love you the most, that's what Brendan Gleeson is arguing there. You can darken the lives and poison lives of the people around you forever. They'll never enjoy life again because of what you've done. Well, I have the right to do that. No, you don't. Why? Because we are unavoidably interconnected. That's the way real life works. You owe your life to a lot of people. And actually, other people owe their life to you. You're unavoidably interconnected. You actually, you do not belong to yourself. So even at the human level, the Western idea that you belong to yourself and to nobody else just actually doesn't work. It's not even true at the horizontal level. And you say, oh, so you're arguing for traditional culture. You're arguing to say you actually belong to your family because they nurtured you. And so now you have to do what your family wants. You have to be whoever what your family wants. No, here's the problem. When you get your identity from your family, from your race, from your people, that's a recipe for racism. It has been throughout all of history. often prone to racism. And here's the modern individualistic society, which, by the way, is cruel in itself because it's just not true to life. We actually do not belong to ourselves. We are radically interdependent. And so what that means is Christianity is not just, listen, Christianity creates a different culture because when sex, money, and power are thought of either as you belong to yourself, you belong to your family, you belong to God, each of those three operating principles creates a different culture in the way in which sex, money, and power are all used. Let me give you one more example. And by the way, this is the example you'll remember because, in other words, tomorrow you'll remember this example because it's about sex. And it's just the way it is. When you go to 1 Corinthians 6, verse 20, where Paul says, you are not your own. You're bought with a price. You're not your own. Why does he bring it up? Why is he actually even saying it there? Two verses before, in 1 Corinthians 6, 18, he says, don't have sex outside marriage. So he's talking about sex. And he says, Christians do not believe in any sex outside of marriage. You can't have sex unless you're married. And then he says, because you're not your own. You're bought with a price. Well, okay, well, how do they go together? I'll tell you how they go together. If you say to somebody, I would like to have sex with you, but I don't want to marry you. What you're actually saying is, I want something from you, but I'm not going to give myself to you. I belong to myself. See, if you say, I want to marry you, then what you're saying is, I not only want to give you my body, physically, that's sex, but I want to give you myself, not just physically, but emotionally, and socially, and legally, and economically, in every way. See, if you really, if you believe I belong to myself, then sex becomes about self-fulfillment. If you believe I belong to God, then you image God in how you use your sexuality. And that is, you only have sex with somebody to whom you've given yourself completely. There has to be an absolute life commitment. In other words, for Christians, sex is about self-giving. In Western culture, sex is actually about, you know, fulfillment. And you see, when I say that because sex is actually, a Christian understanding, is a way of giving, is a way of giving yourself away to somebody else. It's a way of serving someone. It's a way of giving your whole self. You must not have sex with anyone unless you're willing to give yourself completely to them. When I say that in New York City, I mean, especially young people, but everybody looks at me like, what? What? And that shows that Christianity is not just a set of beliefs and behavior. It's a whole new culture. To talk about sex that way is like you're talking, it's like you're talking Martian. And the reason you're talking Martian is it's hard to look into another culture from one culture to another. And so if you understand that you belong to him, the way in which you use money, the way in which you use power, the way in which you use sex, you'll always be different. And by the way, when people become Christians in patriarchal societies, they start to look kind of liberated. When people become Christians like here in New York City in individualistic societies, they look kind of conservative. The reality is they're none of the above. They're Christian. And they're different. And unless we are different, unless we are a counterculture, if we just mirror the culture around us, we're not what God wants us to be. We're not what Jesus wants us to be. We belong to him. And that's why we're not the same as the world. So first of all, church is central. Secondly, the church must be a counterculture. Thirdly, it must be inexplicably attractive. Now why do I say that? And now I'm talking about verse 10. Look at verse 10 with me. Where Jesus says, and glory has come to me through them. Wow. And glory has come to me through them. This is a pretty remarkable thing. What he's trying to say is our job. Well, let me read you something. David Martin Luther Jones, a great pastor and preacher in Britain many years ago, who's a person that I have learned a lot from, he preached on this text. And this is what he says about verse 10. He says, when Jesus says, and glory has come to me through them, he then says, here Jesus reminds his followers of their function and business in this world of time. This statement is one of the most amazing, indeed staggering of all. Our business is to manifest to the world and to make a display of the glories and power of our Lord Jesus Christ. So it's our job to show the world the beauty and glory of Jesus. Lloyd-Jones goes on and says something interesting. He says, it's not enough just to be an admirable person. There's all sorts of good persons. There are many people who are good, they're nice, they're kind, they help the poor, they're upstanding. He says, he says, it's obviously you're not going to show people the glory of Jesus through your life if all you are is just a nice, admirable, respectable person. There's got to be something inexplicable about you. And Lloyd-Jones gives an example. Like in Acts chapter four, there's a place where the early Christian apostles, right after Jesus was ascended to heaven, not long after Pentecost, they started preaching publicly and nobody could figure them out. They were powerful speakers. leaders. The church was growing. And these men, however, these leaders, these apostles were unlearned. They weren't educated. They didn't have credentials. They didn't have training. And yet they had this ability to lead and they had this ability to communicate. And so you can read about it in Acts four. Everybody was saying, not just that these guys are great leaders and speakers, but they shouldn't be. They're inexplicable. Lloyd-Jones says, for example, he says, here's how you're going to show people the glory of God. He says, I glorify him if I am the kind of person of whom people say, what is it about this guy? We cannot explain him. He says, we will glorify him as a church when people meeting with us say, what is it about them? Our explanations and our categories are of no value. There's something else. There's some other mysterious thing involved, which we cannot identify. One example from the Bible and one example from real life, I think. And then we're done with this point here. But from the Bible, do you remember Moses? He's in Exodus three, he's out tending sheep, and he sees in the distance a bush burning, which wasn't all that unusual in the desert. In very arid climate, there were a lot of things that could do combustion. So he sees this bush over there burning, and okay, so that's fine. That happens occasionally. But he keeps looking at it, and it keeps burning and burning and burning. It should burn out. It's just a desert bush. There's not that much fuel. It should burn out. And he looks up after 30 minutes, it's still burning. It's just as bright as before. And he starts to say, that's impossible. It's not just a burning bush. It's a burning bush that defies my category, so he goes to look. And Lloyd-Jones says that's what it means for people to glorify Jesus. And by the way, you know in Acts chapter two, in Pentecost, when the Holy Spirit comes down in the church for the first time, do you remember what's over everybody's little head? Tongue of flame. Why? We're all supposed to be burning bushes. We're all supposed to be people who actually are not just admirable and respectable, but can't be explained. So here's my example. I talked to a guy this week who is a Christian speaker who speaks on college campuses. And he speaks to skeptics, and then afterwards he talks to them one-on-one. So he gave a talk, and he took questions and answers. And afterwards he was talking to a young man who was the head of a kind of skeptics student association on the campus. So he was an atheist or an agnostic or a very skeptical person. At one point he came up to him and said, you know what? I'm having trouble understanding you or even explaining you. So the speaker, my friend says, tell me. And he says, well, I think you must be undergoing some kind of metamorphosis right now. He said, why? He said, well, you have these conservative beliefs, conservative moral values, but you have liberal attitudes. You know, you're very kind to people. You're very understanding. You're very tolerant. You really listen to people. Now here's what I want to know. Are you a conservative that's kind of going liberal? Or are you a liberal that's kind of going conservative? Because I think I've caught you kind of in the middle, like when the larva is coming out of the, becoming a pupa or something like that. And trying to figure out which way. And the guy said, no, no, no, you don't understand. I'm a Christian. And you see, a Christian believes you're saved by grace. And what that means, I'm a sinner, I believe, which means I believe in absolute truth. That's what makes me look conservative. But because I'm a sinner saved by grace, I'm not saved by my good works. That's inherently humbling. So I cannot be condescending to anybody. I cannot be superior to anybody. I have to listen to people. I can never feel like I'm better than anybody else. And so I actually do believe in these conservative convictions, but it does give me that kind of attitude toward people. And the young man looked at him and said, I'm sorry, that's just impossible. That's not Christianity. That can't be. There is no such thing. What was going on there? Burning bush. In other words, the speaker was inexplicably attractive. It's exactly what Lloyd-Jones says. saying, I like that person or I like those people, but I can't explain them. Our explanations and our categories are of no value. There's something else, some other mysterious thing involved which we cannot identify. Does anybody ever say that about you? And does anybody ever say that about us? Lastly, here's something that goes by pretty quickly, but my last point is the church is the company of the forgiven, and that should actually be one of the reasons why we're so attractive if we are attractive to the world. Look at verse six. One of the things he says, it goes by fast. I hope you didn't miss it, but you probably did, because I did too until I was reading and studying this thing. He's talking about his disciples, and then he says at the end of verse six, and they have obeyed your word. They were yours, you gave them to me, and they have obeyed your word. How can he say that? By the way, go back and read the gospels and read about these people. Read about the disciples. Look at them fighting. Look at them getting things wrong. Look, when the chips are down, right? One will deny him, one will betray him, and all will forsake him. They're all cowards. And when Jesus sums up their, you know, he's praying to his father, and he sums up their life, and he says, they have obeyed your word. And you say, wow, that's pretty generous. How can he say that? How can he say that about them? I mean, there's so many things he could say about them, but, you know, have they obeyed God's word? I think on their good days, occasionally they have good days, and sometimes they obey God's word. But basically, that's a remarkably generous statement to say. How can he say that? And by the way, it prepares us for what's going to happen in a few moments. You know what's going to happen? He's going to go to the Garden of Gethsemane. He's going to take his friends, and he's going to say, this is the worst moment of my life. And I just want one thing from you. I want you to sit here with me, stay awake, and pray with me. And over and over and over again, they just fall asleep. They just, so, you know, of all the sins, I mean, they do a lot of bad things, but to me, this is the worst sin of all. I mean, this is like somebody coming to you and saying, you know, this is the worst moment of my life. Could we just sit down and talk? And the person's saying, well, you know, actually, I'm kind of busy. You know, what was it you wanted to talk about? I mean, it's just, it's awful. And yet, what does he say after they do this to him three times? He says, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Can I translate? He says, I know you had good intentions. Now, there's 10 things he could have said about their behavior that day, and nine of them are terrible, and one is good. You had good intentions, and all he does is bring out the good. And he just sort of skips over the nine. How can he be that generous? How can he be that kind? How can he do that, especially in light of the fact that verse 11 reminds us that God is holy? I am coming to you, holy father. Remember what holiness is all about? The holiness of God means that God is pure eyes that can behold iniquity. So how in the world can he just overlook all these egregious sins when God is holy? And the answer, of course, is, he tells you here, it says, holy father, I'm coming to you. Well, how is he coming to the father? By way of the cross. And this is, here's three sentences left. Number one, the reason why he can be such a wonderful high priest, patient, you know, kind to you, listening to you, overlooking your deficiencies, never berating you, you know, never scolding you. The reason he can be such a wonderful, loving, patient high priest is because he was the, he's the ultimate priest because he was the ultimate sacrifice. You know, he's the ultimate sacrifice for sin. So your sins are covered. That's the reason why. He's not just saying, oh, your sins don't matter. Of course your sins matter. Look what he did to cover your sins. But now that he's covered your sins, if you're a Christian, he doesn't scold. He doesn't berate you for your deficiencies. Okay, are you forgiven, Christian friends? Okay, then don't berate each other. Do you hear? Don't be always wagging your finger at each other. Don't always be criticizing each other. Don't always be getting down on each other. Let's be the company of the forgiven. Let's remind ourselves of what he did so that he's just not always on our case, that he's so generous in spirit. And I, we be generous with each other. especially in New York City, an inexplicably attractive place. My goodness, a group of people that weren't always biting and devouring each other, always criticizing each other, always distrusting each other, always fighting with each other. Wow, in New York City? Wouldn't that show the world Jesus' glory? Don't forget his sacrificial love for you. And don't forget that because he bought you, you're not your own. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for giving us this wonderful picture what the church should be. And of course, we are completely convicted in our hearts that we are not what we should be. We do not necessarily have many people looking at us saying, I can't explain these people. We are, to some degree, too much conformed to our cultures. We say we belong to you, but very often we, to a great degree, are influenced by other cultures rather than the gospel. So make us a counterculture. Make us inexplicably attractive. Make us the company of the forgiven. Teach us how to be patient with each other the way your son is so infinitely patient with us. Oh, Lord. And shine out. Let your glory shine out so that the world can see it through us. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
