TITLE: The Ideal Without Real, The Real without Ideal, The Ideal Becomes Real
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The New Age Movement
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-ideal-without-real-the-real-without-ideal-the-ideal-becomes-real-2/

============================================================

I think those of you who were here last time know that I was going to share this with another person on our staff, Scott Sherman, but he came down with some mysterious malady of some sort. He got sick. He got sick today. So this means, well, I know some of you are saying, oh, you're up to it. You could certainly fill the time up all by yourself if you try very hard. It's going to take a lot of concentration on my part to do that, but I'm going to try. What I want to do is, because it's going to consist of this, going to consist of me giving a talk and then you asking questions and answers, we've got a pretty good amount of time to do that. I'm going to, in that case, essentially really work through this handout in detail. You should all have one. It says the New Age Movement at the top. Let me make a couple of preliminary introductory sorts of statements while other people are coming in. Somebody's going to ask me, what do you read about this subject? Now, let me remind you what the purpose is of our time. The purpose is, first of all, to try to compare and contrast the New Age Movement. And my thesis is the New Age Movement grows out of a particular worldview, a particular religion system. And compare and contrast that with the other ones. And what I'm going to, I'll start off by saying, I said it last time, but I'm going to try to develop it in a little more detail this time, that there's really only three basic worldviews, three basic religious systems that are viable or vying right now for the heart of the Western world, at least. Three basic ones. And I'll explain what that is. The New Age Movement is one of them, or it grows out of one of them. And so the first thing we're going to do is try to compare and contrast just to understand it. That's all. Just to understand what the teachings are and where the differences are and so forth. Then secondly, I'm going to, after having done that, I'm going to try to stand real consciously in my position as a Christian and to say, here is what I would consider, I would hope, a fair critique of the New Age Movement. Now, the critique does, I don't expect everybody here, you know, you can be in any, your own position, your own beliefs might be anything. And therefore, I don't expect everybody here to agree with the critique, but I hope that I can not caricature the New Age Movement. I hope it's a fair critique. You may not agree with it, but I hope you would say, this is fair, this is balanced, and it's not a caricature. Not setting up a straw man. Now, the thing I'm going to do is, first of all, work through the comparison of the three different worldviews, and then secondly, make a critique. Now, yeah, you could always turn around and say, well, what about, you know, what about the problems that Christianity has? Well, that's just not, that's not our subject, and I'll be happy to field some questions about that if you want to. But the whole idea is to compare and contrast this particular movement and then give a critique. The, as far as the, people ask me what books to read, well, I'm, I'm, I'm going to give you books that are critical of the New Age Movement, but they do exactly what I'm trying to do. That is, I don't think they caricature it. They don't look at it as a conspiracy, you know. They don't look at it, they, they don't, they don't overdo it and, and create a straw man and knock it down. Now, the four I mention here, which might, you might find interesting, one of them, two of them are by the same guy, Douglas. Somebody who knows this guy told me how to pronounce it. It's obviously a Dutch name. Groothus, I think, maybe. It could be Groothus, too. I don't know. Those of you that know the Dutch names. Anyway, the first one at the top is, in my own mind, the best one. Obviously, it's a critique. It wouldn't be called masking, confronting. It's sort of combative, I know. But I found it pretty helpful. The book by Peter Moore called Disarming the Secular Gods is not a book about the New Age Movement, but every chapter is on a different, he, he actually takes a look at all the different worldviews that are out there vying in the marketplace for the heart of the West. And he looks at every one of the New Age movements, one of them, and it's pretty helpful. And this book by Paul Witts, the only reason I put it here, Paul Witts teaches psychology at NYU. It's called Psychology as Religion, the Cult of Self-Worship. And even though there's no mention of the New Age Movement in there at all, it's a really critical book for understanding why the New Age Movement is so interesting and so popular, and it's growing so popular in a place like the West. I want to show you tonight that the New Age Movement is marketed, contextualized, marketed for the West, Eastern religion. say, from New Age books that are marketed here in this country and ancient Buddhist texts. And you'll see they're saying the same thing, but the ancient Buddhist texts don't say it in a very palatable way. I'm not going to explore this tonight unless you ask, but I think you had in people like Maslow and Carl Rogers, you had a humanistic psychology which wasn't New Age, but put such a tremendous emphasis on self-actualization. The New Age movement has tied in the ancient understanding of nirvana or satari or enlightenment of God consciousness and has tied it into humanistic psychology and all the emphasis on self-actualization. If you read Paul Vitz, I think he had some idea about why, therefore, for the last 20 years we've been ready for the New Age movement and why the New Age movement, by using therapeutic kinds of language, can really come across pretty well. Now, therefore, I thought those books were pretty helpful, but if you have to choose one, I'd choose the one on the top. Okay, look. Let's get started. First part, let me show you the three basic worldviews and how they compare and contrast. Second part, a critique. I'm not going to go... If you look here, those of you who were here last time realized that I already went through these first couple of paragraphs. I don't want to have to go through it again. I'm not. There are a dizzying variety of New Age movements, New Age teachings, New Age organizations and societies and so forth. A tremendous variety of them. And yet, I'll try to show you that underneath it all, they all grow out of the worldview of Eastern, I'm going to call it Monism. Monism means one-ism. It grows out of Eastern Monism, a particular religious system. Buddhism, Hinduism are all part of that. They're different, but they're part of that basic system. And all the New Age movement grows out of that. And in spite of the fact there's inconsistencies because the New Age movement is in the West. And the West has a Christian history. And therefore, the New Age movement has to use a lot of the concepts and a lot of the terms of the West. So there seems to be some inconsistency at times, but your New Age teaching will always tend you back toward this basic structure. It's a very different understanding of reality, and just by way of tangent. You can find out whether Christianity, how Christianity is doing or how Islam is doing or how Judaism is doing by counting up their adherence. You can't find out how the New Age movement is doing by counting up its adherence. And the reason is this. Because if I'm a Baptist and I go to a Muslim and I say I want to become a Muslim, the Muslim would say, well, you've got to leave your Baptist church and join the mosque. Why? Because Muslims and Baptists, though they differ on many things, they basically come out of the same worldviews I'll try to show you. That means they know, the Muslim and the Baptist say to each other, we could both be wrong about God, or you could be right and I could be wrong, or I could be right and you could be wrong, but we can't both be right. Couldn't be. Therefore, either you have to join me or I have to join you. And so the Baptist becomes a Muslim, he has to leave the Baptist church. But a New Age person might come to a Baptist or a Jew or a Roman Catholic and say, they're not going to say, in order to be part of our society, you've got to leave your church. They're not going to say that usually. I'm sure there's some authoritarian type. They're not going to say that. The reason for that is that this, the New Age movement arises from a worldview that has a whole, a very different understanding of truth. They would never say, well, we can't both be right. They would say, you can incorporate what I am teaching you. The New Age teacher would say, you can incorporate what I'm teaching you into where you are now. Well, because as I'm going to try to show you, the difference between truth and falsehood in the New Age movement is a relative difference. The difference between truth and falsehood in traditional theism is an absolute difference. So you can't actually judge how influential the New Age movement is by figuring, you know, by looking and seeing how many people go to New Age things or how many people consider themselves adherents of the New Age movement. There's plenty of people who have actually been, in a sense, converted to the New Age movement who are still Catholics and Jews and Baptists and so forth. Now, let's take a look at these three. The three basic worldviews are what I would call theism. Now, theism is the big three. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. As different as those groups seem, not until the end am I even going to talk that much about Christianity. Whenever I talk about theism, I mean those three big religions all have this worldview in common that I'll explain to you. Then the second major worldview is what I'll call secularism. And secularism says that there really isn't any God, there's just matter. There's just... There's just a lot ofimana recycled people that they come up with it that sometimes they never zaw And we're going to talk to you that I'll explain to you. Then the second major worldview is what I'll call secularism. And secularism says that there really isn't any God, there's just matter. There's just matter. And the only thing you can know is what you can know scientifically. You can call it naturalism, too. There's nothing but nature. The third major worldview is Eastern monism, and New Age is a Western view, a Western version of Eastern monism. And so you have theism, monism, and secularism. Theism says God is the creator of nature and matter. Secularism says there is no God, there's only matter. Where monism says God is matter and is in matter. Now, let's start this comparison by, first of all, looking at how God relates to nature. And if you want to see, that's actually over on the second page, God's relationship to matter. I'd like to talk about it there. Now, here I'm going to talk. Monists are Buddhists, Hindus, people from the New Age movement. They all share the same basic understanding. Monism believes that God animates the universe the way you animate your body. The universe actually is God. And therefore, if the universe didn't exist, God wouldn't exist. God wouldn't exist, and anything you find in the universe is part of God. There's nothing in the world which isn't part of God. Nothing. God is everything. That is an absolute cardinal doctrine. Nothing is outside of him. On the other hand, the Jew or the Christian or the Muslim all understand that God is not matter. He's the creator of matter. And therefore, we'd say that God invented the universe very much like an artist invented a painting or like a composer invents a melody. There's a sense in which the melody reveals the artist. And there's another, certainly there's a sense in which the melody is the artist. It's an extension of the artist. The artist has put him or herself into the work of art very clearly. No doubt about that. And you can't understand the art if you don't understand the person and vice versa. But the creative ability of the artist is still in him or in her, not in the work of art. That's why I put down here, the painter, you might put yourself into it, but the power and skill of the painter, though revealed in the picture, exists apart from the picture. It has an existence of its own. Therefore, we would say, the Christian would never really say that nature is God. The Jew wouldn't say it. The Muslim wouldn't say it. It would say it's created by God. Nature is upheld by God every minute. Nature is held together by God. And therefore, there's a certain sense, of course, in which God is in nature, holding it together, but God's not identified with nature. God exists above it and beyond it, before it, and will exist after it. On the other hand, monism would have to say God is the universe. And therefore, the universe has always been and always will be. One other, this is, if you want to understand a couple of places in the Bible that talks about this distinction, there's a place where Elijah, who was battling against the Canaanite gods and battling against the encroachment of paganism, which was, as I'll try to show you in a minute, Eastern monism. He was battling against the encroachment of paganism into Israel. There's a place where he was on the run from Ahab. I don't know if any of you have ever read this or remember this, maybe, from Sunday school days. And he gets into a cave, and he asks for God to reveal himself. And there is a windstorm, and yet Elijah knew that God was not in the windstorm. And there was fire, and yet God knew there wasn't, and yet Elijah knew God wasn't in the fire. And there was an earthquake, and yet God knew there wasn't an earth, I keep saying it wrong, Elijah knew God wasn't in the earthquake. And finally, Elijah reveals himself through this still small voice. God, he hears God in the still small voice. And the whole purpose of this incident is the Canaanite religions identified God with the processes of nature. They worshipped fire, they worshipped the wind, because, you see, God was them, and was in them. God makes a very important point, and that is that I exist apart from them. I am a person, therefore I exist, and I reveal myself to you as a still small voice. I am not nature. I'm above and around it. I am revealed in nature, but I exist. My power, my creative ability exists apart from it. Okay? Now, something else. Therefore, when it comes to the personality of God, monism ultimately likes it. We'll talk about God as a he, but the fact is personality isn't really something that God is truly characterized by. And if you turn back to the bottom of the second page, the first page, I'm sorry, the bottom of the first page, I put there the three divisions within the worldviews. On the one hand, you've got theism. Now, Christianity and Judaism and Islam are somewhat different here. Christianity would say there's one God in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Islam and Judaism would say there's one God in one person. They would deny the idea of the Trinity. And so it looks like there's a lot of difference, but the main point is that God exists as a person above the universe. And they also would all agree that ultimate reality has distinctions. There's God and there's nature, and they're not the same. There's good and there is evil, and they are not the same. Evil is not God. Evil is not part of God. If you go into monism, you'll see that monism incorporates both what you call pantheism. That is, that there's one God, but he has no personality. He's in everything. You can't pray to him. You can't ask him for things. You can sense him. You can have a consciousness of him. You can be one with him, but he's not really a him. In other words, you know, how do you relate to a real him? You know, how do you relate? You go and talk to the him. And you relate, and you find out what that person, you know, that's how you deal with a real person. You talk with that person. And you find out what that person is like, and you make demands, and you answer demands. But in monism, you have one God, but he's not a person. You can relate to him. You have an experience of him, but you can't talk with him. On the other hand, polytheism, the religions that see the water, here's the water god, here's the fire god, here's the tree god, here's the stream god, that may seem like the opposite extreme of pantheism, right? But it's not at all. They really run together. Because God is in everything, and everything is divine, therefore, you can worship anything as divine. And they really go together. So, Wicca, witchcraft, paganism, the old animism, are all part and parcel of the same thing. The Canaanite religion and the pagan religions that Israel was always fighting with in the Old Testament were basically Eastern monistic. And you'll also know, if you've ever been involved with either Hinduism or Buddhism, Hinduism is very polytheistic. Much of it. Much of Hinduism is very polytheistic. It talks about all sorts of different gods. Buddhism tends to be almost agnostic and says, well, I really don't believe in God. I just believe in ultimate reality. As different as those groups are, they all have the same basic underlying understanding of God. And that is that nature is divine. Nature is eternal. Nature is indivisible. Everything that is, is part of God. There's nothing outside of him. There are no real distinctions. Then you have secularism, who says, you guys are all a bunch of Looney Tunes. There is no God, and he has no person. Now, you must realize, therefore, this, this, this, this, this idea of monism, I think at the, at the top of page two, I make a couple of interesting and important quotes I put down here that Hinduism and Buddhism are both pantheistic. This tends back toward polytheism. Everybody and anyone is God. Hinduism is polytheistic. Believes in reincarnation. Buddhism is essentially agnostic. But they're all part and parcel of the same thing. Here's what they believe. All things we see are parts of the one. God is not personal. The one is all, and everything is the one. Tat-t-vam-asi. That thou art means you are God. Atman is Brahman. The soul of everything is God. Everything is part of God. This is something that they all hold in common. So, all things are God, and theism clearly says all things are not God. There's things that are outside of God. There's things that are apart from God. There's things that are opposed to God. So, therefore, Ammonists would have to say, ultimately, the difference between truth and falsehood and good and evil is a relative one. See, Ammonists would say, all right, is cancer evil? Well, you could say cancer is evil because it kills a human being. But on the other hand, you may be, from another point of view, you could say that the doctor is evil for killing the cancer. And, ultimately, the closer you get to the divine viewpoint, these differences just fall away. And we see that most of the differences are an illusion that comes from you not seeing that all things are God and that you are God, too. And there's a tremendous emphasis, and that's the next point, on the idea of your problems come from not seeing the truth. And the truth is that there are no distinctions, and that you are God, and everything is God, and your problems go away the more you get rid of the veil of illusion. And that's a big thing. You know, a Buddhist or a Hindu guru who's trying to help. the veil of illusion. You're still in the veil of illusion. Illusion is everything. Illusion is the only sin. Now, that's what monism teaches about God and how it differs with secularism and with theism. Secondly, on the second page, then the nature of humankind, our problem and our solution. Arising out of this view of God and of its relationship to matter comes this. Monism, therefore, believes that the problem of the human condition is that we're subject to maya, illusion. That things and individuals exist as separate entities. They don't. Therefore, to say this, not that, me, not you, are misleading statements. The problem is, therefore, my inability to grasp the true nature of things. Distinctions are an illusion. You know, now, just to give you some, this is an old text that I've used for years. Buddhist texts are the ages. It's a very interesting and helpful translation of a lot of different Buddhist texts. So, just to give you an idea, if you're steeped in the Western tradition, this is going to sound nonsensical. And it would be very hard for a Western person to grasp it if it wasn't translated. And I'll show you what I mean by translation. But, for example, here's an important, here's a revealing example. From one of the Hindu, from one of the Indian, one of the Hindu scriptures. These are two people talking. Manjorsri is a great guru and a great teacher. Manjorsri, said the student, Is what you have been telling me the absolute truth? Yes, said Manjorsri. All words are true. Are lies then also true? He asked. They are. And you know why? Good, sir, all words are empty, vain, and belong to no point in space. To be empty and vain and to belong to no point in space is the characteristic of absolute truth. In that sense, all words are true. Between the words of the Devadatta, that's the opponent of Buddha, and the words of the Tathagata, there actually is no distinction or difference at all. How is this? All possible words are words of the Tathagata. In other words, all possible words are in God. There is no getting outside of him. There is no getting outside of what is so. Therefore, all words are true. Now, you see, the point is, if you can't get outside of God, if God is everything, then there's no such thing, really, as anything that isn't ultimate reality. The Christian understanding is a lie or evil is not ultimate reality. It's not God. It's not of God. God hates it. And therefore, it is unreality. Whereas, in monism, those distinctions basically have to be undercut. But the closer you get to divine consciousness. Now, admittedly, the way I read that, I mean, when you listen to that, it sounds almost nonsensical. For example, it says, How is it possible all words are true? There is no getting outside of him or outside what is so. And it says, Whatever can be said in words is able to say something only by dent of saying nothing at all. You get that? A big part of coming to enlightenment in Zen Buddhism and a big part of coming to nirvana in Hinduism is to destroy the reason, destroy the rational sense. It's because rationality makes distinctions. It talks about opposites. It talks about this, not that. It talks about contradictions. And, of course, as long as you're all bound up in contradictions, you're still going to consider yourself an individual and not see the truth of oneness. Not see at-one-ment, not ever achieve at-one-ment, which is oneness with reality. I'll give you another one here. Here's a teacher. Mahamadi, foolish common people do not understand that what is seen is merely your own mind. Being convinced that there exists outside a variety of objects, being addicted to discriminate between existence and non-existence, between oneness and otherness, between bothness and non-bothness, between permanence and impermanence, as true to the own being of things, this produces false imaginations. Any distinctions are wrong. And that's what happens to foolish common people. And this is the reason we have problems. Now look down here on the page again. Therefore, what is salvation in the monistic framework? In monism, there's no distinctions. All suffering, war, racism, crime. Do you see how they would say all this comes from thinking, from tanha or desire, to seek fulfillment as an individual. It's by not seeing the oneness of everyone, the divinity of everyone, the sameness of everyone. Because of maya, which is, remember, illusion, we try to find satisfaction in accomplishments or pleasures. You see, a lot of this sounds very much, and it can sound like the Christian talk about how you're not supposed to save yourself. You see, a lot of this sounds like the Christian talk about how you're not supposed to save yourself. satisfaction in accomplishments or pleasures. You see, a lot of this sounds very much, and it can sound like the Christian talk about how you're not supposed to save yourself through your own good works. And you see, the monistic person, the Buddhist, the New Age person can say, your big problem is you try to find satisfaction in accomplishments or pleasure or power or even love, external things. All pain and all regret come from this. We never find fulfillment. And until you discard your Maya, until you get out of the veil of illusion, you will experience alienation and dislocation. And all your problems come from that. The goal then is enlightenment or whatever you want to call it, and everybody's got a different word for it. Satari is the Zen word, nirvana, God consciousness. It's an experience of being completely one with the universe and being in touch with the divinity, which is you. There's no joy and there's no sorrow. Now, see, we don't like to think about this, but I'm trying to say to you that the New Age movement has to go back originally to its eastern roots because it arises out of this view of God and of reality. Ultimately, the only way you can actually get this great God consciousness is to get beyond joy and sorrow and even get beyond love or hate, get beyond truth or falsehood, because all those things are really illusions. They must be, because everything is one. You know, as silly as it might, you know, we can laugh at it. But, for example, this particular understanding of reality underlies an awful lot of modern movies. It completely underlies the Star Wars trilogy. The whole idea is, what is the force? Well, the force just is. It's around everything. You know, you don't pray to the force. You just let it go through you. There's a dark side of the force. There's an evil side of the force. It doesn't say the force is good and it hates the evil. It says there's an evil side of the force. I mean, it's, you've got to say that with this view of God. Now, how do you get to enlightenment? And this is where everybody has a different path. And if you've been involved in any religion or movement or society that arises out of this basic worldview, you probably will say, that's not what they told me, because everybody's got a different way to get there. Everybody. You know, basically what Shirley MacLaine says, the basic thing is, everybody's God. Everybody. That's it. And that is it. That's really what the salvation is. You have to realize that. But how to get there, you know, you had the, have you ever heard of left-handed tantric Buddhism? Left-handed tantric Buddhism, no kidding, was a view that said the way to get to enlightenment and to get to God consciousness was to go out there and just go crazy. Just, just indulge in absolutely every impulse the minute it happens to you. That's the only way for you to sort of tire out that stupid, selfish, individualistic, hedonistic impulse. And eventually you might find nirvana that way. Other people will go the other direction and they say, you get away from it all. You go up on a tower. You don't talk to anybody. You, you have nothing to do with people. You don't eat much. You don't, you know, you don't sleep much. And you, and you continually meditate on a, on a koan, which is a nonsense proverb or a mandela or a mantra or something until you break through the rational side of your mind is so weak that the intuitive side breaks through and you intuit the whole and you intuit all of reality. And there's just hundreds and hundreds of ways of doing it. And I, there's not much, all I know is from the, from basically the teachings at the bottom of this paragraph, it says the experience of enlightenment is always beyond knowledge. You can't describe it. It has to be beyond knowledge because as soon as you would use words, you break meaning down into this, not that. So it's beyond description. It's beyond personality. I think, yeah, it's, it's beyond personality. It means you realize you're not an individual and, but you're part of the one and it's beyond morality because you realize the world is perfect at every moment. Now, a lot of the stuff I just read to you sounded crazy. And yet, I mean, it's, it's, for example, now here, some of you recognize this book. Somebody gave me this, The Course of Miracles book. Let me just read you a section out of it. This is called The Illusion of Needs. Why needs are an illusion. Now, notice what's interesting is that since it's a book marketed in the West, Christian terminology is used, but it's redefined. Look, a sense of separation from God is the only lack you really need to correct. This sense of separation would never have arisen if you had not distorted your perception of truth and had thus perceived yourself as lacking. See, your mistake is that you perceive yourself as lacking. The idea of order of needs arose because having made this fundamental error that you were separated from God, you have fragmented yourself. But as you integrate, you become one and your needs become one accordingly. Unified need leads to unified action because this produces a lack of conflict. Now, listen to this. The idea of orders of need, which... which... separated from God, that's an error, requires correction at its own level before the error of perceiving levels at all can be corrected. This is because you think you live in space, where concepts such as up and down are meaningful, but ultimately space is as meaningless as time, they're merely beliefs. That's exactly what Manjurzi was saying, remember, about words. Words do not occupy space and time, and ultimate reality has nothing to do with space and time. The real purpose of this world is to use it to correct your unbelief. You can never control the effects of fear yourself because you made fear, and you believe in what you made. In attitude then, though not in content, you resemble your Creator. Your Creator has perfect faith in His creations because He created them. That is why you can believe that what no one else thinks is true. It is true for you if it is made by you. All aspects of fear are untrue because they do not exist at the creative level, and therefore, fear does not exist at all. To whatever extent you are willing to submit your beliefs to this test, to that extent are your perceptions corrected. In sorting out the false from the true, the miracle then proceeds along this line. Perfect love casts out fear. If fear exists, then there is not perfect love. But, only perfect love exists, and if there is fear, it produces a state that does not exist. Believe this, and you will be free. Only God can establish this solution, and this faith is His gift. Now, what this is saying, it doesn't give me an author, but what this is saying is, there is no sin except knowing that you're separated from God, and nobody can be separated from God. It precludes the idea of real evil. There is no real evil. Why? Because nobody can be separated from God, and the only evil is to think there is. And the only problem that you have is the illusion that you're separate. Now, by the way, up to this point, I'm not really criticizing this. I'm just telling you this is not new. This is very old. This is older than Christianity. It's older than Judaism, because the Canaanites already believed it before Judaism came along. And so, it's not really a new thing. That's all I'm trying to get across. For example, or this, I don't think I read this last time. This is also from The Course in Miracles. It says, It says, And I think the last time I read you this idea, The Trouble with Forgiveness, it says, If you pardon sins that are against you, that makes them real. Real forgiveness is to see there never was a sin. Okay, now, Well, see, it's perfectly consistent. You know, it is. It's perfectly consistent, because it arises out of the idea that everything is God, and nothing can exist outside of God. And therefore, there ultimately can't be anything, truth and falsehood, good and evil, ultimately are part of God, and therefore, ultimately are relative. That when you see something as good or bad, ultimately, it's a matter of perspective. You can't get outside of God. There is nothing outside of God. And all your problems come from the illusion. Now, one thing nobody ever explains in Buddhism or Mormonism is where the illusion came from. You know, in other words, is they believe in sin, but have no... The only way they believe in sin is, sin is believing in sin. I mean, sin... The only separation from God you have is to think you're separate from God. Where the heck did that come from? I don't know. At least Christianity, Judaism, and Islam give you some idea. It says there's a God. He was a creator. He created beings in His image. It meant they had free will. They abused their free will. Because they abused their free will and rebelled, therefore, evil has entered into creation. Now, you may not believe that, but at least you can say there's a coherent reason in that framework for the existence of evil. There is no... In the monistic framework... And I've gotten over to the critique, so I've already... I better move on. In the monistic framework, not only is evil actually an illusion, but there is no real reason given or explanation for why the heck we've got this illusion. Even if our misery is an illusion, it still hurts. And I want to know why I hurt. Where did it come from? It's all your fault, they say. Oh, why is it my fault? How did I get this way? I don't know. page two, Eastern thought and the New Age movement share these characteristics. Let me just read them, and then I'll give you the critique. God and all things are essentially one. Listen, for an absolute monist, God is all there is, and matter is total illusion. For the modified monist, God relates to matter like the soul of the body, but matter is less real. Now, I'm trying to show you there's all sorts of little derivations inside. There's a lot of people in the West or in the New Age movement that are really modified monists. They would just say that matter is not as real as God, instead of saying matter really isn't real because God is everything. Therefore, you are God with infinite potential, able to create your own reality. That's what the reading from The Course in Miracles said. In other words, you can create your reality. If it's true for you, it's really true, because ultimately, there is no objective standard for truth, because there's really no such thing as falsehood. It's an escape, pardon me, matter is less real than you are. By the way, this is a distant cousin of existentialism, which says that you exist is more important than what you exist. You can create your own authentic existence by deciding what you think is right and wrong. Existentialism is sort of a distant cousin of it, but anyway. Number three, salvation, therefore, is for absolute monists, salvation is total escape from the illusion of being an individual. That's a misprint. It shouldn't be A-N-D, it should be A-N. It's escape from the illusion of being an individual. For modified monists, salvation lies in sensing your oneness with nature and discovering your deep inner power. In both cases, it's mystical inner experience that's the key to overcoming all your problems. Four, truth is completely relative. Five, oh, pardon me, for absolute monists, everything is true. Everything that is, is. Language fractures reality. All statements are true, man jurors re. For modified monists, we have to see that all philosophies and religions are basically the same at root. That's the reason why a New Age devotee doesn't necessarily have to leave the Catholic Church to get into the New Age, because ultimately, you see, in order to leave would be to admit there's contradictions, and see, to admit contradictions means you're getting further away from God consciousness. For modified monists, we see that all philosophies are blah, blah, blah. For Christians, for Christians, this is just for you guys who are, you, men and women, excuse me, well, that's, that's a Brooklyn way of talking about, to generic you, you guys. You should keep this in mind. People often say, when, when is this group over here that calls itself a church, just an, here's a group that calls itself a church, and it's very strange, and it doesn't sound like the church I know of, is that an idiosyncratic sect within Christianity, or is it actually a non-Christian cult calling itself a church? And I'm just suggesting, in light of all this, there's two acid tests, two acid doctrinal tests, that the Bible itself says, if anybody denies either of these things, you may say you're a Christian, you're not. One is, does it deny the unique deity of Jesus Christ as the Son of God? And number two, does it promise salvation by grace alone through faith, or through your own, your own personal efforts? If, if somebody says you're not saved by grace, but you're saved simply by realizing, or mystical experience, or trying to live a good life, then that, that, that particular group has denied the doctrine of justification by faith alone. If it says Jesus is God, but there are a whole bunch of other guys out there who are God too, then that also denies the unique deity of Christ. And then, you see, it's in 1 John that says, if you, if anybody, if any spirit in the world denies that Jesus Christ is God come in the flesh, that's Antichrist. And in Galatians 1, it says, Jesus, Paul says, if even an angel from heaven comes down and preaches that you're saved by your works instead of by faith, throw him out. Take him by the seat of his ethereal celestial pants, you know, put, put on your sunglasses, because it'll be very hard, because, you know, he'll be there, you know, overwhelming everybody with his power and glory and nobility. But if he says that you're saved through mystical experience or anything other than the finished work of Christ, throw him out. That's what Paul says in Galatians 1. Now, Paul may be wrong, but you can't incorporate him into an Eastern worldview by any means. The critique, I've already, now look, the critique has got three points to it. This is a hard thing to do. Many of you have had experience with various parts of the New Age movement, and some of the things I say, you might say, well, I never heard that where I was. You're exaggerating. Well, can you imagine if you were trying to give a critique of Christianity? You know, there's all kinds of Christians. You've got Orthodox, you've got everybody. And therefore, if you critiqued the structure of beliefs that all the different varieties of Christianity had in common, if you critique that, then some of the critique will fall worse on the Pentecostals than on the Catholics. And some of the critique will fall worse on the, you know, on the Presbyterians than on the Eastern Orthodox. And that's just the way it's going to be. So what I'm giving you is a critique, not of, it's not going to fall equally on every form of the New Age. But I'm just trying to say that it, every part of the New Age tends toward the same basic concept of reality. And these are the weaknesses that I see. Number one, I already mentioned this, but the unreality, this is the last page, sorry, the unreality of evil and suffering. I'll tell you in a minute, Christians have got a problem with suffering. There's no doubt about it. And if God's, if God's good and he's all powerful, why does he allow suffering and evil? And I'll, maybe I'll turn around and talk about that if you want me to, or say something about it. But what I'm trying to say is monism has a worse problem. That's one of the reasons I'm a Christian, by the way, is not because Christianity has got no problems, just the alternatives are far worse, far more difficult, far more contradictory, far more unsatisfying. Not that Christianity has got, you know, God answers every question and raises no issues. My word, no. But, but you see, if everything is God and God doesn't exist above the world, then the distinction between good and bad is not a clear real one. And that's a problem. Look, when you see a slum, or when you see somebody dying of cancer, can you really say, well, the evil there is really just all a matter of perspective? You know, to me, that's, that's, that's the theological version of the ostrich, who says, if I just change my perspective, it'll go away. I'll just stick my head in the sand, and I can't see it so it's not there. I'll change my consciousness. I'll define it differently. You know, I, I don't know what I think about that. I, and I don't know what you think about that. A Christian can say, God is separate from the world, and there are evil things in it God did not intend. They're contrary to his will. He gave his creatures the great gift of creativity, and we abused it, and therefore there's, uh, we've defaced the work. But the monist has to see the evil as part of God, and therefore there is no real solution to it, other than to change your consciousness about it. The consistent monist, and there's nobody who's consistent any more than is a consistent Christian. Right now I'm not, I'm, I'm, I'm not criticizing individual people. I'm criticizing the system. A consistent monist sees a slum or a cancer and has to say, you have to see from the God consciousness that this two are, this two, these two things are part of God, and not really finally a problem. And the Christian has to say, that's a damned, that's damned nonsense. Christian has to say that. Because you see, Christianity is ultimately a fighting religion, and the new age can't be. Christianity says there's things out there that we have got to blast. There's things out there that have got to change. There's things out there we've got to declare war on. Not, not to find it away. Not to say the only real problem you've got is that you, you're seeing things wrong. The only real sin is to believe in it. The only real separation from God is, is to believe you're separated from God. No. The Christian says, no, separation from God is a real thing. There's real misery out there. There's real evil. There's real, there's real pain, and we, and something's got to be done about it. That's why we put down, the Christian sees the world going wrong and insists that God has insisted that we have to put it right. Therefore, generally, I could be wrong about this. The new age movement is going to lead, I think, to environmental activism, and that's about it. People are going to, you know, you're going to legislate and lobby and get activistic about the environment, of course. But how in the world do you get the resources out of the new age movement to really say there's oppression, there's injustice in the world, there's evil and there's pain, there's sickness and there's suffering? We've got to build hospitals. We've got to do something about it. I don't think it has the resources for it. There's very little incentive in it. And therefore, monism can actually, in the long run, this is what's so ironic, lead to a self-centeredness. For all the talk about individualism, it may turn you into the most incredibly self-centered individualist of all. And it can do that, and I've seen that. Because here's the difference. Christianity says suffering is so real that God himself had to come to earth and had to suffer himself. Evil and death and pain, he had to take it on himself. Now, that's a tremendous... listen, all the New Age resonating and reflecting and clearing is not going to get rid of sin. Christianity says God had to come down to earth and actually fight against it. He had to do battle with it. He had to take it on himself. That's why Martin Luther said, Lord, and I wrote it down here, Lord Jesus, you are my righteousness and I have become your sin. He says, you took on you what was mine, and yet you set on me what was yours. You became what you were not, that I might become what I was not. You came to earth and took my sin and my evil upon you so that you could give me your righteousness. Now, this is a completely different understanding of atonement than the New Age version of atonement. The New Age version says sin is an illusion and evil is an illusion. Christianity says it's absolutely real. The New Age approach says God is impersonal and he's part of everything. And the Christian understanding says God is absolutely holy and he's out to demolish evil and sin. They're very, very, very different. By the way, let me give you one really good example. I went recently and saw the musical play Once on this Island, or is it Once Upon this Island? So Once Upon this Island, really good, really good. Now, but the point is, it's essentially a monistic story with a monistic solution. If any of you have seen it, it's told in the French Antilles and it's in that particular culture. And there's lots of different gods. You remember that? It's polytheistic. It's part of the story. It's about a little girl named Timun, who is a terribly, horribly oppressed peasant girl. And she accidentally...
