TITLE: The Man Who Would Not Be Hurried
SCRIPTURE: Mark 5:25-43
TOPICS: Christmas and Advent
SERIES: Two Christmas Meditations
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-man-who-would-not-be-hurried/

============================================================

Passage on which the teaching is based. It doesn't look like a Christmas text, but actually it is. Let me tell you why. There's one teaching, one truth, one lesson that Christmas teaches us that we don't reflect on very much. We don't reflect on well or enough. Christmas points back to a promise that God took centuries, thousands of years to fulfill. In the Magnificat, when Mary sings, she's pregnant with Jesus and she sings about the birth of the Messiah, she says this, My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit doth rejoice in God my Savior, for he has helped his servants, remembering to be merciful to Abraham and his descendants forever, even as he said. Yeah, that's right. God said to Abraham, God promised the birth of Jesus to Abraham, but that was like thousands of years before it happened. It took God an extremely long time to fulfill his promise. And not only does Christmas point back to a promise that took God a very long time to fulfill, Christmas points forward to a promise that he hasn't fulfilled yet. Because, you see, the first coming of the Lord points to the second coming of the Lord, the day in which there will be peace on earth, real peace on earth. See, Christmas points to the promise that someday the Lord will come back and violence will be put away and warfare and all tears will be wiped away, but it's been 2,000 years. And we're still weeping. Christmas points to the fact that though God says, I will not forget my promises, He says, I will not be hurried. I will not be rushed. And I do answer, I do fulfill my promises, but in a way that very often looks like inexcusable and unreasonable delay to you. And that's one of the teachings of Christmas, and that is waiting. Let me show you a perfect example of something that Christmas teaches us about, and let's draw out the implications of it for our own lives. This is Mark 5, 24 to 43. A large crowd followed and pressed around him. And the woman was there who had been subject to bleeding for 12 years. She had suffered a great deal under the care of many doctors and had spent all she had. Yet instead of getting better, she grew worse. When she heard about Jesus, she came up behind him in the crowd and touched his cloak because she thought, if I just touch his clothes, I'll be healed. Immediately her bleeding stopped, and she felt in her body that she was freed from her suffering. At once Jesus realized that power had gone out from him. He turned around in the crowd and asked, who touched my clothes? You see the people crowding around you, against you? His disciples answered, and yet you ask, who touched me? But Jesus kept looking around to see who had done it. And then the woman, knowing what had happened to her, came and fell at his feet and, trembling with fear, told him the whole truth. And he said to her, daughter, your faith has healed you. Go in peace and be freed from your suffering. While Jesus was still speaking, some men came from the house of Jairus, the synagogue ruler. Your daughter is dead, they said. Why bother the teacher anymore? Ignoring what they said, Jesus told the synagogue ruler, don't be afraid, just believe. He did not let anyone follow him except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James. And when they came to the home of the synagogue ruler, Jesus saw a commotion with people crying and wailing loudly. He went in and said to them, why all this commotion and wailing? The child is not dead, but asleep. But they laughed at him. And after he put them all out, he took the child's father and mother and his disciples who were with him, and he went in where the child was. He took her by the hand and said to her, Talitha Koum, which means little girl, I say to you, get up. Immediately, the girl stood up and walked around. She was 12 years old. At this, they were completely astonished. He gave strict orders not to let anyone know about this, and he told them to give her something to eat. Let's look at the questionable delays of Jesus Christ. And then let's look at the answerable grace of Jesus Christ. I mean the grace that answers the questions that arise when he delays. Let's look at the questionable delays and the answering grace. First of all, what do I mean by questionable delays? If you understand the context, and I didn't print the entire chapter here in your bulletin. If you understand the context, verse 35 is absolutely gut-wrenching. Why? Well, in verse 21, just a few verses before the passage begins, in verse 21, a synagogue ruler, a ruler of the synagogue, Jairus, comes to Jesus, falls down before him and says, My little daughter is deathly ill. She's on the verge of death. Would you come? Would you heal her? Would you save her life? And Jesus agrees. And so he and the disciples and Jairus and maybe some other people from his household are rushing to save the life of this little girl. Verse 24, But a large crowd followed and pressed around him. life of this little girl, Jesus feels himself being touched and stops and pulls out a woman from the crowd and sits down and is having a conversation with her, an extended conversation with her. Look at verse 35, while Jesus was still speaking. He's continuing on and on and on with this thing. Now, this is the only way, if you understand the context, it's the only way to explain how perplexed and how deeply sarcastic the apostles are being in verse 31. I mean, you don't even, the translation kind of mutes the sarcasm. Here's what's going on. You want the gist of this? They're excited. Jesus has agreed to go save the life of a little girl of a prominent family. And so, in a sense, they've all gotten into the EMS truck and they're rushing and the sirens are going and it's flashing and it's blowing. And suddenly, Jesus has stopped the truck. And he looks over in a crowd and he says, I want to have a conversation with this person. And the disciples, you see, they're saying, somebody touched you. Of course somebody touched you. You're in the middle of a crowd. What are you talking about? You see, look at the deep sarcasm. They're utterly perplexed. And think of Jairus. He can't believe it. Jesus stops. He sits down or he stands there. He goes into this extended conversation. Just imagine it. Here's a father. His little girl's life is ticking away. There's a chasm opening at his feet. You know, about to just eat him up. And then suddenly, his worst nightmares are realized. Messengers, look at verse 35. Messengers come while Jesus was still speaking, going on and on and on and on. Some men came and said, the words that he most was afraid to hear, your daughter's dead. And see, when they say, why bother the teacher anymore? What they mean is, it's over. And Jesus says, what? He ignores them. And he says, no, it's not. Don't be overthrown by what looks to you like an inexcusable and unreasonable delay to what you asked me for. Believe. Now, here's the first point. The first point is simply this. God's grace virtually never operates on our time frame. Never operates on a schedule that we consider reasonable. Almost never operates according to our time measurements, our calendars, our agendas, changes our schedules. And as a result, it constantly calls into, calls our, it makes our hearts sick, it makes us angry, it fills us with discouragement, sometimes despair, and makes us question the very love of God. And Jesus, in this text, is calling us like this, and he's saying this, I fulfill my promises, but not usually, in a way that you think is punctual. And therefore, if you want me in your life, I want you to know that you're going to continually feel that I'm apparently delaying, but I will fulfill my promises. I'm going to say something that is going to surprise some of you. You know, usually you don't expect preachers to say, things are relative. You expect preachers to say, things are not relative. There's a real right and a real wrong. There's a real good and a real bad. There's a real truth and a real falsity. These things are not relative. And, you know, sometimes I do do that, don't I? But I want to tell you something that is very relative. It is pretty much completely relative. And that is fastness and slowness. Quick punctuality and lateness. I read, and by the way, I may be, if you disagree with this, if you're from one of these countries and you disagree, argue with the book. I was reading a book by a cultural anthropologist who said, one of the key ways you can differentiate between cultures is the concept of punctuality. And this is what he said. He said this, okay? I'll give you the book if you don't like it, but, you know, here's what he said. You get the gist of what I'm saying. He says, if you say, meet you at 2 p.m., in European cultures, if you are more than 15 minutes late, it's expected that you will apologize. You have, in a sense, broken your promise. In Latin American cultures, you've got to go past 30 to 45 minutes before anybody expects you to apologize. You show up, in other words, if a Latin American shows up 40 minutes late to an appointment with a European, the European is sitting there waiting for something that will never happen. And they said, on the other hand, in the Isle of Yap, in somewhere, isn't that in the South Pacific? Anyway, I don't know. In the Isle of Yap, you have to be four hours late. Before it's expected that you would apologize. Now, if that's even true of different cultures, and don't you remember when you were a kid having a... on and on and on, and if somebody, if your parents told you it'll be a month away, you said, a month? And how much more would the difference, would there be a difference between us and God? 2 Peter 2, pardon me, 2 Peter 3, verse 8, a day with the Lord is like a thousand years, and a thousand years is like a day, for the Lord is not slow in keeping his promise, as some understand slowness, as some understand slowness. Now, what is that saying? It's simply, listen, you remember the storm? Jesus is in the, he's asleep in the storm, and they're about to sink, and when he wakes up, they say, don't you care, master, that we perish? Now, there's a premise beneath the panic, there's a premise on which the panic is based, there's a premise at the heart of the panic, and here's the premise, the premise is that we should never be sinking, we should never be in danger, we believe in you, you should be answering our prayers, you should be meeting our needs so fast that we're never in these kinds of things, these situations, and Jesus Christ looks at them and essentially says this, if you want to impose arrogantly your time frames on me, you will never feel loved by me, and it'll be your fault, because I do love you. For my mercies, they endure, ever faithful, ever sure. So that's the problem. The problem is, you cannot live life without continually finding yourself heart sick at what you consider unreasonable and inexcusable delays. Things that you think you have to have, things that you've asked for, things that you've longed for, things that you've prayed for, things that you've worked for, and it just doesn't happen. You look at the promises for a fulfilled life, you look at the promises, and you're empty. And it seems like it's gone on and on and on and on, and you just don't see how in the world it's ever going to be fulfilled. And the Bible says that's the normal way the grace of God works. And your hearts will be sick. But there's an answer. And what does Jesus say? Just believe. Now what I like about that, here's what I like about this text. He looks at Jairus and he says, just believe. But there's another way which he's not saying just believe. And here's why. In the grace of God, the very story itself, or at least I should say the sandwich is an interleaving of the story of Jairus and the story of the woman. The story itself bristles with reasons and perspectives and insights that will make it possible for us to deal with the delays in our lives. Okay? And he says, just believe. But what's nice about this is, even though he says just believe, he also gives us all kinds of reasons and perspectives and insights that will make it vastly easier if you look at them to handle the delays in your life. So the delays in your life don't make you bitter, but instead make you great. It's going to be one or the other. Here's what he shows us. Look at how his grace answers questions about the delays. It shows us three things. Number one, delays teach wisdom. They teach God's wisdom. If you were an emergency room doctor, and I guess maybe some of you are, okay? Here's a woman, and she is chronically ill, not acutely ill. She has a serious disease, but she's been living with her for 12 years, okay? And here's a little girl, and she's on the verge of death. She's not chronically ill. She's acutely ill. Okay, what are you going to do? There's not an emergency room doctor in the world that won't say, we have to take the little girl first. The woman can wait. And therefore, everybody thinks that Jesus is absolutely nuts. But Jairus and the disciples, in fact, everybody in this story cannot see some things that we can as readers. We as readers see a couple of missing crucial factors. They're missing to them, but not to us. What do we see? Number one, the first thing we see, the first thing we realize, is that Jesus Christ has no more trouble healing a dead person than a sick person. There's no difference. So that makes no difference at all. But here's the second thing. Jesus looks out in the crowd and realizes there's a woman who has just been physically healed in a kind of superstitious way. She just touched his cloak. Look, she's been physically healed, but unless he deals with her right now, she'll never become an eternally transformed disciple of his, whose entire life is completely turned around and will be turned around forever and ever and ever. That has to be worked on immediately. Whether the little girl lives or dies doesn't matter. This woman has to be dealt with immediately. You and I see that. Jesus sees that. Nobody else sees it because there are these crucial missing factors. Now let me ask you a question. Right now, are you discouraged? Are you in anger? Are you in resentment? Have you been through times in your life where you basically walked away from God or walked away from all hope because you said, there is absolutely no way anything good can come out of this? This is inexcusable. This is, this is unreasonable. What are we being told here? That there are missing factors. This isTONC. Thank you. how could you see them? How could you see them? How could you know? And therefore, Jesus looks and says, I don't know what else to say. You're going to have to trust me. I mean, if I am the one who I say I am, if I am the divine son, of course I'm going to see things that you're not going to be able to see. How could you possibly expect to? Analyze the logic of this little syllogism, may I? Analyze the logic of this. Because I can't think of any good reasons for this delay, therefore, there can't be any good reasons. What do you think of the logic there? Well, it's utterly flawed. It's emotionally completely understandable, but it is rationally absolutely false. And yet, how many of you are operating on the basis of that right now? How many of you have walked away from God in the past on the basis of that? Jesus Christ is saying, I will always give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything I know. And how could you possibly assume? How could you possibly know everything I know? Remember Teresa of Avila? Remember? The way I like to quote her, Teresa of Avila said, you know, from eternity, the most miserable life in the history of the world on earth will look like one night in a bad hotel. Jesus Christ says, I will give you whatever you would have asked for if you knew what I know. So the first thing we see here is the wisdom. Jesus' delay here shows the wisdom of God. This delay shows the wisdom of God and makes it easier for us to deal with our delays, right? Number one. Number two, this delay does not only show us the wisdom of God, this delay shows us the grace of God. Compare Jairus and the woman. Now, in some ways, it might not strike you quite as much because, again, I didn't print the early part of the passage where Jesus meets Jairus. But Jairus is a synagogue ruler. Now, let's compare the two people. A synagogue ruler was like the president, the chief elder. And almost for certain, the synagogue ruler would have been at probably a very prominent man, probably a very wealthy man, certainly socially incredibly respected. And secondly, a very religious man, a very moral man. Now, let's look at the woman. Utterly opposite end of the spectrum. A, she's a woman in a society where men had all the status, number one. Number two, she's economically destitute. You see that? It said she had lost all of her money. She had spent all she had. So she was at the bottom of the economic ladder, verse 26. But not only that, she was not only a woman in a society where men had the status. She was not only penniless in a society where, you know, obviously wealth, as always, had such tremendous weight and power. But thirdly, she was sick, chronically sick, in a society that believed that if you're chronically sick, you were an immoral or a cursed person. That's how they looked at it. In John chapter 9, you remember the plot? In John chapter 9, the disciples point to a man born blind, and they say to Jesus, now whose sin that he was born blind? Was it him or it was his parents? In other words, they didn't say, was he guilty? They assumed he was guilty. They assumed that he had sinned. They assumed that that was a cursed family. And so here's a woman who's chronically ill. Nobody can get her any better. So she's at the opposite end of the spectrum of Jairus, socially, economically, morally. And Jesus stops for her. And what is this saying? Dick Lucas, in his notes on Mark, puts it perfectly well. I'll read them to you. He says, Jesus Christ takes the time to comfort and teach an unclean woman with a chronic problem, causing a male church leader in urgent need to wait. You can just wait. What is this talking about? This is saying something that the gospel says over and over and over, that Jesus Christ resists and reverses the world's standards of beauty and of power and of status. It completely reverses it. What we're being told here is that Jesus Christ rejects the world's understanding of what is good and what is bad, who is in and who is out. Why? Why? Because of the cross. And what's the way of the cross? The cross means the way up is down. The way to get power is to serve. The way to, uh, the first shall be last. It means the way to get the righteousness of God is to admit that you have no righteousness at all. The way of the cross is the way up is down. And Jesus Christ is simply following this out. And he's showing by this delay. And through this delay, he's trying to show us what? That God's grace is really grace. His grace is really, really grace. It's not, God's favor is not based, his blessing is not based on your performance or your status. Now, what does that mean? Here's what it means. This delay proves the grace of God. And I would like you to consider this for a second. Think about the delays in your own life. I submit to you that. Why? Here's why. Delays do and ought to create sorrow. Delays of justice do and ought to create anger. I want you to realize that sorrow and anger are not only natural, but they're absolutely right. In some ways, they're obligatory. If you've got a heart, if you've got a conscience, then delays in justice and delays of love and delays can create sorrow and anger. But when the sorrow and anger becomes infected in the soul, there's something else going on. What do I mean by infected? I mean when the sorrow goes bad, when the anger goes bad, when it poisons you, when it infects you, when it pushes you down, when it's really destroying your life because of the delays. It's because underneath the pus in your soul, you'll find a foreign object. And you know what that foreign object is? It's what the old writers used to call works righteousness or self-righteousness. A sense that God owes me. Now listen carefully. You'll be able to bear delays if you get rid of this foreign object. They'll make you great. They'll make you clean. They'll make you wise. But if this foreign object is in there, they will make you bitter. They will infect you. They will destroy you. And here's what I mean by that. If you say, I've worked very hard. God owes me. God owes me. Self-righteousness is such an incredible root. You know where all the worry comes from in our lives? Almost all of it? Because we know exactly how life has to go. That's self-righteousness. Do you know why grudges, the grudges, the anger, the resentment you have in your life towards certain people that is distorting your life, it's always because of self-righteousness. You cannot stay mad at somebody unless you feel, I would never do that. Our relational problems, our emotional problems, our social problems, at the root of all these things of self-righteousness, and therefore God delays. And one of the purposes of his delay is to show us, he says, by grace alone. This delay proves that he's a God of grace and helps us to deal with our delays. So first of all, delays prove the wisdom of God. Secondly, delays prove the grace of God. Lastly, delays prove that he's utterly, utterly, utterly trustworthy. Mark says that when Jesus Christ healed her, he healed her in a particular way. He took her by the hand and said, Talitha cum, which literally means, little girl, I say to you, get up. But unfortunately, the translation can't completely give us the gist. Let me explain. The word Talitha, yes, literally means little girl. It's a diminutive. But in that society, in that culture, it's a diminutive that was used as a pet name. See, from culture to culture, the pet names are very different. And you have to understand that a better translation of this would have been the word honey or sugar. And the second thing you have to realize is when he says get up, he's not saying arise from the dead. He's using a term that just simply means sit up, get up. And essentially, what he's doing is he's taking her by the hand and he's saying exactly what her mother or her father would have said on any morning. He grabs her by the hand and he says, honey, it's time to get up. What does that tell you? Here's what it tells you. Oh my gosh, here's what it tells you. Number one, it tells you about his power. This is the greatest, the greatest enemy we have. This is the most implacable. This is the most inexorable. This is the greatest enemy there is to the human race. Death. Death. And there's no incantations. There's no hocus pocus. He doesn't say, stand back. He doesn't roll up his sleeve. The power that the gentleness, the almost effortlessness proves he has is unbelievable. He reaches down into death. And he pulls her right out. Upsy-daisy, honey, it's time to get up. And here's what that means. If you have me in your life, you can laugh at death. If you have me in your life, even the greatest enemy the human race has is nothing more than a good night's sleep. Power. Honey, get up. Death. Upsy-daisy. Okay? She was dead. You know, it doesn't actually say that here. Luke tells the story. Luke was a physician, and he says she was dead. That's why everybody's so astounded. But he says, not when I'm around. So the first thing, honey, it's time to get up, proves his power. And secondly, honey, it's time to get up, proves exquisite tenderness. Here's the parent you need. do it. Brothers, sisters, teachers, friends, here's the parent you need. Here's the parent that takes you by the hand. Here's the parent that will never fail you. Now here's the question. How could he do this? We have just said that regardless of your record, regardless of your status, right? Jesus says by grace, it doesn't matter who you are. It doesn't matter what you've done. It doesn't matter whether you were on the staff, the paid staff of hell. It doesn't matter whether you were a hit man for the mob. It doesn't matter. God loves, if anything, to come to the people who have failed the most, the people who are the furthest outside to show the world what he thinks of their standards. He's a God of grace, and so he takes you by the hand, and he brings you right to your death. No condemnation. It doesn't matter who you are. It doesn't matter what you've done. It doesn't matter what your record is. How can he do that? I'll tell you why. Because when he was on the cross, he lost his father's hand. On the cross, there was no honey time to get up. Death went after Jesus. Death visited all of its vengeance, all of its power, all of its condemnation. Why? Because on the cross, Jesus Christ took the penalty we deserved. He took the penalty and the punishment for all our sins. He voluntarily went to the cross, and there he lost his father's hand. He lost the Lord's hand so we could have the Lord's hand. Now, look at Jesus Christ with that power. Look at Jesus Christ loving us like that. There's the answer. Why would you want to hurry somebody like this? He loves you completely, and he knows what he's doing. Why would you ever want to hurry somebody like this? So he says, don't. Let me conclude by asking you a question. Are you trying to hurry God now? Are you just so angry because you can't think of any good reason for the delay, therefore there can't be one? Here's what this text is telling us. Here's what Christmas is telling us. Do not confuse your agenda for him as faith in him. Do not confuse your agenda that you want him to do. Do not confuse your agenda for him with faith in him. How many of us have said, oh, I believed in him once and he let me down. Do not confuse your coming with an agenda for him, and he doesn't walk on through the paces as him having left you down. Are you trying to hurry God? God, he will not be hurried. He loves you. He's too wise. He's too gracious to be hurried. And secondly, is there anybody who says, boy, I wish I could believe like that. Boy, I wish I had that kind of faith. I wish I had that kind of connection to God so that I had that kind of confidence and that ability to go through life with all these delays. Well, you know what? You may be wrong. When you say, I wish I had your faith, what you mean is, I wish I had your certainty. But look what he says to Jairus. He doesn't say, what does he say? Don't doubt. Just believe. He doesn't say that. Oh, no. He says, don't be afraid. The opposite of saving faith is not uncertainty. It's cowardice. Some of you don't want to admit you're weak. Some of you don't want your friends to think you've got religion. See, some of you are just being cowardly. Jesus Christ says, look, you do not have to have great faith. The woman believes very poorly. She's very superstitious, you know. She thinks, if I just touch. She doesn't know anything about the need for a personal relationship. Jairus actually believes quite well, doesn't he? Jairus, unlike Nicodemus, who is also a synagogue ruler, he's not afraid to come in daytime. Nicodemus came at night. He was afraid. He didn't want anybody to know. Jairus believes very well. The woman believes very poorly. And he goes to her and he says, he makes Jairus wait. He gives her immediate gratification. What's that to say? It's not the quality of your faith. It's not the certainty of your faith. You don't need lots of wonderful certainty. You just need the determination to go to him and not be afraid. Ditch your fears. Go to him. Trust him. Why would you want to hurry somebody like this? He loves you. Let's pray. Father, we ask that you would now help us at Christmastime to see your mercies endure. You will fulfill your promises, but not in our time frame. Help us to see that. Help us to know that. Help us to live out of that. Help us to have the wisdom and grace and trust in you we need in order to let the delays in our lives make us great instead of make us bitter. And we ask this in Jesus' name. Amen.
