TITLE: The Lord Praying for Mission
SCRIPTURE: John 17:13-21
TOPICS: Church Planting and Missions Sharing Your Faith
SERIES: The Lord’s Prayer 1999
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-lord-praying-for-mission/

============================================================

Let me read from John chapter 17. It's printed in your bulletin. What we're doing these last few weeks of the summer is we're taking a look at Jesus' prayer. At the last hours of His life, almost the last moments of His life, He gives us a prayer. He prays to His Father, and it's the longest prayer in the Bible from Jesus. This is the longest sustained prayer that we have. It's all of chapter 17. We're going through it piece by piece. Tonight, let me read you 13 to 21. And Jesus said, I am coming to you now, but I say these things while I am still in the world so that they may have the full measure of my joy within them. I have given them your word, and the world has hated them, for they are not of the world any more than I am of the world. My prayer is not that you take them out of the world, but that you protect them from the evil one. They are not of the world even as I am not of it. Sanctify them by the truth. Your word is truth. As you sent me into the world, I have sent them into the world. For them, I sanctify myself so that they too may be truly sanctified. My prayer is not for them alone. I pray also for those who will believe in me through their message that all of them may be one Father, just as you are in me and I am in you. May they also be in us so that the world may believe that you have sent me. This is God's word. Now, one of the most unpopular aspects of Christianity for the modern person is the very idea of missions or missionaries. And whenever missions or missionary, Christian missions is ever mentioned in literature, if it's ever mentioned, it's ever depicted in a movie, in the theater, in literature, in any way, it's universally depicted negatively. It's condemned, sometimes bitterly so. It's very typical for people to say, well, I think Christianity has a lot of good things. Well, why do they always seem to need to convert people, try to convert everybody? And I've heard Christians, you hear Christians say, well, you know, I'm a Christian, but I believe it's a private thing. I don't believe it's something, I don't think I have to represent myself to everybody as a Christian. I don't believe I have to shout it from the rooftops. It's a private thing. But here, as we've been looking for the last couple of weeks, here we see Jesus' prayer, and it's at the very end of his life. It's his last words. And here he has something, he's got a passion. There's something he really wants for us, his followers. And it's in verse 13. And the NIV doesn't translate it, well, maybe there's no way to translate it just right. He says, I'm coming to you now, but I say these things, Father, while I'm still in the world, so that they may have the full measure of my joy. Now, he has something that he wants for us. In Greek, it's the pleroma. It's the fullness of joy. The difference between the pleroma, the fullness of joy, and just joy is like the difference between having a well and having a cup of water. Jesus wants us to have a fullness in our life. And in order to give us that fullness, he gives us a mission. Now, you say, where's that? Where's the word mission? Well, it's twice in verse 18. Because when he says, as you sent me, Father, into the world, so I send them into the world, the word send in Latin is missio, from which I get our word mission. All the word mission means is sentness. And what we're being told here, very simple. Jesus says, I have a fullness of life because I'm a man in mission. And I want them to have the same fullness of joy, and so I'm going to make them a people in mission. And what that means is this. When Jesus Christ wills your fullness, your joy, he gives you a mission. And that means we can't possibly turn up our nose and say mission is for certain kind of super Christians, or mission is for certain kinds of fanatics, or mission is an option. That's not the kind of Christianity I like. Because if this is true, what he's saying here, then it means that mission is of the very essence of being a Christian. In fact, you need to have, in fact, mission is the essence of life. So let's take a look at what Jesus teaches us about mission. And there's going to be four things we can look at, all right? We're going to see the need for mission, the purpose of the Christian mission, the balance we must strike in Christian mission, and the power for Christian mission. Okay? The need, the purpose, the balance, and the power. First, the need. I'm going to be brief here, but we've already, let me just extend what we've already seen. in Jesus' mind, there's a very intimate connection between fullness of joy and mission. Now, why would that be so? Let's for a moment step back and not think about Christian mission. Let's talk generically. What's it mean? What's a mission? What does it mean to have a mission? What does it mean to be on a mission? Well, it's fairly simple. A mission is when, you're on a mission when your comfort, your position, your safety comes second to the cause. When there's someone or someone's or something more important than your happiness, your needs, and your freedom. You risk them. You risk all those for the cause. You sacrifice, if necessary, all of those for the cause. That's what a mission is. Now, what happens when you go on mission? And actually, one of the most interesting passages in light of this is a passage. It's pretty familiar, but you might not have thought. I didn't until recently think of it in terms of mission. In Hebrews chapter 12, first two verses, it tells us something about how Jesus responded to the prospect of going to the cross. You know, at some point, the prospect of his mission, going to the cross was before. I mean, this is what we read in Hebrews 12. Therefore, it says, let us throw off everything that hinders, and let us run with perseverance our race, fixing our eyes on Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the sake of the joy set before him, endured the cross, scorning its shame, and sat down at the right hand of the throne of God. God. Now, there's a paradoxical statement here. We're told that what was put before Jesus was the cross. And when he saw the prospect of the shame of the cross, and the destruction of the cross, and the pain of the cross, he took it. But if you look at the grammar, it says, for the sake of the, not the cross that was set before him, he endured the cross. It says, for the sake of the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross. Now, this is not saying the cross was a joy. What this is saying is that because he went into mission, he experienced tremendous joy and tremendous suffering. Now, the fact is, that's true across the board. If you live for the furtherance of your own interests, your social interests, your economic interests, your personal interests, if you live for your own comfort, your own needs, your own happiness, and your own freedom, you will have a very cozy little life. Very little in the way of fulfillment and joy. Very little in the way of danger and suffering. But if you want a big life, if you want a full life, if you want not just existence, but real living, get into mission. It was true for Jesus. It was true for everybody. And the alternative is a diminished life. Now, what do I mean by that? Well, in our culture, something pretty interesting, there's no doubt in the last 20 or 30 years that the cultural consensus goes like this. It's very different than, say, my parents' generation or my grandparents' generation. In their generation, the cultural consensus is the important thing is duty. Duty to country. Duty to family. Duty to church. Duty to religion. Duty to moral claims. That's the important thing. You come second. That's not the cultural consensus now. The cultural consensus is that you're here to find your dream and fulfill it. Only you know what's right for you. And you see, claims of duty duty to anything else that would come in the way of you becoming all that you feel that you need to be. You have to ditch. And so we have a freedom. And yet our culture has a pervasive emptiness about it. We've got our freedom in a way that past generations didn't have. But we've lost our joy. Why? Because you see, when you live, when your needs are the most significant thing in your life, it's not long before it dawns on you, slowly, that your life is not making a difference for anybody else. And therefore, if you are the most significant thing in your life, ironically, paradoxically, paradoxically, you've come to feel more and more insignificant. And you're right. See, the great paradox is, if you and your needs and happiness and freedom are the most important thing, you feel less and less important. And if you make something else more important than your importance, you feel very important. And that's the reason why, without mission, there's no fullness in your life. We need a mission. Okay. But now, secondly, we're also taught here, not just that we need mission. We're taught here the purpose of the Christian mission. Now, we're going to move away from talking about mission in general, generically. And we start talking now about the mission that Jesus lays out. that we're called to do? What does Jesus send us in the world to do? What are we supposed to be about? You know, what is the purpose of our mission? You know, there's no mission without a goal. There's no mission without a purpose. What is it? Well, it's very easy when you start looking at what Christian mission is about to get lost in the details. And if you look at the details of what Christians are running around doing, sometimes you say, well, they look a lot like what you might call liberal people because Christians are very involved. They always have been, and they should be, with the poor. They're very involved with people without fathers and mothers, orphans. They're very involved with the sick. They're very involved with the hungry. They're doing what's called deed ministry. It means they're helping people practically. So they're patching up what's broken. They're trying to heal that which is, that needs repair. They're trying to work on the physical and the social and the economic and the material and the emotional needs of people. But on the other hand, sometimes they look like liberal people. Sometimes we look like conservative people. We look because we also preach, we proclaim, we teach, we try to get people to join the community of the faith. We look like conservative, the sectarians who are always trying to recruit people, see, to come into their group. But you see, if you look at the details, you can miss the forest for the trees. Of course, Christians are supposed to feed people because Jesus did. Of course, Christians are supposed to work for healing and to welcome people on the margins of society because Jesus did. Of course, Christians are supposed to preach. Of course, Christians are going to tell people to repent. Of course, Christians are going to do all that because Jesus did. But we're supposed to do that and everything we do, not just for it. It's not an end in itself. Our mission is to actually convince the world, verse 21, of Jesus' mission. Look at verse 21. Next week's sermon, and I'm not going to get into this, verse 21 says, Christians must have loving community. We must love one another, deep unity. Okay, that's one, that's part of the ministry we have to each other. And we won't get into that because that's next week's sermon, the love we're supposed to have. But look at the purpose of it. Why does a Christian do everything that he or she does? Verse 21 says, that the world may believe you sent me. Our mission is to get the world to believe in Jesus' mission. Whether we're doing something with deed, whether we're doing something with word, whether we're building a beautiful, loving community, in community, in word, in deed, everything we do is to try to get the world to believe. Our mission is to get the world to believe in Jesus' mission. That Jesus was not just born, but he was sent. That Jesus was not just a great man born into the world to teach people how to love one another, but he was sent into the world, son of God, from the kingdom of heaven. Now, why is that so important? Why is that such a big deal? The gospel is so sweeping. It is far more optimistic than the most of the other religions of the world and far more pessimistic than the secularism of the world. You see, most of the religions of the world actually, when they take a look at life, what do most of the religions say the purpose of religion is? It's to escape the world. If you live in a certain way, someday you go to heaven. Someday you go back into the all soul. When you're here, you can get God's blessing. When you're here, you have a more peaceful life and you can handle life. But eventually, the purpose of most of the other world religions is to escape. It's a very negative view of the world. That represents a view that says, you know, this world is kind of bad. It's going to harden. We're going to give you strength. And eventually, you go to paradise. Eventually, we'll get past all this. This world is an illusion, says many of those other. This world isn't important. This world is a place where you just sort of connect and on you go. And that's what most of the religions, of the major religions of the world say. On the other hand, secular people are naively optimistic. They say, we can make this world a better place if we just pull together, if we just love one another, if we just educate, and if we just, you know, bring to bear, you know, we can just make this such a great world. Now, Christianity is far more sweeping. To secular people, it says, please, there is something radically wrong here. The world and universe is broken. Physically, there's death. I mean, our biggest problem is death. Disease, decay, everything falls apart. We're physically broken. The world is socially broken. Look at the injustice. Look at the conflict. Look at the violence. And the world, and we're psychologically broken. There's an emptiness. There's an alienation. There's not going to deal with that. Volunteerism's not going to deal with that, says Christianity. There's something wrong at all levels. The world is much more deeply broken than what secular people want to admit. But on the other hand, the gospel says to the other religions of the world, not just the New Testament, but the whole Bible says, God loves this world. This world is broken in sin. This world is distorted now and broken. But God is not going to abandon it. God is not just going to save people out of it. Especially when you go to the prophets of the Old Testament, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, all those prophets. What they say is, someday the Lord himself will come. Someday the Lord himself, the king will come. And he's going to heal the physical brokenness. He's going to heal the social brokenness. He's going to heal the physical brokenness. He's not going to abandon this world. He's going to rehab this world. He's going to restore this world. He's going to renew this world. And when Jesus Christ says, I want you to preach. I want you to teach. I want you to heal. I want you to feed. I want you to do, I want you to love. I want you to do all these things so that the world may know that I've been sent from the kingdom of God, that I'm from that place, that I have come to bring the kingdom, that I am the king, that I am fulfilling what the prophets always said, that the Lord himself will come. And when, see, Jesus Christ's career is all about this. When Jesus Christ was incarnate, look at the incarnation. What's that mean? Born as a baby in a manger? Isn't that sweet? You know what that means? He broke the barrier between the real and the ideal. He comes from the ideal. He comes from heaven. He comes from the place where everything is in harmony. Everything is full. He comes where everything is whole, and he comes down. The real, the ideal becomes real. He breaks that barrier. Then he dies on the cross. He breaks the barrier of guilt and sin that separates us from a holy God. And then he rises from the dead. He separates, he breaks the barrier of death, death, sin. What's he doing? Jesus says, I've brought the kingdom. And I've done it through sacrifice. I've done it not through politics and not through technology. I've done it not through legislation. I've done it not through the market. I've done it not through the meritocracy. I've not done it through the democracy. I've not, I've not done it through anything except I came and I died and that broke the barrier. And now, he says, as I have come on the mission of God to restore the world, I ask you to join. Now, how does that happen? Like this. The mission of God has begun. When you become a Christian, you join the mission of God. That's what it means to become a Christian. It's not a department. Missions isn't something that you do in your spare time. It's not a section out of your schedule. No, it's what he's about. It's what you're about. Look, when you become a Christian, how does that happen? Get this. You repent. You believe. What does that mean? You conform yourself to the pattern of his mission. You conform yourself to the way of the cross. You say, not my freedom, not my power. I confess I'm a sinner. I give my life over to serve you. That's exactly the opposite of the way the world operates. And when you conform yourself into that mission, into the pattern of the cross, in comes the kingdom and your heart starts to heal. But then when you turn to other people and you open your mouth and you open your heart, you begin to care. You begin to listen. You begin to make yourself vulnerable. You're willing to talk about what Christ means to you. Oh, that's frightening. Oh, you're going to get laughed at. Oh, you're going to get shunned sometimes. Or else you're going to get people in who are so happy to see someone who will finally listen to them that they'll use you. What are you doing? You're conformed to the pattern of his mission. You're conformed to the pattern of the kingdom. You're conforming yourself to the pattern of the cross. And through you, the kingdom comes. And people start to get healed. People start to believe. People start to see. And then when you turn to not just individuals, but when you turn to sectors of the world, groups of people, neighborhoods, places where there's tremendous brokenness, economic, social, emotional, spiritual. And instead of furthering your own career, instead of furthering, you know, instead of buying as big a house as you possibly can, instead of that, you conform yourself to the pattern of the mission. You conform yourself to the pattern of the kingdom, the pattern of the cross. Your freedom, your needs, your happiness, your comfort comes second. And you begin to serve other people. And that means that through you, the kingdom comes. And there's healing. and it's going to go on until someday the bible says the kingdom will completely come there'll be every tear will be wiped away all the disease and decay and death will be over that's part of our goal destroy death all social injustice will be gone that is our goal you see all peoples one that there'll be nothing there will be no tears the bible says that is our goal nothing less we're part of the mission of god and that's the reason why yeah do we preach do we try to get people to come to church do we try to say well here's the doctrines believe this do we try to feed people do we try to help people do we try to uh heal have healed broken bodies yes but why jesus says your mission is to get the world to believe in my mission the mission of god lord coming back restoring the earth and when you repent and believe in me the kingdom comes into your life and you're swept up into the mission of god and that's the reason why that's the purpose that's what you're after and that's the reason why mission is at the essence of what it means to be a christian now thirdly third thing we learn here is not just the need for mission and the purpose of mission what the christian mission is now the third thing we learn is for effectiveness jesus gives us a kind of strategic secret and i've been working i've been looking around for a good word for it and i i don't have one so i'm going to have to give you the next best thing there's a balance to strike all of us want to be part of that mission i mean even those of you who are here are not sure you believe in christianity you know we we want to be people in mission we want to feel that we make a difference and so it's very exciting just to even hear about it even if you don't believe it's exciting and so you said oh i would love to be an agent like that i would love to be able to see the world change through me and through what i do as i can fly i can see that but why is it that most christians aren't that effective i think we need to be honest about this why is it that it's you know god's doing a lot of great kingdom work but very often it's in spite of us in spite of most of us maybe why is this jesus says because there is a balance that must be struck and actually nobody strikes it just right and because most of us are off to one side or the other uh there's a reason why we're ineffective and it's you it's really right here pretty interesting in verse 14 he says i have given them your word and the world is hated they are not of the world verse 15 says my prayer is not that you take them out of the world but you protect them from evil and then verse 18 says as you sent me into the world so i send them into the world now look carefully for on the one hand jesus says you must not be of the world you'll there's no way people are going to believe that jesus was sent there's no way people are going to believe that the kingdom of god has has landed if you're of the world which means if you're just like the world if christians are just like everyone in the world for example if christians are just as materialistic as individualistic with how they conduct their life or if christians are just as uh if the christians are just as dependent on circumstances for their joy as people in the world if things are going well money things are going well career things are going well in life and family everybody in your family's happy people love you you've got someone who loves you and all that if the circumstances are going well you're happy if circumstances are not doing well you're devastated and if you're just like the people in the world you're of the world or if you're just as prejudiced and angry and hostile toward folks who don't have your views on religion or politics if you're just if you're just as alienated and hostile to people who you think are wrong and people who are different politically different culturally different if in other words if you are of the world if you're just like everybody in the world if people don't look at you and and see something really unique in the way you live your life why should the world believe why should anybody believe that jesus was sent by the father but on the other hand verse 15 says not only must you not be of the world you must not be out of the world he prays you not go out of the world now what's that mean one thing i recently uh noticed as i was doing some reading and was kind of disconcerting but not surprising of all the various sorts of belief groups in the world i mean in america you know you've got uh eastern orthodox christians roman catholic christians you've got protestant orthodox christians uh what do i mean by protestant orthodox christians i'm talking about people uh got Jewish people, you've got Muslims, you have secular people. Of all those groups, the people least likely to live in a great big city like New York are Protestant Orthodox Christians, by far. Studies have shown this. Protestant Orthodox Christians are by far the most suburban people in America. And you know why? Well, you know why. I've heard it certainly. Many people say to me, you live in New York City? You want to expose yourself to all that? You want your children to be exposed to all that? And the only conclusion I can draw is that people are actually seeking in their life to do exactly what Jesus prayed that they would not do. Jesus says, I don't want them out of the world. In fact, he doesn't even say, I want them in the world. You notice that? That's not the word he uses in verse 18. Even the word in is too passive. He says, I don't want them of the world, but I don't want them out of the world. I want them into the world. What does it mean to be into the world? What it means to be into the world means to be deeply engaged with people who differ radically from where you are in their beliefs. It's to be deeply engaged with people who are really very troubled with plenty of needs and therefore you become vulnerable. You're over your head. You're out of control. To be into the world means to actually be deeply engaged. Yes, yes, it means to love the world, John 3, 16, but in no way be seduced by it or attracted. People who are out of the world are afraid and disdainful of it. People who are of the world are attracted to it. But the secret of mission, and if you get this just right, and nobody does, if you got this just right, God would save the whole world through you. The rest of us could take a vacation. If you were not too much of the world or too much out of the world, all of us are ineffective because we're too much one or the other. We're too assimilated to it or too afraid or disdainful of it. But to be into the world means to be deeply engaged in it and utterly unattracted to it. Now, you say, how can that happen? Well, look, now we actually kind of touched on this last week, but one of the things that's so remarkable about the verses 17, 18, and 19, 17 is about holiness. Sanctify them. We talked about this last week. It means the character of your heart when it's changed by the gospel. Sanctify them. Verse 19 is about holiness. As I have sanctified myself, I want them to be truly sanctified. But verse 18 is about mission. Now, why would Jesus talk about holiness, mission, and holiness? And here's the reason why. The best way for you, well, there's many ways. First of all, it means that there is no mission without holiness. It's this freedom of heart. It's this unique way in which your heart functions when it's been changed by the gospel that enables you to be into the world. In fact, I'll go so far as to say, this is the way you know that you've got gospel holiness and not just some kind of moralistic Phariseeism. That you are neither attracted to the world nor disdainful of it or afraid of it. You neither say, oh my gosh, the world, my gosh, the world. I got to get away. It's so polluting. It's so scary. It's so awful. It's so disgusting. Nor, on the other hand, do you say, the world, the world, what a great place. I can't wait. Example, you come into the city, you meet people way above you, much more rich, much more successful, much more capable than you. You meet people much further below you, much more broken, much more messed up, much poorer. And you meet people way away from you, people who views of things are just like from another planet as far as you're concerned. You meet the way ups, the way downs, the way outs. And if your understanding of yourself, if your self-understanding, if your self-appreciation, if your self-image is based on power and performance to standards, you will either be pushed one way or the other. Let me give you an example. When the average person comes into contact with someone who is absolutely, incredibly rich, powerful, and successful, incredibly rich, almost always, if you get close to a person like that, or you start to get close, you get into close contact, you fall into one of two, one of two attitudes. On the one hand, you may just disdain the person. You say, I can't believe, I am offended, I am outraged that somebody would spend this much money on a home, on a chair, on clothing, when the people of the world, there's people of the world starving. So, you... want to have anything to do with them. So you feel superior to them. Or else you say, wow, I'm with this kind of person sitting in this kind of room eating at this kind of restaurant. Look at this little chocolate thingy I'm eating for dessert. $60. My word. What a cool person I am that I'm part of. Now here's the point. If your self-appreciation is based on power and performance and you come up against somebody far more capable, far more successful than you, you will have to defend yourself either by feeling superior to them or else getting their affirmation. But the gospel says two things that no other religion, no other philosophy ever says. Doesn't even try to say. First of all, the gospel doesn't just say, oh, you're needy, you're flawed. The gospel says you are a sinner. You are lost. You are so filled with pride and selfishness and wickedness, you deserve hell. And by the way, no other religion talks to you like that. And therefore, the gospel says you shouldn't feel superior to anybody. But the gospel also says, unlike any other religion, right now, through your faith in Jesus Christ, when the Father looks at you, he doesn't see a mark on you. He doesn't see a pimple on your righteousness. You are an utter beauty, you're an absolute beauty to him. You don't need anyone else's affirmation at all. Now that's the reason why, that's the reason why Jesus can say, if you are sanctified in the gospel, if you are holy, you will be into the world. In fact, this is the only way that you know your holiness isn't just, isn't just sort of moral self-effort. On the one hand, there's no fear and disdain, no disgust at the world. On the other hand, absolutely no attraction. You're not out of, you're not of, you're into. And when you're into, to the degree you're into, you will see the kingdom of God changing lives through you. And the reason why you and I don't see more of it happening is because we're either too much in, too much out, pardon me, of or too much out of. And that's why Jesus says, that's, this is a remarkable insight. It is unbelievable to me. And it's the thing that really has made me most repent. As I've preached this sermon three times now, and as I keep taking a look at this, why aren't we more effective? Because we lack gospel holiness, and therefore we're not into the world. Now lastly, fairly brief, but lastly, you say, okay, I see I need a mission. I see what the mission is. And I even see what I have to do. But how do I do it? Where do I get the power for it? Where do I get the strength for it? Where? Well, this text is just so filled with power sources. But let me just, let me just name you three, okay? First of all, we have the confidence of kingdom authority. The confidence of kingdom authority. In other words, what the Hebrews writer says, we are receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken. Let me put it to you this way. Look at verse 20. Jesus prays for not just his 12 disciples. He says, Father, I'm not just praying this prayer for the 12 disciples right here. I'm praying for all who will believe through their message. Not who might believe, who will believe. Jesus is saying, the kingdom is coming. And here's what's so important. Let me put this, let me put this in some historical perspective for some of you. I'm a baby boomer, you know. I'm about to turn 49. I won't tell you exactly when, but soon. And when I was growing up, and I was a teenager, and when I was in college, everybody sang and really believed what Peter, Paul, and Mary said when they sang, if I had a hammer. If I had a hammer. I'd hammer out, I'd hammer out justice. I'd hammer out freedom. I'd hammer out love. And so, you know, in the college years, especially baby boomers talked about being radicals. What's a radical? Radicals said, who cares about money? Who cares about career? Who cares about comfort and safety? We're going to give our lives for freedom. We're going to give our lives. We're going to try to change the world. And then we grew up, and we laughed at ourselves, and we got cynical. And now, whenever somebody says, come change the world, they mean recycle. Come change the world. That means be part of our walk-a-thon and give money to a good cause. And they're good causes, and you should recycle. I'm not against it. But they're now, I mean, we are in a cynical age, and all discussion of changing the world is metaphorical, unless you're a Christian. When you hear the song, if you ever hear the song, and some of you have never heard of the song, I, if I had a hammer, I'd hammer out justice. I'd hammer out freedom. I'd change the world. I'd bring about love. I'd end war. Everybody else but a Christian has to talk about that with a little. But are you a Christian today? No spin. No metaphor. Absolutely literally. That is exactly what you're called to do. That's exactly what you will do. We're the only radicals left. We're the only ones that can sing that song with integrity. Has it dawned on you? On the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, the MMPI, which is trying to kind of get at, you know, personality disorders, there's a question. There's a true or false question. There's a whole lot of weird true or false, but, you know, but there's a true or false question, at least it used to be, on the MMPI, and it said this. True or false, I am a secret agent from God. I took that test and I said no, but after I got into college, from then on I answered it like a Christian. From the world's point of view, you're nuts to say that. From the Christian point of view, that is the literal absolute truth. We should all be radicals. Why aren't we? There should be no cynicism. We have the confidence of the authority of the kingdom, number one. Number two, second source of power is we have the experience of God's reality. When Moses, Moses believed in God, but when he met the reality of God in the burning bush, he was sent to Pharaoh. Isaiah believed in God, but when he met the reality of God in the temple, he was sent. He said, who will go for me and preach to people who will never hear? Abraham believed in God, but when he experienced the reality of God, God came down and said, Abraham, I will make you, I will bless you, and I'll make you to be a blessing. Now get out. Look at Moses, look at Isaiah, look at Abraham. Whenever somebody moves from just belief to an experience of the reality of God, they hear God say, get out. Get out of your comfort zone. Get out of your security zone. Get out where you're out of control. Get deeply engaged in other people's lives. God is a spiritual tornado. He never calls you in to heal you without sending you out in mission. He never blesses you except to make you to be a blessing. He never takes your sin away. He never heals you on the inside with a coal from his altar without saying, who will go? And anybody who's actually met the reality of God says, I can't keep this to myself. And therefore, if you're a person, I'm a Christian, but there's no need for me to shout out from the housetops. I believe it's a private thing. You are a pre-temple Isaiah. You are a pre-burning bush Moses. You may believe in God, but you haven't met the living reality of God because anyone who has is thrust out. And lastly, the main power you get for mission is this. Verse 19 again. Well, if you were here last week, Jesus says, for their sake, for them I sanctify myself. The only way you are really and truly going to get out there in mission is if you realize the only way you're going to get out. You know, God comes to everybody. He comes to Isaiah. He comes to Moses. He says, get out. The only way you're ever going to get out is realize that Jesus' mission for you meant that he really got out. All you and I get out of is our comfort zone. All you and I get out of is our security zone. Jesus got out of heaven. Jesus got out of his father's love. Jesus got out of life itself. Jesus got out. In Jesus' mission, he really gave up everything. And when you see that he loves you like that, when you see his mission for you, when you see that you were the object of his mission, only when you see yourself as the object of mission will you see yourself as the subject of mission. Only when you see him rescuing you will you be willing to go out and risk everything to rescue others. Only when you know how much he loved you that he would do that will you go out in mission not because you need to be needed, which is a counterfeit of mission. Not to tell other people, you have the truth and you're wrong and I'm right. That's a counterfeit of mission. That's where you're going out there to meet your own needs. But you're going out there because you know he loves you. And now you've got that gospel holiness. You, unless you get out of your security zone into mission, you not only can't be the blessing, but you can't know God because he got out in the most radical way of all. So many of us are drowning under our small ambitions. We're smothering under the smallness of our lives. We've got no greater goals than to get something on our resume and then get on and do all the things we've always dreamed of. Get out. Let's pray. Give us mission. Help us know you as the sending God. Let's pray. mission. That's the only way we'll have fullness of life. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. And he's going to heal the physical brokenness. He's going to heal the social brokenness. He's not going to abandon this world. He's going to rehab this world. He's going to restore this world. He's going to renew this world. And when Jesus Christ says, I want you to preach. I want you to teach. I want you to heal. I want you to feed. I want you to do, I want you to love. I want you to do all these things so that the world may know that I've been sent from the kingdom of God. That I'm from that place. That I have come to bring the kingdom. That I am the king. That I am fulfilling what the prophets always said. That the Lord himself will come. And when see Jesus Christ's career is all about this. When Jesus Christ was incarnate, look at the incarnation. What's that mean? Born as a baby in a manger. Isn't that sweet? You know what that means? He broke the barrier between the real and the ideal. He comes from the ideal. He comes from heaven. He comes from the place where everything is in harmony. Everything is full. He comes where everything is whole. And he comes down. The real, the ideal becomes real. He breaks that barrier. Then he dies on the cross. He breaks the barrier of guilt and sin that separates us from a holy God. And then he rises from the dead. He separates, he breaks the barrier of death, death, sin. What's he doing? Jesus says, I've brought the kingdom. And I've done it through sacrifice. I've done it not through politics and not through technology. I've done it not through legislation. I've done it not through the market. I've done it not through the meritocracy. I've not done it through the democracy. I've not done it through anything except I came and I died. And that broke the barrier. And now, he says, as I have come on the mission of God to restore the world, I ask you to join. Now, how does that happen? Like this. The mission of God has begun. When you become a Christian, you join the mission of God. That's what it means to become a Christian. It's not a department. Missions isn't something that you do in your spare time. It's not a section out of your schedule. No, it's what he's about. It's what you're about. Look, when you become a Christian, how does that happen? Get this. You repent. You believe. What does that mean? You conform yourself to the pattern of his mission. You conform yourself to the way of the cross. You say, not my freedom, not my power. I confess I'm a sinner. I give my life over to serve you. That's exactly the opposite of the way the world operates. And when you conform yourself into that mission, into the pattern of the cross, in comes the kingdom and your heart starts to heal. But then when you turn to other people and you open your mouth, and you open your heart, you begin to care, you begin to listen, you begin to make yourself vulnerable. You're willing to talk about what Christ means to you. Oh, that's frightening. Oh, you're going to get laughed at. Oh, you're going to get shunned sometimes. Or else you're going to get people in who are so happy to see someone who will finally listen to them that they'll use you. What are you doing? You're conformed to the pattern of his mission. You're conformed to the pattern of the kingdom. You're conforming yourself to the pattern of the cross. And through you, the kingdom comes. And people start to get healed. People start to believe. People start to see. And then when you turn to not just individuals, but when you turn to sectors of the world, groups of people, neighborhoods, places where there's tremendous brokenness, economic, social, emotional, spiritual. And instead of furthering your own career, instead of furthering, you know, instead of buying as big a house as you possibly can, instead of that, you conform yourself to the pattern of the mission. You conform yourself to the pattern of the kingdom, the pattern of the cross. Your freedom, your needs, your happiness, your comfort comes second. And you begin to serve other people. And that means that through you, the kingdom comes. And there's healing. Now, this is going to go on, and it's going to go on until someday, the Bible says, the kingdom will completely come. There'll be, every tear will be wiped away. All the disease and decay and death will be over. That's part of our goal. Destroy death. All social injustice will be gone. That is our goal. You see? All peoples won. That there'll be nothing, there will be no tears, the Bible says. That is our goal. Nothing less. We're part of the mission of God. And that's the reason why, yeah, do we preach? Do we try to get people to come to church? believe this? Do we try to feed people? Do we try to help people? Do we try to heal broken bodies? Yes, but why? Jesus says, your mission is to get the world to believe in my mission, the mission of God, Lord coming back, restoring the earth. And when you repent and believe in me, the kingdom comes into your life and you're swept up into the mission of God. And that's the reason why. That's the purpose. That's what you're after, and that's the reason why mission is at the essence of what it means to be a Christian. Now, thirdly, third thing we learn here is not just the need for mission and the purpose of mission, what the Christian mission is. Now, the third thing we learn is for effectiveness, Jesus gives us a kind of strategic secret, and I've been working, I've been looking around for a good word for it, and I don't have one, so I'm going to have to give you the next best thing. There's a balance to strike. All of us want to be part of that mission. I mean, even those of you who are here are not sure you believe in Christianity. You know, we want to be people in mission. We want to feel that we make a difference. And so it's very exciting just to even hear about it, even if you don't believe it's exciting. And so you say, oh, I would love to be an agent like that. I would love to be able to see the world change through me and through what I do. I can see that. But why is it that most Christians aren't that effective? I think we need to be honest about this. Why is it that it's, you know, God's doing a lot of great kingdom work, but very often it's in spite of us, in spite of most of us maybe. Why is this? Jesus says because there is a balance that must be struck, and actually nobody strikes it just right, and because most of us are off to one side or the other, there's a reason why we're ineffective. And it's really right here pretty interesting. In verse 14, he says, I have given them your word, and the world is hated. They are not of the world. Verse 15 says, my prayer is not that you take them out of the world, but you protect them from evil. And then verse 18 says, as you sent me into the world, so I send them into the world. Now look carefully. On the one hand, Jesus says, you must not be of the world. You'll, there's no way people are going to believe that Jesus was sent. There's no way people are going to believe that the kingdom of God has landed if you're of the world, which means if you're just like the world. If Christians are just like everyone in the world, for example, if Christians are just as materialistic and as individualistic with how they conduct their life, or if Christians are just as, if the Christians are just as dependent on circumstances for their joy as people in the world. If things are going well, money, things are going well, career, things are going well in life and family, everybody in your family's happy, people love you, you've got someone who loves you, and all that. If the circumstances are going well, you're happy. If circumstances are not doing well, you're devastated. And if you're just like the people in the world, you're of the world. Or if you're just as prejudiced and angry and hostile toward folks who don't have your views on religion or politics, if you're just, if you're just as alienated and hostile to people who you think are wrong and people who are different, politically different, culturally different. If, in other words, if you are of the world, if you're just like everybody in the world, if people don't look at you and see something really unique in the way you live your life, why should the world believe, why should anybody believe that Jesus was sent by the Father? But on the other hand, verse 15 says, not only must you not be of the world, you must not be out of the world. He prays you not go out of the world. Now what's that mean? One thing I recently noticed as I was doing some reading, and it was kind of disconcerting, but not surprising. Of all the various sorts of belief groups in the world, I mean in America, you know, you've got Eastern Orthodox Christians, Roman Catholic Christians, you've got Protestant Orthodox Christians. What do I mean by Protestant Orthodox Christians? I'm talking about people who believe in classic, supernatural, historic Christianity. You've got Jewish people, you've got Muslims, you have secular people. Of all those groups, the people least likely to live in a great big city like New York are Protestant Orthodox Christians, by far. Studies have shown this. Protestant Orthodox Christians are by far the most suburban people in America. America. And you know why? Well, you know why. I've heard it certainly. Many, many people say to me, you live in New York City? You want to expose yourself to all that? that? you that? And the only conclusion I can draw is that people are actually seeking in their life to do exactly what Jesus prayed that they would not do. Jesus says, I don't want them out of the world. In fact, he doesn't even say, I want them in the world. You notice that? That's not the word he uses in verse 18. Even the word in is too passive. He says, I don't want them of the world, but I don't want them out of the world. I want them into the world. What does it mean to be into the world? What it means to be into the world means to be deeply engaged with people who differ radically from where you are in their beliefs. It's to be deeply engaged with people who are really very troubled with plenty of needs, and therefore you become vulnerable. You're over your head. You're out of control. To be into the world means to actually be deeply engaged. Yes, yes, it means to love the world, John 3, 16, but in no way be seduced by it or attracted. People who are out of the world are afraid and disdainful of it. People who are of the world are attracted to it. But the secret of mission, and if you get this just right, and nobody does, if you got this just right, God would save the whole world through you. The rest of us could take a vacation. If you were not too much of the world or too much out of the world, all of us are ineffective because we're too much one or the other. We're too assimilated to it or we're too afraid or disdainful of it. But to be into the world means to be deeply engaged in it and utterly unattracted to it. Now, you say, how can that happen? Well, look, now we actually kind of touched on this last week, but one of the things that's so remarkable about the verses 17, 18, and 19, 17 is about holiness. Sanctify them. We talked about this last week. It means the character of your heart when it's changed by the gospel. Sanctify them. Verse 19 is about holiness. As I have sanctified myself, I want them to be truly sanctified. But verse 18 is about mission. Now, why would Jesus talk about holiness, mission, and holiness? And here's the reason why. The best way for you, well, there's many ways. First of all, it means that there is no mission without holiness. It's this freedom of heart. It's this unique way in which your heart functions when it's been changed by the gospel that enables you to be into the world. In fact, I'll go so far as to say, this is the way you know that you've got gospel holiness and not just some kind of moralistic Phariseeism. That you are neither attracted to the world nor disdainful of it or afraid of it. You neither say, oh my gosh, the world, my gosh, the world. I got to get away. It's so polluting. It's so scary. It's so awful. It's so disgusting. Nor, on the other hand, do you say, the world. The world. What a great place. I can't wait. Example. You come into the city. You meet people way above you, much more rich, much more successful, much more capable than you. You meet people much further below you, much more broken, much more messed up, much poorer. And you meet people way away from you. People whose views of things are just like from another planet as far as you're concerned. You meet the way ups, the way downs, the way outs. And if your understanding of yourself, if your self-understanding, if your self-appreciation, if your self-image is based on power and performance to standards, you will either be pushed one way or the other. Let me give you an example. When the average person comes into contact with someone who is absolutely, incredibly rich, powerful, and successful. Incredibly rich. Almost always, if you get close to a person like that, or you start to get close, you get into close contact, you fall into one of two attitudes. On the one hand, you may just disdain the person. You say, I can't believe, I am offended, I am outraged, that somebody would spend this much money on a home, on a chair, on clothing, when the people, there's people in the world who are starving. So you feel like, I'm just offended. I don't want to have anything to do with them. So you feel superior to them. Or else you say, wow, I'm with this kind of person sitting in this kind of room eating at this kind of restaurant. Look at this little chocolate thingy I'm eating for dessert. Sixty dollars. My word. What a cool person I am that I'm part of. Now here's the point. If your self-appreciation is based on power and performance, and you come up against somebody far more capable, far more successful than you, you will have to defend yourself. Either by feeling superior to them, or else getting their affirmation. But the gospel says two things that no other religion a lot of golf to learn from other 저녁 style things that you should be making a difference, depending on you, you're wearing your bog I will have to understand this approach. And I either by feeling superior to them or else getting their affirmation. But the gospel says two things that no other religion, no other philosophy ever says. Doesn't even try to say. First of all, the gospel doesn't just say, oh, you're needy, you're flawed. The gospel says you are a sinner. You are lost. You are so filled with pride and selfishness and wickedness, you deserve hell. By the way, no other religion talks to you like that. And therefore, the gospel says you shouldn't feel superior to anybody. But the gospel also says, unlike any other religion, right now, through your faith in Jesus Christ, when the Father looks at you, he doesn't see a mark on you. He doesn't see a pimple on your righteousness. You are an absolute beauty to him. You don't need anyone else's affirmation at all. Now, that's the reason why Jesus can say, if you are sanctified in the gospel, if you are holy, you will be into the world. In fact, this is the only way that you know your holiness isn't just sort of moral self-effort. On the one hand, there's no fear and disdain, no disgust at the world. On the other hand, absolutely no attraction. You're not out of, you're not of, you're into. And when you're into, to the degree you're into, you will see the kingdom of God changing lives through you. And the reason why you and I don't see more of it happening is because we're either too much in, too much out, pardon me, of, or too much out of. And that's why Jesus says, that's, this is a remarkable insight. It is unbelievable to me. And it's the thing that really has made me most repent. As I've preached this sermon three times now, and as I keep taking a look at this, why aren't we more effective? Because we lack gospel holiness, and therefore we're not into the world. Now, lastly, fairly brief, but lastly, you say, okay, I see I need a mission, I see what the mission is, and I even see what I have to do, but how do I do it? Where do I get the power for it? Where do I get the strength for it? Where? Well, this text is just so filled with power sources, but let me just, let me just name you three, okay? First of all, we have the confidence of kingdom authority. The confidence of kingdom authority. In other words, what the Hebrews writer says, we are receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken. Let me put it to you this way. Look at verse 20. Jesus prays for not just his 12 disciples. He says, Father, I'm not just praying this prayer for the 12 disciples right here. I'm praying for all who will believe through their message. Not who might believe, who will believe. Jesus is saying, the kingdom is coming. And here's what's so important. Let me put this, let me put this in some historical perspective for some of you. I'm a baby boomer, you know. I'm about to turn 49. I won't tell you exactly when, but soon. And when I was growing up, when I was a teenager, when I was in college, everybody sang and really believed what Peter, Paul, and Mary said when they sang, If I Had a Hammer. If I Had a Hammer, I'd hammer out justice, I'd hammer out freedom, I'd hammer out love. And so, you know, in the college years especially, baby boomers talked about being radicals. What's a radical? A radical said, who cares about money? Who cares about career? Who cares about comfort and safety? We're going to give our lives for freedom. We're going to give our lives, we're going to try to change the world. And then, we grew up, and we laughed at ourselves, and we got cynical. And now, whenever somebody says, come change the world, they mean recycle. Come change the world. That means be part of our walk-a-thon and give money to a good cause. And there are good causes, and you should recycle. I'm not against it. But there, now, I mean, we are in a cynical age, and all discussion of changing the world is metaphorical, unless you're a Christian. When you hear the song, if you ever hear the song, and some of you have never heard of the song, if I had a hammer, I'd hammer out justice, I'd hammer out freedom, I'd change the world, I'd bring about love, I'd end war. Remember, everybody else but a Christian has to talk about that with a little bit of a jaded laugh and talk about it metaphorically. But if you're, are you a Christian today? No spin, no metaphor, absolutely literally. That is exactly what you're called to do. That's exactly what you will do. We're the only radicals left. We're the only ones that can sing that song with integrity. Has it dawned on you? On the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, the MMPI, which is trying to kind of get at, you know, personality disorders, there's a question. There's a true or false question. There's a whole lot of weird true or false, you know. But there's a true or false question, at least it used to be. am a secret agent from God. I took that test, and I said no, and but after I got into college, from then on I answered it like a Christian. From the world's point of view, you're nuts to say that. From the Christian point of view, that is the literal absolute truth. We should all be radicals. Why aren't we? There should be no cynicism. We have the, we have the confidence of the authority of the kingdom, number one. Number two, second source of power is we have the experience of God's reality. When Moses, Moses believed in God, but when he met the reality of God in the burning bush, he was sent to Pharaoh. Pharaoh. Isaiah believed in God, but when he went the reality of God in the temple, he was sent, he said, who will go for me and preach to people who will never hear? Abraham believed in God, but when he experienced the reality of God, God came down and said, Abraham, I will make you, I will bless you, and I'll make you to be a blessing. Now get out. Look at Moses, look at Isaiah, look at Abraham. Whenever somebody moves from just belief to an experience of the reality of God, they hear God say, get out. Get out of your comfort zone. Get out of your security zone. Get out where you're out of control. Get deeply engaged in other people's lives. God is a spiritual tornado. He never calls you in to heal you without sending you out in mission. He never blesses you except to make you to be a blessing. He never, he never takes, he never takes your sin away, never heals you on the inside with a coal from his altar without saying, who will go? And anybody who's actually met the reality of God says, I can't keep this to myself. And therefore, if you're a person, I'm a Christian, but there's no need for me to shout out from the housetops. I believe it's a, private thing. You are a pre-temple Isaiah. You are a pre-burning bush Moses. You may believe in God, but you haven't met the living reality of God because anyone who has is thrust out. And lastly, the main power you get for mission is this. Verse 19 again. Well, if you were here last week, Jesus says, for their sake, for them, I sanctify myself. The only way you are really and truly going to get out there in mission is if you realize the only way you're going to get out, you know, God comes to everybody, comes to Isaiah, comes to Moses, he says, get out. The only way you're ever going to get out is realize that Jesus' mission for you meant that he really got out. All you get and I get out of is our comfort zone. All you and I get out of is our security zone. Jesus got out of heaven. Jesus got out of his father's love. Jesus got out of life itself. Jesus got out. In Jesus' mission, he really gave up everything. And when you see that he loves you like that, when you see his mission for you, when you, when you see that you were the object of his mission, only when you see yourself as the object of mission, when you see yourself as a subject of mission. Only when you see him rescuing you will you be willing to go out and risk everything to rescue others. Only when you know how much he loved you that he would do that will you go out in mission not because you need to be needed, which is a counterfeit of mission. Not to tell other people you have the truth and you're wrong and I'm right. That's a counterfeit of mission. That's where you're going out there to meet your own needs. But you're going out there because you know he loves you. And now you've got that gospel holiness. You, unless you get out of your security zone into mission, you not only can't be the blessing, but you can't know God because he got out in the most radical way of all. So many of us are drowning under our small ambitions. We're smothering under the smallness of our lives. We've got no greater goals than to get something on our resume and then get on and do all the things we've always dreamed of. Get out. Let's pray. Give us mission. Help us know you as the sending God. Put us into your mission. That's the only way we'll have fullness of life. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
