TITLE: The Descent of the Spirit
SCRIPTURE: Acts 2:1-13
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Acts: The Gospel in the City
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-descent-of-the-spirit/

============================================================

Good evening. Tonight's scripture reading is from Acts 2 verses 1 through 13. It's found on page 11 of your worship guide. When the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place. Suddenly a sound, like the blowing of a violent wind, came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting. They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each of them. All of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them. Now they were staying, there were staying in Jerusalem, God-fearing Jews from every nation under heaven. When they heard this sound, a crowd came together in bewilderment because each one heard them speaking in his own language. Utterly amazed, they asked, are not all these men who are speaking Galileans? Then how is it that each of us hears them in his own native language? Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, residents of Mesopotamia, Judea, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the parts of Libya near Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs. We hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongues. Amazed and perplexed, they asked one another, what does this mean? Some, however, made fun of them and said, they have had too much wine. The word of the Lord. Lord. Thanks be to God. So we've been gone looking at the book of Acts and we come to a very famous passage, the day of Pentecost. And occasionally people say, oh, this is, I've heard people say, this is the birthday of the church. It's not completely precisely right or accurate because the word church in both Hebrew in Greek means the called out ones. And God actually began calling out a people to himself, saved by grace, living according to his word. He began doing that back many, many centuries before this, at least since the time of Abraham. What makes this unique though, is the descent of the Holy Spirit. There's a sense in which the Old Testament people of God became the New Testament people of God because down came the Holy Spirit with a transforming power that had never been known heretofore. That's what makes, in a certain sense, the people of God are really getting rebooted, relaunched here on Pentecost. It's the fullness of the Spirit. Now, what does that mean? We need to ask the same question that the crowd asked. What does this mean? And I'm glad that even though it's way too much to cover here, we're going to be coming back to this constantly. By going through the Acts of the Apostles, we'll be constantly coming back to the fullness of the Spirit. And the themes I'm about to tell you, I think, are associated with the fullness of the Spirit. To be filled with the Spirit means outside power, inner wonder, a universal message, and a new man on the mountain. Let's start beginning. First of all, being filled with the Spirit means outside power. There's three phenomena that are associated with the day of Pentecost. The first is, verse 2, suddenly a sound like the blowing of a violent wind came from heaven and filled the whole house where they were sitting. That's the first thing, a violent wind. Notice it says they heard and felt something like the blowing of a violent wind. Now, this is quite an image. My wife, Kathy, went out on the balcony, or our balcony, for just briefly during Hurricane Sandy. And she came back saying, I've never felt anything like that. I've never felt that kind of force. Now, actually, I was outside in the 1980s. I was caught outside during a tornado. And so, I have felt that kind of force. And that might be one of the reasons I didn't go out on the balcony in Hurricane Sandy. I don't know. But the point is, is that what happened to them was like, it doesn't say it was a violent wind. It was like a violent wind. And the point is that they experienced something coming from outside them. This was not an internal psychological experience arising from inside. it. They all saw it. It was coming out, not just down from outside them, but from outside of the whole world. Look, it says it came from heaven. And therefore, to be filled with the Spirit means to have a divine power come from outside of you and come into you. It's not just a kind of emotional or psychological experience arising from within. And that immediately puts us on a collision course with our culture and what the culture tells you and me about our problems and the solution. You see, the culture says all of our problems come from outside of us. And inside, you have what it takes to solve them. Christianity says your main problem comes from inside you. And out there, God has the power to give you what you need. I was watching a TV newscast and they were showing a, they showed some pop star, some rock star, who had just finished her performance. And to her cheering fans, as soon as the music was over, she put her fist in the air and she said, Whatever you aspire to be and do, you have all the power within you to make it happen. See, that's what the world tells you. If you've got problems, they're out there. Social prejudice or dysfunctional family or political and economic corruption. The problems are out there and you have inside you everything that you need in order to solve your problems. The Bible says the opposite. Martin Luther says human nature is, and he used a Latin term, incurvitus se, which means curved in on itself. Our fundamental nature is to be self-centered, is to feel like we are the center of the universe. And we're so self-centered that we are blind to how self-centered we are. We're so self-centered we can't admit how self-centered we are. And this is the reason why the world is a miserable place. Because you have a whole bunch of little centers of the universe running around. And only one person can be the center of the universe. And so we're constantly clashing with each other. The world says the problem is out there, the solution is in here. Christianity says the problem is in here and the power of God is the solution out there. By the way, if you want proof of what I'm telling you, take a look at what the culture says. Take a look at an article in the New York Times Magazine today by Lori Gottlieb called What Brand is Your Therapist? Did you see that? She points out something interesting. In the last 15 years, there's 30% fewer people going to psychotherapy today than there were 15 years ago. And she was a therapist, or she is a therapist at a journalist. So she was interviewing people who had been in therapy for years. And what they say is, years ago, people came in saying, I need to understand myself and change. Now, people feel like my problems are because there's people out there that need to change. So, for example, in the article, she says she talked to one woman who's a therapist. And she says, now when she speaks or when she writes in newsletters, she said she puts herself forward differently. This is what it says. She says, I see fewer and fewer people today saying I want to change. What I see is more and more people saying they come in because they want someone or something else to change. So at professional networking events or newsletters, her pitch went from I treat people with depression and anxiety to are you having trouble with difficult people in your life? You know, what Lori Gottlieb points out is a couple of generations in America of bombarding kids with self-esteem. Bombarding kids with self-esteem means that we are an entire culture of people who say, now I've got a problem. It's not me. It's you. But you realize how hopeless that is? If all your problems are circumstances and people you don't have any control over, what a frustrating life. But what if your main problems are you? Then there's hope because God has got some power that will come into your life and change you. So first of all, being spirit-filled means outside power. Secondly, though, it means inner wonder. Verse 2, excuse me, verse 3 is the second of the two phenomena that are associated with Pentecost. They saw what seemed to be tongues of fire that separated and came to rest on each one of them. Do you know how significant this is? In the Old Testament, when God's glory presence, his special presence shows up, it shows up as fire. So when he's making a covenant with Abraham in Genesis 15, he appears as a blazing torch. And when he appears to Moses the very first time in the wilderness, he appears as a burning bush. And when he comes down on Mount Sinai to appear to the people of Israel, we'll get back to this later, he comes down in fire and smoke. Thank you. of God is depicted as fire. He expresses it as fire. When he's leading the children of Israel through the wilderness, at night he's a pillar of fire. And when Ezekiel sees, in Ezekiel chapter one, he has a vision of God, the glory of God, he sees fire everywhere. And whenever the fire of God in the Old Testament showed up, the presence of God showed up, it was overwhelming, it was intolerable, it was fatal sometimes. And now do you realize what's happening on the day of Pentecost? Every believer is now a burning bush. The glory of God, the presence of God has now come into every single believer. That presence that was once fatal now comes in every, everyone, notice it says, came to rest on each of them. Now I want you to consider something. In that room were the apostles. And the apostles were, I don't know how to put this, the most ordained people in history. Now, why do I say that? Well, what does it mean to be ordained? Ordained means you're trained, you're a leader in the church, and you're set apart, and you have authority. Now, I'm all for that. I believe the Bible does say there should be leaders, there should be authority, there should be ordained. But in the history of the church, there have never been officers like the apostles. Because they were chosen directly by Jesus Christ, recruited by him, and trained by him, and set in their place. So they were really ordained, they were really installed, they were really authorities. And yet, guess what? They're not the only ones that got the Holy Spirit. The tongues of flame rest on each one of them. The humblest Christian, male and female, clergy and lay, everybody. Now, you say, okay, well, that's amazing. But what does it feel like? I mean, what does that actually mean? Let's keep asking that word, what does this mean? And whenever I read in the Bible about the fullness of the Spirit, it's expressed in many ways. But I think I perceive after all these years of looking at this, a thread through them all. When Jesus gets the Holy Spirit at his baptism, the Holy Spirit comes upon him in his baptism, he hears a voice saying, this is my son, in whom I'm well pleased. You are my son, and I delight in you. I say, well, that's Jesus. But in Romans 8, 16, we're told for all Christians, the Spirit comes into our heart and bears witness with our spirit that we are children of God. And Galatians 4, 6, it says, the Spirit of God comes into our heart crying, Abba, Father. It's the same thing. The fullness of the Spirit, the job of the Spirit is to come in and tell you about his love for you, his delight in you, and the fact that you are his child. And in John, how does he do that? How does the Holy Spirit do that? In John 14, 15, 16, Jesus is talking about the Holy Spirit he's going to send. And he says, look, I've told you many things, but the Holy Spirit will take what I've told you and manifest it to you. And that means these things that you know in your head, the Holy Spirit will come and make them real to your heart, will make them a fiery reality in your life. Now, all of this, everything I've been telling you, I feel like there's never been a better illustration of what I'm saying. Thomas Goodman was a 17th century British Puritan pastor, tells a story to try to get across this idea of the fullness of the Spirit. He says he was, one day he was watching a father and a little son walking along the street and they were talking, but at one point they turned to each other and the father swept the son up into his arms and he hugged him and his little boy put his arms around his father's neck and they hugged and they kissed and they said they loved each other. And then after that was done, he put the boy down and they kept on walking. And Thomas Goodman says, was the little boy more a son in his father's arms than he was down on the street? Legally, no. He was as much a son in the arms as on the street as much a son on the street as in the arms. Legally, no difference. Objectively, no difference. Subjectively, experientially, existentially, all the difference. In other words, in his father's arms, he was experiencing his father's love. He was experiencing his sonship. And what that means is when the Holy Spirit comes down on you in the fullness, you said, an assurance of who you are. It's taking the things that you might know with your head and making them real. And you say, well, how does that work out? All right, I'll tell you. Here's the voice of the fullness of the Spirit. It's when you are able to say, wait a minute. It takes, by the way, the power of the Spirit to say this. You say, wait a minute. If someone as all-powerful as that loves me, like this. He delights in me. He has gone to infinite lengths and depths to save me at infinite cost to himself. He says he'll never let me go, that nothing in heaven and earth or time and eternity will ever, ever make him lose me. He will always hold on to me. And he's going to glorify me. And he's going to make me perfect. And he's going to take everything bad out of my life eventually. If that's all true, why am I worried? Why am I upset about money? Why do I care if that person snubbed me? Why do I ever get down? That's the voice of the fullness of the Spirit. When you can talk to yourself like that, you have it. And what does it look like on the outside? It looks like you're drunk. Look at verse 13. Somehow, however, they're drunk. And, you know, later on, Paul picks up on that in Ephesians 5.18. And says, don't be drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit. What's that mean? What it means is being filled with the Spirit must be like being drunk, but also it's unlike being drunk, you know. Don't be drunk with wine, be filled with the Spirit. It means it's like being drunk and it's not like being drunk. Well, how is it like being drunk? I'll tell you how it's like being drunk. The reason they thought they were drunk was because of the joyful fearlessness. They were, we'll get to this in a minute. They were speaking the gospel without inhibition, out in public. There was a joy and there was a fear. They were too happy to care what people thought. They were too happy to be afraid of anything. Now, when you see this joyful fearlessness, this lack of inhibition, it can remind you of being drunk because alcohol does that. It takes away your inhibitions and you are, you know, you're fearless because you're so happy, right? Okay, so in that sense, being filled with the Spirit is like being drunk because to feel your Father's arms around you, to know, to have, for His love for you to be a fire reality makes you so joyful that it does make you fearless, but the Holy Spirit does not do it like alcohol does it. That's what Paul means when he says, don't be drunk with wine, be filled with the Spirit. Why? Well, those of you with a medical background know that alcohol is a depressant. You say, wait, wait a minute, alcohol is a depressant? I know when people get drunk, they get pretty happy. Oh, no, it doesn't mean it makes you depressed. It means it depresses part of your brain functions. The reason you're happy when you're drunk is because you're stupid, is because you are less aware of reality. The things that bothered you when you're fully aware of reality, they don't bother you. Wee, because I'm happy. Why? Because I really can't think very straight. In other words, reality is hidden from me. What's really wrong is hidden from me. I'm happy through stupidity because alcohol is a depressant, but the Holy Spirit is not. The Holy Spirit gives you joy through intelligence, not through stupidity, because it shows you that reality. It says, wait a minute, the only person whose opinion and power matters, loves you to the stars, will do anything for you, has done anything for you, has given up everything for you, and will never let you go. You see, that means the Holy Spirit makes you more aware of reality. It shows you all of reality, and as a result, the things that were bothering you become small. There's stupid happiness, and there's intelligent happiness, and the Holy Spirit gives you joyful fearlessness by making you more aware of reality, but especially, in particular, absolutely acknowledging and assuring you that you are his child. And therefore, the Holy Spirit-filledness is number one, it's outside power. Number two, it's inner wonder, wonder at what God has done. Number three, though, it's a universal message. Now, look carefully. The third mark of spirit-filledness is what? It's the third of the phenomena. It says, all of them were filled with the Holy Spirit and began to speak in other tongues as the Spirit enabled them. And then down in verse 11, it says, we hear them declaring the wonders of God in our own tongue. Now, when you read it, say, they began to speak in other tongues, right away, you say, oh, that's Pentecostalism, right? Pentecostalism is that branch of Christianity which people speak in tongues. And so that's talking about that, right? The answer is yes and no. And the reason why? And the reason why? the day of Pentecost are not like the tongues that we see even in the rest of the Bible. 1 Corinthians 12, 13, 14, Paul talks about tongue speaking, and when he does, he says, now, if you pray in tongues in a worship service, nobody can understand you, so you need to interpret it or have somebody interpret it, but now, notice, Paul's assuming when he's talking in 1 Corinthians that if you're praying in tongues, people don't understand you, but these tongues, everybody understood in their own language. It was a miracle. Now, what were they saying? They were happy and they were joyful, but what were they talking about? When they were filled with the Spirit, they didn't talk about being happy. They didn't get out there saying, I'm happy. Are you happy? Yeah, I'm happy too. That's not what they were talking about. They were talking about the wonders of God, and the wonders of God, the word wonders translates to Greek word megalia, which means the mighty works of God, the mighty actions of God, and it's a word that means the miraculous acts of salvation by God in history. In the Old Testament, it refers to the parting of the Red Sea, in which God delivered the children of Israel from oppression in Egypt through a miraculous action history, but in the New Testament, it means the miraculous way that God has saved us through Jesus, through the incarnation, God becoming human, through the resurrection, God breaking the bands of death, through the cross. They were talking about the gospel, and that means that the third mark of spirit-filledness is to be joyfully obsessed with the gospel. If you're really spirit-filled, you're not thinking about how happy you are, though you are. You're thinking about the gospel. You're thinking about the mighty acts of God. You're obsessed with the gospel. You're obsessed with talking to people about the gospel. You have new facility in speaking to people about the gospel. You want to do it because your joy is grounded in the gospel of what Jesus Christ has done for you, of course. But it's not just that on Pentecost we're shown that spirit-filledness means joyful utterance and being joyfully obsessed with the gospel. This first presentation of the gospel was in every different language at once. You see this list? It's a long list of all these people. Why? It was a little tedious, wasn't it? Certainly for the scripture readers every day today, it's a long list of kind of big words. Why was Luke so careful to show you how many different countries and how many different languages were represented in Jerusalem, which was, by the way, normal? This was Pentecost, 50 days after the Passover. However, Jews came from all over the world. They lived all over the known world. And they came back, you know, for the great feasts. And, of course, most of them did not speak as their first language Hebrew. They spoke something else. And, therefore, you had all these various languages present. And when the gospel was first preached to the world, it was preached in every language at once. Do you know the significance of that? I don't think we've actually come to grips with it. I'm going to watch the clock here because I could go on for a while about this, but I want to talk about it. By a deliberate miracle, God made sure that there was no language and, therefore, no culture, because language is the bearer of culture, no language and no culture has precedence over any other in the Christian faith. There is no language that has pride. There is no culture that has pride of place. There is no language or culture that everybody can say, oh, but that's the original. And everything else sort of comes in secondary. No, it was all done at once. Do you know what that means? Laman Sané, who teaches at Yale Divinity School, is an African professor of missions, has written two books that are very important books. One is called Translating the Message, and one is called Whose Religion is Christianity? Let me tell you something about what he says in each one. In Translating the Message, he points out something that is pretty well known, that Muslims will tell you that the Koran cannot be translated. You say, what do you mean? Surely you can get the Koran in English. Yes, but usually, even on the cover page, it will tell you that's not really the Koran. That's the English explanation of the Koran. Why? And what Laman Sané points out, and he used to be a Muslim, he understands this pretty well, is that as far as Muslims are concerned, God speaks Arabic. All the original revelation was in Arabic. All the original communication of Islam to the world was in Arabic. And therefore, if you want to hear God's Word, you must hear it or read it in Arabic. All other translations are not really translations. It's not really God's Word. It's just a kind of derivative or explanation. It's just a kind of randomization. It's a very real cottidad. We do believe the word of God can be translated. If you have it in Chinese or if you have it in English, that is the word of God in English. That is the word of God in Chinese. But wait, wait, wait, there's more to it than that. Laman Sanay says there is a unified Islamic culture. There is an Arabic language and an Arabic culture that wherever you are, any place that Islam becomes ascendant, it actually, in a sense, takes the culture and makes it unified with all other Islamic cultures. There's a unified worldwide Islamic culture. He says that's not true of Christianity because of Pentecost. Not at all. As a matter of fact, Christianity is the most culturally diverse religion on the face of the earth. It takes radically different forms because Christianity, because of Pentecost, there is no one language, there is no one culture that is the right culture. And therefore, Christianity comes into every culture and renews every culture, but at the same time, honors every culture. And therefore, if you're Chinese and you become a Christian, you're lifted out of your culture to a degree. The gospel has got powerful, it's a powerful story. If you're African, it lifts you a little bit out of your culture. It tells you about a man who died for his enemies. It tells you that he did so by giving up power and giving up riches to save us. He calls us to love God and love our neighbor. And when you become a Christian, Laman Sanay says, and he's right here, it takes you a little bit out of your culture because every culture is to some degree judged by the gospel. And you're actually given a perspective as a Christian, whatever culture you're from, and you see excesses in your culture, and you see imbalances, and you see God substitutes. So you're not the same. But if you're African and you become a Christian, you don't become European. You're an African Christian. You're a Chinese Christian. You're a Korean Christian. You're still in your culture. Christianity leaves you there. It does not steamroller every culture, but allows for this incredible diversity. Why? Because of Pentecost. Because God refused to let one culture or one language be the predominant one in Christianity. In fact, one example that Laman Sanay gives, and I can only give it to you because he gave it to me, is he says it's not just all other religions are less culturally diverse than Christianity. But even secularism is far less culturally diverse. And he gives an example. He says, think about what it means to be an African. He said the core of being an African is you believe that the world is spiritually alive. You believe that there are spirits everywhere, that there's good spirits, there's evil spirits. The world is supernaturally and spiritually alive. Now he says, what if you, an African, and you go off to Harvard or Yale or Princeton, and you get a good Western education? You know what they're going to do? They're going to celebrate cultural diversity. What they're going to say is, oh, I love the way you dress. I love your music. But then they're going to tell you, oh, there are no miracles. There are no evil spirits. There are no good spirits. Everything has a scientific explanation. They will totally flatten your Africanness and celebrate your Africanness. Oh, we love your diversity, right? We love the way, we love your food. We'll destroy your culture. We'll destroy the heart of your Africanness. But we really appreciate your food. We all have different foods here. He says, Christianity won't do that. He says, secularism will destroy your Africanness. Other religions will take that away. But here's what's going to happen. Here's what he says. I love this. Christianity helped Africans become renewed Africans, not remade Europeans. And here's how he explains it. He says, Africans see the world filled with spirits. They see it as a spiritually alive place. Christianity accepts the reality of the spirit world, but removes the tendency in African cultures towards superstition and violence because it shows Christ as the victor over all evil spirits. And he is the victor over evil spirits with love and service, not through violence. And therefore, Laman Sane says, what Christianity does is it comes in and renews you as an African, but leaves you an African. Doesn't make you into a European. Doesn't make you into a secularist. Doesn't make you something else. If you go off to Harvard, Yale, and Princeton, for all their talk of cultural diversity, they will make you into a European. They'll take away the very core of what makes you African. Now, you can multiply this, but I'm not going to because I don't have the time, nor do I have the courage to go through and look at every single culture, including mine. And I say, I'm white, but I've been pulled out of my white European-ness. And at the same time, I'm still what I am. Because Christianity doesn't steamroller all the different cultures. It loves them. It honors them. It renews them. What does this mean? You say, practically, tell me what we're talking about. Here's what it means. First of all, don't you dare take your culture. part of it. But also, all of our cultures are different. Our cultures have different levels of emotional expressiveness, different ways of making decisions, different beliefs in the relationship of the individual to the group. So, you know, different cultures have different narratives about how free an individual should be, different understandings of time and punctuality and good use of time, different understandings of social power, different understandings of how you argue and reason, right? Christianity doesn't steamroller those things, but here's what you've got to be sure not to do. My particular kind of Christianity in my culture, I must not think that that is real Christianity. That's the real Christianity. I love 45-minute expository sermons with lots of footnotes and the guy talking about Greek and Hebrew. That's real Christianity. Not this out there where the guy's walking around and raising his voice and being so emotional. How dare you? Don't you know that on Pentecost, God didn't let the gospel go out just through one language and one culture. It says, what's going on? We hear them declaring the gospel of God in our own tongues, everybody in their own tongues. We need to, on the one hand, not insist that the particular kind of Christianity we have at Redeemer is the only kind. And even here at Redeemer, we need to be working as much as we possibly can to be as racially and as culturally diverse as we can. Because that's what the Spirit wants. And I want you to know that in this world today, the churches that lift up the power of the Spirit and the Spirit is a big part of their theology, those churches are the most interracial and multicultural human institutions in the world. It works. Now, I got to run to the last point. Sorry to take so much time on that one. We're going to get back to it in the book of Acts. But what does it mean to be Spirit-filled? Outside power, inner wonder, universal message, and lastly, a new man on the mountain. Now, what do I say that about? What do I mean? Why does God send the Holy Spirit down on Pentecost? See, verse one, when the day of Pentecost came, they were all together in one place. He could have sent it down the day before or after. Well, it's the symbolism. Well, what was Pentecost? Pentecost was 50 days after the Passover, and it was when God gathered the people of Israel together at Mount Sinai and entered into a covenant relationship with them. Now, if you compare Pentecost with Mount Sinai, you see it's like and unlike. In both cases, God came down. In both cases, there was fire and quake and wind. In both cases, it was a message. And, you know, Mount Sinai, God gave the Ten Commandments, and Pentecost, out comes the gospel. But, ah, we're right away getting into what's different. On Mount Sinai, everybody was scared. And when God spoke, see, the fire came down on the top of the mountain. And when he spoke, he spoke from the top of the mountain, and the people couldn't stand it. And they went to Moses, and they said, Moses, you go up. We can't stand to hear God speaking to us. You go up, and you tell us what God is saying. And he became the mediator. He became the man on the mountain, the man in the middle, the bridge. That's why God could enter into a covenant relationship with the children of Israel. Moses was the mediator, and he went up, and he got the word of God, and he brought it down. And when they sinned, he interceded for them. When God was ready to have nothing to do with the children of Israel, whenever they sinned, he went up, and he prayed for them. He was the mediator. And yet, things are better here. The fire doesn't just come down at the top of the mountain. It comes down on every single Christian. And the word that's going out is not the word of the law. It's the word of the gospel. And back then, when they heard the word of God, they said, we can't bear it. But as we're going to see as we go through the chapter two, when the people around heard the word of God, they wanted to hear more. Why? I'll tell you why. We have a better man on the mountain. Moses was great, but Jesus Christ was greater. He's the ultimate mediator. He wasn't just man. He was God and man. So he's the perfect mediator, the perfect man in the middle. But when we sin, he didn't just pray for us. He died for us. And when they died, Matthew tells us, the moment he died on the cross, the veil of the temple was ripped from top to bottom. And that fire, that glory that was back in the Holy of Holies, that was fatal before, now that you are in Christ, it comes into your life. And if you really want to understand, to Exodus 19. You should go all the way back to Genesis 11. If you go back to Genesis 10 and 11, Genesis 10 also gives us a long list of the different nations. And in Genesis 11, it tells us that the people got together to try to build a tower called the Tower of Babel. They tried to create a tower, a temple, a new religion without God. They were arrogant. They were proud. They were in defiance of God. And God judged them. You know how he judged them? Though they had one language, they couldn't understand each other. Remember that? They got confused, so they had to give up the project. They had one language, but they couldn't understand each other. And what a parable that is. The parable is it's because of human pride and human arrogance that the human race is divided into all of its warring factions and cultures and races. But on Pentecost, see, Genesis 11, one language, but they couldn't understand each other. In Acts 2, through the miracle of Pentecost, they had all these different languages, but they could understand each other. Why? Because the curse of Babel is being reversed. And people that once were at each other's throats, people who couldn't understand each other, are understanding each other. They're being brought back together. Why? Because the judgment came down on Jesus. And because the judgment came down on Jesus, now we, that, you know, the fire of God's wrath came down on Jesus so we could have the fire of warmth and love. The judgment came down on Jesus so we could see that all the various curses that the human race, that's bothering the human race, are being reversed now. They're being reversed. And do you know what it means to be part of a church? Do you know what it means to be part of this congregation? This is not just a place for you as an individual to come and get inspired. This is a place for you to live out gradually, slowly, but surely, the undoing of the curses that have come into the human race and that are dividing people. This is a place not only for you to get an inner wonder and to get your psychological needs met, but this is a place for the barriers to come down between the cultures and the races and for us to show the world what, how the human race can be healed under the lordship of Jesus Christ. Don't you want to be part of that? I want to be part of that. But if you want to be part of that, you need to be filled with the spirit. And you say, well, I don't know that I am as filled with the spirit as I should be. I'm not sure. It's been a while since I felt God's, existentially God's arms around me and his love. Well, keep coming because the book of Acts is about that. And until then, keep asking, oh Lord, spirit of God, please descend. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for this remarkable tour of our resources, a remarkable picture of what would be possible for us to be, what we should be as a church. We pray for this congregation here on the east side. We pray for every place in New York City, every place in the world where Jesus Christ's name is named. And we ask that you would help us realize through the fullness of the spirit, the healing of the heart, the healing of human society and community that can happen through the work of Jesus Christ and the power of your spirit. We ask that you would enable us to experience these things because not only would that be the most blessed thing in the world, but it would glorify your name. And we ask that you would accomplish it through Jesus. In his name we pray. Amen.
