TITLE: The Ideal Without Real, The Real without Ideal, The Ideal Becomes Real
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: The New Age Movement
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-ideal-without-real-the-real-without-ideal-the-ideal-becomes-real/

============================================================

...say to her, by the way, you know, she keeps saying, oh, we're going to get married, and he doesn't say anything, and finally, you know, he says, oh, by the way, I've got to get married now, and you can stick around with my mistress, and casts her out, saying, look, this is the reality, you're a peasant, and I'm ruling class, I've got to marry somebody in my own class, and, you know, she's just absolutely destroyed, her health is destroyed, and she dies, and the way this tale ends is the gods come and turn her into a beautiful tree, and she becomes this beautiful tree, and she arches up over the place where this man that she loves so much gets married and raises his children, and she showers love and joy down on them. At the very end, the last song says how you've got to tell stories like this so that you can forgive and have joy. Now, some of the reviews I read said, what a cop-out. Here's this peasant woman who's absolutely oppressed, okay? Now, what are the different alternatives? The New Age alternative is exactly what happens, and that is, you just have become one with nature and realize all distinctions ultimately are illusions, and you just have to become one, and I'm sorry, you know, is that what you really say to that? After all that injustice, after all that evil, after all that, that she becomes a tree, and she, you know, she forgives them. That's the New Age version. Now, there's several other possibilities. What are the other possibilities? There's three secularist versions. There's the Marxist who says, we're going to kick butt. Give me a break, turn her into a tree. We're going to go up there, and we're going to take from the rich and give to the poor, and we're going to create a just society. One of the reasons that that particular version of secularism is not popular right now is because we find that 50 years later, the people who were the liberators have become the oppressors, and the doctrine of sin, which is denied by secularism and Marxism, catches up with you, and now nobody wants to do that, see? All right, there's another secularist version. That's the cynical version, and that is to say, you know, this tree thing is silly. That's just the way life is. That's the way it is. There is no joy in Mudville. Mighty Casey is struck out. There's no use crying over spilled milk. That's just the way things are. That's the cynic. That's the secular cynic. A lot of people live in life that way, but you kill your humanity by saying that's just the way it is. That kind of person won't go the New Age route and try to deny the reality of evil, which is a cop-out, I think. But on the other hand, there's no hope either, because the cynic knows that if I have a revolution in a few years, you know, if I lead the revolution, I'll be the one behind the big gates, and I'll be the one oppressing the peasant somehow. I'll find a way to do it. So that's the cynical approach, but that kills your humanity. Then you have the existentialist approach. The existentialist approach you see in the movie or in the play Man of La Mancha, where it says the existentialist sees the world is full of evil and full of injustice and full of absurdity. You see the ideal, and you see the real. And you realize there's no way in the world you're going to change the real. You don't take the New Age cop out by saying, oh, well, we're just going to imagine that things are different. Nor does he take the Marxist approach because he won't deify any, you know, he won't deify the lower classes. The Marxist approach says, actually, the wicked people are the powerful people, and the good people are the poor people. The trouble is, as soon as the poor get to be powerful, then they become the bad people. What the existentialist does is he says, I'm just going to authenticate myself by fighting against evil all of my life, and I'm going to be an idealist in a realistic world. The Man of La Mancha is the ultimate existentialist because he goes off and he acts as if he's a knight, and he acts as if there is nobility, and he acts as if there is greatness, even though there's not. Everybody else thinks he's insane. But what he's done is, here's the ideal, and here's the real. There's this big concrete slab between the two, and what the existentialist does is he just jumps over into the ideal, and he lives as if the ideal is real. He just lives as if it's real, even though there's no possibility of it happening. And he looks like, you know, there's a place where, in the Men of La Mancha, somebody accuses him of being mad, and he says, when the world is lunatic, who's to say where madness lies? And he says, maybe maddest of all is to see the world as it is and not as it ought to be. And so here, the New Age thing is to say, let's just become one with nature. The cynic says, well, let's just accept it. The Marxist says, let's kick butt. The existentialist says, let's live as if it's true. Let's fight the unbeatable foe. Let's, you know, let's march into hell for a heavenly cause. Let's, let's dream the impossible dream. The Christian, though, if Christianity is true, it's the only one that. and the ideal world at once. Because Christianity says the ideal, Jesus Christ, has become real. He broke a hole through the wall. Jesus is the only one who actually ever marched into hell for a heavenly cause. And therefore, you don't have the New Age problem of having to say, we're just going to imagine evil away. You don't have the secularist problem of thinking that any particular class of people can deal with it. You don't have the existentialist problem of saying the only way to live in the ideal world is to be crazy. What actually you've got instead is the Christian who says, if Jesus Christ broke through the wall from ideal to real, and he's come into this world, and he's moving into my life with the Holy Spirit, and his kingdom is breaking into the world, and someday he's going to set things right, that means I can live both in the ideal and the real world at the same time. I can live on the basis of the kingdom of God. I'm a citizen of the kingdom of heaven, which is breaking into the world. I don't know. Christianity might be wrong, but it's the only thing that enables you to look sin in the face, look evil in the face, call it by its real name, and still live with any kind of hope at all. It's not the ostrich approach. By the way, C.S. Lewis used to be an existentialist. You've heard me, if you've been around here, quote him all the time. He says he was an atheist for a long time because he looked at Hinduism and Buddhism, and they just act as if pain wasn't real. And he said, what a cop-out. But he used to say, for many years I rejected Christianity because I kept on feeling, whatever you say, and however clever your arguments are, how do you deal with the fact that the world is a nasty, painful, awful place? And he says, my argument against God, he said, I used to say, isn't it much simpler to say that this world is so nasty that it wasn't made by an intelligent or good power at all? My argument against God was that the universe seemed too cruel and unjust, but how had I gotten this idea of just and unjust? A man does not call a line crooked unless he has some idea of a straight line. What was I comparing this universe with when I call it unjust? If the whole show was bad and senseless from A to Z, so to speak, why did I, who was supposed to be part of the show, find myself in such violent reaction against it? A man feels wet when he falls into water because man is not a water animal. A fish would not feel wet. Of course, I could have given up my idea of justice by saying it's nothing but a private idea of my own, but if I did that, then my argument against God collapsed too, for the argument depended on saying that the world was really unjust, not simply that it did not happen to please my private fancies. Thus, in the very act of trying to prove God did not exist because of the pain and evil of the world, I found I was forced to assume that one part of reality, my idea of justice, was full of sins. Consequently, atheism turns out to be too simple because if the universe has no meaning, we shouldn't have ever found out that it has no meaning. If the world is unjust, if there is no God, I have no right to be angry. See, the point is that Christians have a problem with suffering. Why doesn't God stop it? But as Lewis pointed out, atheism is a very bad explanation for evil because, you see, if you're an atheist, you don't have any right to ever call anything evil. You don't have a right to be angry because where did you get your idea of injustice? If there is no God, then it's just your preference. It's just your subjective opinion what is just and unjust. He says Hinduism and Buddhism basically just tries to act as if it's not there. Tell somebody who just died of cancer, well, it was an illusion. Now, the second major pressure point is the unreality of the personal. Now, I mentioned that last week, so I don't think I'll go into it more. I mean, two weeks ago. Monism affirms the infinity and the eternity of God, but not the personality and love of God. Look, there's nothing better than love. Nothing. Think about this. When I was a teenager, my mother and father used to say, where are you going? And I would say, out. What do you mean, out? Where are you going? I don't know, out. Well, you've got to want to go somewhere. Heck no. If you're a teenager, there's people that you want to be with. There's relationships that you want to have. There's a girl you want to be with. You don't care where you're going as long as you can be with her, as long as you can be with that crowd you want to be with. You see, relationships, very, very important. The Bible says that ultimate reality, when you die, you will still be a person. And see, the ultimate goal of existence is to meet a personal God and to fall into his arms and to be his son. have fulfillment. You see, ultimately, that is our goal. Monism would have to say ultimately what happens to you is you lose your personality and you're one dew drop going back into the ocean. Your being, your essence is all part of the one, but there is no, no talk, and there can't be any talk, of personal existence. You know, there's a great, there's a place in 1 Corinthians 15 where it says that when we die, we will, we're sown a physical body and we're raised a resurrection body. You know, Christianity is one of the wonderful religious, maybe the only wonderful religion that says that not only will your soul be redeemed, but your body will be redeemed. You will live in all eternity with a body. That is tremendously personal. And in 1 Corinthians it says that your physical body, when it dies, will be raised a spiritual body, a resurrection body like Christ had, one that could eat fish but didn't need to eat fish. And it says just as one seed brings up a different flower, so one body will bring up a different body. What that means is that on the one hand, your eternal self, your resurrection body, your resurrection self will be continuous with your present self and yet glorious. You know, here's a rose seed and here's an acorn. It's pretty obvious that they're different, but when you sow them, what comes up is rather different than the seed. Everything in that tree was in that little acorn in miniature. But when it comes up, it's so different. When we get to heaven, we're going to run over to each other, we're going to grab each other, we're going to say, it is you, isn't it? I knew you could be like this. In your best moments, in your best moments I saw flashes of this. I saw it in miniature, but now look at you. Don't you want to be able to talk? Don't you want to be able to go places together? Where are you going, Tim? Out. You see, theism, now they're all different, but theism says ultimate reality is personal. And our future, the omega point, is personal. No. Basically, heaven is relationship. Basically, heaven's a world of love. It's a great sermon by Jonathan Edwards on what is heaven. He says, heaven's a world of love. You want to know what we're going to be doing in heaven? We're going to be bathed in love. We're going to have relationships like we can hardly imagine now. On the other hand, you see, what monism holds out is the idea of just going back and being part of the one. The underlying structure of ultimate reality is clearly God in everything. God who's impersonal. And then I mentioned this poem. A lot of you weren't here two weeks ago, but this poem was written by a Japanese Buddhist famous poet. When his wife and most of his children died, people came to him and said, well, they're just dew drops going back into the ocean. And so you'll be with them in the kind of general sense of your spirits will be intertwined and you'll never be able to say, let's go out. You'll never be able to say, let's go over and look at the ocean. And so he wrote this, the dew drop world, a dew drop world it is. And still, although it is, or more simply, the world is due, the world is due. And yet, and yet. And what he's saying is, I hope there's more to it than this. Thirdly, he got the problem of moral relativism. And that means, you know, what's interesting, secularism and the new age movement, boy, they hate each other. The secularists think the new age people are lonier than the Christians. And the new age people are all against secularism and technology because it's you guys that are ruining the earth. You are the ones who are ravaging it. You're the one that see the world as an object instead of a subject and so on. But what's interesting is the secularist ultimately says there is no objective truth and so does the new age person. Because if God isn't personal, he doesn't speak. And there's no such thing as hard copy truth. Hard copy truth is truth I have to submit to in spite of my inner impulses. The new age person has to say, look deep inside of yourself. And that's the way to find truth. Listen to your deepest desires and your deepest impulses. And that will show you what truth and right and wrong is. The problem is, there's a lot of people who've been tyrants, who've killed people, who have looked deep inside themselves and seen that they're supposed to slay somebody. And you can say, well, you know, they were off. How do you know they were off? Well, they didn't really get in touch with ultimate reality. How do you know? See, the interesting thing is, in neither the secularism or monism, is there any concept of obedience? As a Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the Christian, the the really get in touch with ultimate reality. How do you know? See, the interesting thing is, in neither the secularism or monism, is there any concept of obedience? As a Christian, there are things that I obey. Why? Because there's a God who spoke to me and who says, this is the way things are. This is the way you must live. You must behave in a certain way to eradicate evil in the world and in your life. And when I don't want to do that, I have to submit myself to it. It's hard copy truth. When it comes right down to it, though, ultimately in monism, cruelty is just a manifestation of God. And there ultimately is no real and final way of distinguishing between a tree and a human being. What ultimately is the difference? See, in Christianity, the human being is created in the image of God. The tree is not. The human being has a free will, can make decisions, can do right and wrong. The tree can't. But you see, in monism, there can't be any difference at all, no fundamental difference or no ultimate difference. And there's a related problem in monism. How do you deal with guilt? You see, frankly, deep in our hearts, the only way to deal with guilt is to say, help a person see whether the guilt is true or false. If it's true guilt, you have to repent and make the change, and that's the way you get a clear conscience. If it's false guilt, you have to show the person that you're being guilty over nothing. This is not really a problem. Your mother told you people shouldn't act like that, but nobody else believes that. The Bible doesn't believe that, and you can help a person's guilty conscience over saying it's false guilt. But you see, according to the New Age, essentially all guilt is false guilt. And where do you draw the line on that? Is it really true that if you've killed somebody, that's false guilt? Well, no, that's different. Well, give me a basis for that. Ultimately, you're in a swamp, as far as I can say, and as far as I can see. You see, the Bible says we have a God who speaks, and therefore we don't have moral relativism. The Bible says we have a God who loves, therefore, ultimately, reality is personal. And the Bible says we have a God who sends. That means that he's a fighting God, he's against suffering, and he's going to deal with it. And as a result, there's a pretty big difference in cleavage between monism and theism. Now, basically, I have done my best, and I stretched the time out, as some of you said, boy, that must have been real hard work. But it really wasn't, as you know. And I can take some questions and answers right now. This is the... If you think I've caricatured the New Age movement, then just put your hand up and say, well, I read this, or I experienced this, and they said this, and that's not in line with what you have said. Challenge me. Go ahead. I don't mind that. I'm not expecting to have you agree with everything, but I hope I will challenge you to think more clearly and be able to make distinctions you might not have been able to make before. Go ahead. Yeah. The question would be, why would you want to combat... The question is, why would you want to combat other people's philosophies? The question is, why should Christianity be a fighting religion? Why should you combat other people's philosophies? Now, your question assumes a worldview. Your question assumes that philosophies can't kill you, that philosophies can't send you to hell. I mean, in other words, there's a sense in which you're begging the question. You've assumed, by asking the question, the answer. So it's not... You see, my answer to the question is that... is another question. My question would be, if it's possible that ideas have consequences, eternal consequences, if there is such a thing as real truth and real error, and error would be outside of God and therefore would cut you off from God and would damn your soul, then why not combat what you think is error? I'll tell you this. I need to do it... See, because Christians believe they're saved by grace alone, and because Christians... Every real Christian I know feels that at one time their eyes were kind of blinded to the truth. Therefore, a Christian always goes about in a mighty gentle way. A Christian comes and says, you know, I see better now than I used to, but I don't see perfectly clearly. And I wouldn't... I want you to see that I think this is an error, but I also want you to know that I used to be where you were. There's a gentleness, there's a humility. Real humility does not mean that all truth is relative. Real humility is saying, I think I'm right, but I want to try to deal with you in a loving way, not feeling like I'm superior. So you see, the reason you have to combat a false philosophy would be if you believe in your philosophy that truth and falsehood are absolutely different. If you say, why should I combat anybody else's philosophy, you're actually assuming a new age or a monistic understanding of reality. So how do we... I would just suggest you think about the ramifications of that. a relativist, ultimately, because even if you tell me I'm wrong to combat other people's philosophies, you've just, relativism is impossible because you just told me I was wrong. You're combating my philosophy by asking me the question. And so you can't really assert relativism without denying it as you assert it. And the reason I think you're caught in that kind of contradiction is because fundamentally reality is full of distinctions. It's not one and it's not indivisible. So that's why I combat philosophies. It's a perfectly fair question. And I'll tell you what's really behind your question, which I really will grant now that I just, you know, maybe you think that was a combative answer. But see, what's behind it is lots of Christians have not been humble and lots of Christians have done overkill and lots of Christians are condescending and superior. And lots of people who claim to be Christians aren't Christians and yet they claim to be Christians and so they've waged wars killing people who didn't believe their way. And there's been a lot of atrocities committed in the name of Christianity and I really, I apologize for them and I can't, all I can say is it doesn't necessarily mean because a lot of people had a distorted understanding of the truth that therefore the basics of Christianity would not be true. But you have a right to be nervous. You have a right to be nervous because so many atrocities have been committed in the name of combating false philosophies. Somebody else? Yeah, okay, great. Then go ahead. If we are just... As an example, wouldn't you combat evil through example rather than verbally arguing and coming after people? If you use Christ's life for an example, you'll see he's so perfectly wise. There were times in which he was very verbally contentious and maybe not abusive but close to it when he got up in front of the religious leaders and he said, you brood of vipers. You know, he said, you scour heaven and earth to make a convert to your religion and then you make them even more bad out of hell than you are yourselves. Now, that's a pretty strong statement. On the other hand, there's other places where he's dealing with prostitutes and people who obviously are in error and he just, you know, he just leads them along. He says, how are you doing? Now, you see, he's perfectly wise. He knows the best way to combat false philosophies. Sometimes the example is the best way and other times the example won't sink in. He's characterized by perfect wisdom. But he's a great example because a person who's always combative obviously isn't following his example. I think you're right. Great. Yeah. Why suffering happens to defenseless infants, for example, suffer tremendous pain and so forth. Well, I know you're not expecting me to answer that. Well, I think it's not anything you haven't heard someone ask before. Well, look, when people watched Jesus dying on the cross, there were a lot of people that said, why would God allow this suffering? How could God bring any good out of this? Because here he was healing people and here he was doing all these great deeds and then he got a kangaroo court, strung him up and killed him. And there were people sitting there who said, well, I don't see what God could possibly be bringing out of this. I can't see what possible redemption could be coming out of this. I don't doubt at all people lost their faith in God watching him die. Now, nobody today, none of us worry about that. You know why? Because there's a book written. It's a long book, it's a heavy book, the Bible, and the whole book is there just to explain the purpose God had for allowing the suffering of Jesus Christ on the cross. It's an elaborate book. It shows that the answer to that question, why, the answer to the question, in just his case, why, you have to know all kinds of, you know, the tentacles of the answer go throughout history. Very, very complicated. But we don't question why God allowed that because he wrote us a whole book on the subject. Okay, and yet on here, here's Baby Doe. Why is Baby Doe suffering? We don't have the book. We don't know. Now, are we going to walk home and say, how can you believe in a God who lets suffering happen like that? Don't forget what Lewis said. If you don't believe in a God, there isn't any problem of evil. Because it's just in your imagination. There's no way of defining evil. There's no, and if there is no God, you don't even have a right to be angry. It's God's existence and God's justice that makes it even possible for you to be angry about that child, saying that's wrong. If there's no God, you can't say it's wrong. preference that babies not suffer. The fact that there's a God and the fact that God gave us a book to explain one major act of suffering, if it wasn't for that book, we wouldn't know. We don't have Baby Doe's book. We don't have your book. We don't have my book. I don't know about you, Nelson, but the first thing I do when I get to heaven is I'm going to visit the library. Okay, somebody right here late to them very well. Also, the fact is that Christians don't have all the answers. And if you're not talking with other people who don't share your views, you'll start to get kind of proud and smug. It is nothing more humbling than to be asked questions you can't answer. Now, all I'm trying to say, all I'm trying to say, therefore, is that we shouldn't ghettoize ourselves. Of course, you're fortunate. If you live in New York City, it's very hard for Christians to be ghettoized here. It really is. Now, is your question just how to avoid that? Yeah. Yeah. Oh. Listen, look, I'll give you the answer I actually, that Craig helped me into. When I say how to combat the New Age movement, I'm talking about a system. I'm not talking about people. And a couple of times I alluded to that. Let me make it loud and clear. It's one thing for you to say, this is a bad system. The fact is that nobody is, if Christianity is true, then people, because if Christianity is true, then bad religions, the people are never going to be able to be consistent. Because those religions are giving them a view of reality that isn't really the true one. Therefore, people are always more consistent, and they're really better than their bad religion ought to make them. People are always better than their religion ought to make them. And as a result of that, you just have to recognize the fact that they're not, that the system might be bad, and the system might be very pernicious, but the people holding the system are always better than the system. And they're also inconsistent. Nobody's consistent. And so if you say, well, if you're in the New Age, you have to believe this. And they say, no, I don't. I believe this. Well, you can't do that. And yes, I can. Why? Because I want to. So you have to make a very, very clear distinction in your mind between an evil system and the persons that adhere to them, usually imperfectly. And a Christian has to say, look, I don't like the system, and I think the system's hurting you. But I love you. I care about you. I want to spend time with you. I want to be as much of a friend as you'll let me be. That's really quite important, because then you're going to be like Christ, who sometimes needed to be combative and other times combated, you know, falsehood by simply, by his example and his relationships. Okay? Yeah? Mm-hmm. Can you, back to the New Age, can you explain how a Christian would come to Christ and then how a New Age would go, by initiation or something, through a guru to their Christ-like consciousness, or how, why they have to go through a guru, what he has to do with their coming to Christ or whatever? I mean, how a New Ager gets into the New Age as opposed to how a Christian gets into Christianity? Well, for example, in the initiation and that inner eye that they talk about in the mystical experience as opposed to a Christian coming to the Lord. Well, you see, there's, as I was saying, there is no one way for, it all depends on the branch you're in. But ultimately, all New Age salvation is being incorporated into some kind of higher God consciousness. So it's a form of mysticism. You don't necessarily have to come through a guru, I don't think. It depends on, it depends on the branch. It depends on the society. It depends on the group. But in Christianity, in Protestant Christianity, I ought to say, you know, I've been real generic. I've been talking about Judaism, you know, everybody here. When I talk about theism, I'm talking about the whole family. Essentially, here, essentially, all Christians believe that God is holy and he created us. And therefore, we owe him everything. We owe it to serve him. We owe it to love our neighbor as ourselves, obey his law perfectly. And all Christians also know that we don't do that. We don't give him what we owe him. Therefore, we sin, and therefore, we owe him a debt. And all Christians believe that Jesus paid the debt. And that makes for us available God's acceptance and grace, not on the basis of what we've done, but on the basis of what he's done. The big difference in, the big division in Christianity is that Catholics believe that that grace that Christ earned on the cross is available through the sacraments. And so you have to be baptized and you have to be baptized. have to do your confession, you have to deal with the sacraments, you have to do it continually every day to keep yourself in a state of grace. And you're never completely sure that you're there. There's always a little low-level anxiety. Now, I'm being critical, of course. The Protestant understanding is that grace is available on the day that you see that you've been living as your own master and you've been trying to be your own savior. That means you've been trying to be good enough to get accepted by God and to live up to the standards through your own efforts. On the day you transfer your trust over from your own efforts and your own goodness to Christ, and you say, Lord, now I ask that you accept me completely because of what Jesus did. That's just what Luther was talking about when Luther said, Lord Jesus, because you died on the cross, you've become my goodness and I became your sin. You took on yourself what was mine and you set upon me what was yours. You took my punishment, I get your reward, and so on. But the minute you agree with that and you rely on that and you, by an act of faith, put your trust in that, at that moment, the Protestants would say, the grace of God comes into your life, which means objectively in heaven, a place is reserved for you and your sins are pardoned and wiped out forever. And subjectively, inside, see Christianity's got a mystical side too and an objective side. Inside, the grace of God comes in because the Spirit of God resides in you and begins to change you into the likeness of Christ. The moment you do make that transaction, there's an objective and subjective thing that happens. In the New Age movement, salvation is all subjective. In Christianity, it's objective and subjective. The difference in Catholics and Protestants is the Catholics would say that it's sort of an ongoing process and you can fall in and out of the state of grace. And the Protestants would say it's a once and done transaction. And of course, I'm Protestant and I think that is a vastly superior approach because it really brings you the peace in a way that the sacerdotalism, which means grace comes to the sacraments, just never gives you the same kind of peace. I can take one more. I saw, you know, I've been up front and I got to take somebody in the back. Go ahead. Sure. Okay, so he's saying, if you empty your mind of rational thought, it leaves you with love. How the heck do you know that if you've emptied your mind of rational thought? And I want to ask another question. What's the opposite? Yeah, well, you see, what I think I tried to show you is that the basic idea of monism is a nice consistent system, but none of us are holding it that way for it in order for it to spread amongst Western people who've got a Christian background. We're a post-Christian society. We're not Christian, but we're post-Christian. So we've got an awful lot of values that came down to us from Christianity, like the value of love and the value of the individual, which you don't have in Eastern cultures, the value of the individual and so on. And therefore, these New Age teachings are being held with all sorts of inconsistency. And they have, you know, in other words, they're being, New Age concepts are being given Christian kinds of, they're being described in Christian kinds of language. And so the answer is that's just an inconsistency. I would just try to say, well, rather than just try to destroy that or combat that, maybe the best thing to do is just is to ask more questions to find out how that leaves you with love. And besides that, if you're really emptying your mind completely of rational thought, how would you know? Now, the only reason I'm saying that is, you see, there's an inconsistency there. And yet, do you see the New Age monistic roots? He doesn't have to stop being a Presbyterian, does he? He doesn't have to stop going to church in order to do the New Age thing. Because, you see, ultimately, all truths are true. All these different philosophies and religions basically boil down to the same thing. And he has bought that idea. But he's also holding things inconsistently. And people can be happily inconsistent for a long time. Therefore, I would not suggest you trying to poke logical holes in things, except a gentle question here or there that would get him to think occasionally. Frankly, a positive presentation of the whole gospel is much better than picking holes in people's beliefs. And I think that's much more important. To a great degree, the reason I'm picking holes in this particular set of beliefs is partly because it's not as threatening. If any of you have a New Age worldview and you come to hear me, I think I can prick holes in public in a way that's not very threatening. But if I sit down with you, I don't want to come after you. Because I can prick holes in a system in public, but if I sit down with you one-on-one, I'm pricking holes in you, and I don't want to do that. Christ's example is that talking to my father, if this man was my father, I'd be pretty gentle about it, and I'd be much more interested in talking about giving him a whole balanced presentation of my understanding of the gospel, rather than try to pick apart little logical fallacies in his own, but there's plenty of them. Okay, listen, if you don't mind, I'd like to close in prayer. That's a way in which I can make everybody get emotional permission to get up and leave. So can I just do that? Let me close in prayer. Father, if there's anything I have said tonight that is misleading, I pray, if it's confusing, if it's distorted, I pray that you would, by your Spirit's power, remove those thoughts from our minds, because I don't want to be party to the spread of falsehood. But on the other hand, if there's anything that I said here tonight that really is in line with your divine mind and your divine will, then I pray that the seeds of the truth would be planted in the hearts and the minds of the people who are here, and that those seeds would bear fruit and would not leave us alone until it has brought every person here before your face. And now we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
