TITLE: The Lord’s Anointed
SCRIPTURE: 1 Samuel 16:1-13
TOPICS: God the Father The Holy Spirit
SERIES: The Gospel According to David
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-lords-anointed/

============================================================

The text on which the teaching is based comes from 1 Samuel, the 16th chapter, the 1st through the 13th verses. The Lord said to Samuel, How long will you grieve over Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel? Fill your horn with oil and go. I will send you to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided for myself a king among his sons. And Samuel said, How can I go? If Saul hears it, he will kill me. And the Lord said, Take a heifer with you and say, I have come to sacrifice to the Lord. And invite Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show you what you shall do. And you shall anoint for me him whom I declare to you. Samuel did what the Lord commanded and came to Bethlehem. The elders of the city came to meet him trembling and said, Do you come peaceably? And he said peaceably, I have come to sacrifice to the Lord. Consecrate yourselves and come with me to the sacrifice. And he consecrated Jesse and his sons and invited them to the sacrifice. When they came, he looked on Eliab and thought, Surely the Lord's anointed is before him. But the Lord said to Samuel, Do not look on his appearance or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected him. For the Lord sees not as man sees. Man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. Then Jesse called Abinadab and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither has the Lord chosen this one. Then Jesse made Shammah pass by, and he said, Neither has the Lord chosen this one. And Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel. And Samuel said to Jesse, The Lord has not chosen these. Then Samuel said to Jesse, Are all your sons here? And he said, There remains yet the youngest, but behold, he is keeping the sheep. And Samuel said to Jesse, Send and get him, for we will not sit down till he comes here. And he sent and brought him in. Now he was ruddy and had beautiful eyes and was handsome. And the Lord said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he. Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the Spirit of the Lord rushed upon David from that day forward. And Samuel rose up and went to Ramah. This is God's Word. The life of David, which we're looking at, is the longest narrative in ancient literature that presents a single human life. Hear that? In all of ancient literature, this is the longest narrative presentation of a single human life, a biography, as it were. What's it about? It's about the search for a true king. It starts with Hannah. We saw it a few weeks ago in the beginning of 1 Samuel 1 and 2. Hannah gets a vision of a true king and sings a song of a true king. And when she describes him, it's so brilliant and poignant and perfect, describes a true king as one who doesn't accumulate power but distributes power. A true king is one, you remember this phrase from her song, is one who lifts the needy from the ash heap and seats them with princes. He doesn't so much accumulate power but distributes power. He works for justice. In other words, he lives to serve, not use people. And Samuel, the prophet, Hannah's son, so received this vision of a true king from his mother that he anointed Saul, the first king of Israel, and now, as you can see, is weeping inconsolably because he's turned out not to be a true king. He's turned out not. He's just like all the rest of the human kings. They don't live to serve but to accrue power. And so he's weeping inconsolably. Now, let's stop a minute. It's important to realize that this longing for a true king we see in this story, this passage, this narrative in the Bible, is not just a historical curiosity. It's not something that we can say, oh, that's interesting. Back then, people believed in kings or wanted kings. Not at all. The longing for justice on the earth, the longing for a society filled with people who have the same character that Hannah's talking about, people who serve rather than use people, who don't accumulate power as much as distribute power. The longing for a society filled with people with that kind of heart character is something we're still longing for. It dominates our political discourse to this minute. If you read, if you see, if you have eyes to see. in some ways, Samuel reminds me of an awful lot of other people I read. I read them all the time in the New York Times and in all the journals. There's so many people today who have despaired, just like Samuel, of justice. There's people who say, who's to even say what justice is, and we'll never find it, and we can't even define it, and no one can be trustworthy, and everyone's corrupt, like Samuel. But God comes to Samuel and says, there is a king, and there is a way to infuse kingly character into the human race. Now, what do we learn about this? There's three features of the narrative that tell us three things about kingly character, character of the heart, which is what this passage is about. We see the seeing God, the rushing spirit, and the forgotten son. The seeing God, the rushing spirit, and the forgotten son. The importance of character, the costliness of character, and how to get it. Number one, the seeing God. Let's notice what we learn about the seeing God and what that teaches us about the importance of character. One of the key words and concepts in the whole passage is the idea of looking and seeing. In verse one, God says, I have provided for myself a king among the sons of Jesse. I've provided for myself a king, but that's an okay English translation. But literally in Hebrew, he says, I have seen me a king. Now, we've got a little bit of that idiom in English. You know, we talk about seeing to something. I've seen to it. That means I've arranged for it. But what God actually says literally is, I see, I've seen me a king amongst the sons of Jesse. And then the second time we see this concept really comes up in verses six and seven, the heart of the passage. And when the sons of Jesse were paraded in front of Samuel, when they came, Samuel looked on Eliab and thought, surely this is the anointed. But the Lord said, do not look on his appearance or his height, because I have rejected him. For the Lord sees not as man sees. The man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. Now, what's all this about? This is all about misdirection. Do you know what misdirection is? If you're a pickpocket or a stage magician, you know all about it. Okay? And this is in New York, so for all I know, half of you are one or the other. Most other places, I wouldn't think there'd be that many. What's misdirection? For example, if you want to pick somebody's pocket, you have to focus all their attention over here so they don't see you picking their pocket over here. In stage magic, misdirection is almost always the basis of virtually every magic trick. In magic, what you have to do is you have to get the audience's full attention to go to an inconsequential location when your other hand is doing the real operation at a location that people aren't looking at. So you've got to get them to look at this while you're doing the real thing over here. In other words, to pay full attention to something that's inconsequential or completely unimportant is to be blind, is to be fooled, is to have your pocket picked, is to not see truly, is not to see reality. God is saying to Samuel, he says, not only you, but the whole human race, not just you, but man, you know, the whole human race, humankind, are obsessed with things that are not real. They're not spiritual reality. Here's the two things he says. He's talking about Eliab comes by and Samuel sees his height and says, this is the one. Now why would he look at a tall man and think this is the one? Two reasons. One is, first of all, a tall man is physically impressive. So first of all, he is referring to a kind of physical attraction. Wow, look at him. But you have to keep in mind the realities of the social context. Height and size was also absolutely required. It was a talent, you might say, required in all kings. You know William Wallace, Braveheart? We all know he was very large, very tall. And we don't know how tall, but we do know this. We have his sword. It's in the William Wallace Museum. And his sword was five foot six inches long. How big was this person if he had a five foot six inch long? And actually nobody knows, but almost all scholars say he must have been at least six foot six or six foot seven at a time in which virtually everybody else was smaller than they are now. What does that mean? It doesn't just mean that people were smitten by his physical attractiveness. They were smitten by his sword. He was unstoppable. I mean, all the accounts, I mean, it's a long time ago, but all the accounts are he was utterly unstoppable in battle. What does that mean? If you are the one man who is the most unstoppable in battle. tribes, then you're the king of the whole region. That's why Samuel's not just simply smitten by appearance, he's also smitten by the gifts, by the competence, by the skills. And God says, you're having your pocket picked, Samuel. God says, character of the heart is the reality. A physical appearance, beauty, polish, sleekness, brilliance, talent, success, money, these things are inconsequential. They're not who you really are. They're peripheral to who you really are. They're not basic to who you really are. And if you look at them, if you're obsessed with them, if you're, or even if you're just more concerned about them than you are about heart character, you're in trouble. You're having your pocket picked. You are blind. Let's break this down for a second. You see how the importance of heart character, the way this has gotten across in the parish, in the passage, let's look at these two things. First of all, the passage is teaching us heart character is infinitely more important than physical appearance. Man looks on the appearance, not God. That's not the reality. That's not who you are. That's not who they are. But boy, is it important now. We live in a society, in a culture in which we are bombarded with images of physical beauty to the degree that no matter who you are, no matter who you are, you cannot help but make some comparison with yourself. And therefore, we think more about our physical appearance than any group of people in the history of the world, in any other century, in any other culture, far more than anyone ever has. Now, that's corrosive. And I mean, I don't want to have to go into it because you've read it and there's lots of research. It's incredibly corrosive to women who find their self-appreciation is inordinately tied to how thin you are. And of course, men at this point are being inundated with a kind of unprecedented wave of involvement in and availability of pornography. And you know what pornography is? Listen, there is no better summary of this passage than the great words of Martin Luther King Jr. in his famous I Have a Dream sermon in which he dreamt of a nation in which people would not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character. It's a perfect, perfect summary of this passage. You know what pornography is? In pornography, you deeply habituate, pornography deeply habituates your soul to look at things in the completely opposite way than God does. It habituates you to concentrate completely on the shape and quality of the skin, not the content of the character. So that when you walk down the street, well, here's what pornography does. You walk down the street, you find yourself noticing, you find your head turning to look at what God says is the spiritually inconsequential and unreal. We are pulverized. We live in a society which sees exactly the opposite of God. I mean, God's concerned that Samuel looks like this. What would he say to us? What does he say to us? What is he saying to us? Everyone in this culture, practically, does dating and mate searching exactly the way Jesse does it. Jesse knew that one of his sons was going to be king. All right? So first of all, he brings forward the most physically impressive, most physically attractive, the most gifted, you know, first and second and third, and doesn't even bring in the littlest baby. We're going to get to that later. Now, here's how we all do it. You look at 10 members of the opposite sex, you eliminate a whole bunch of them that are unpolished looking, uncool looking, unsuccessful, and we look at the ones that are cool looking. They're the only ones we even think of, and we hope some of them have character. But this text tells you, the chances of you having just eliminated the true prince or princess you've been looking for all of your life are very high. Huh? Why? Your pocket's being picked. Misdirection. You're a spirit. You're a victim of spiritual misdirection. So character is infinitely more important than physical appearance. And secondly, character is also infinitely more important than gifts and talent. Now, we live in a city that puts at least as much effort, maybe more. You've heard the famous Waylon Jennings song, Too Dumb for New York, Too Ugly for LA. You've heard that song? So in some ways, New York might put even more emphasis on, you know, I don't care what you are in your private life. Can you produce? Are you talented? Do you have the goods? Do you know what, you know, are you smart enough? Are you good enough? Are you bright enough? This is New York. It's a meritocracy. least he or she has a nice personality, which is a way of saying no looks, no talent, but they're nice. It's a way of absolutely demeaning the possibility that character in any way is a redeeming characteristic for someone who's mediocre. That's exactly the opposite of what God says. Exactly the opposite. And let me ask you a question. Look at all the miseries of the world from war and oppression down to broken relationships. What is the source of all that misery? A lack of talent? A lack of creativity? A lack of brilliance? No, it's a lack of, it's a lack of love, a lack of character. It's caused by pride and selfishness and resentment and hate. And yet, when God says, nothing matters but character, giftedness and talent and brilliance, why are you looking at that? Why does that obsess you? Why do you look to that to be how you know you're important? Why do you look to that to know how you know that you're okay? How dare you? Don't you? You'll never get there. You'll always be comparing yourself to everybody else. In fact, here's how far the Bible goes. The Bible goes this far. In 1 Corinthians 13, very famous verse. Let me paraphrase it. Here's what Paul says. Paul says, you could speak like an angel. You could have the gift of prophecy. Be the greatest preacher. Fathom all mysteries. Be a great theologian. Have faith that can move mountains. Be a leader of a church. You know, a great leader. Give your money to charity and give your money to ministry in enormous amounts. But if you have not love, you are, spiritually speaking, nothing. You know what he just said? He said, even inside the church, you could be a preacher. You could be a teacher. You could be a counselor. You could be an incredible leader. You could do all these things for people. You could be helping all these things for people. And have never given your heart to God or hardly have given your heart to God. So distinct are gifts and talents from heart character. And you say, how could that be? And the answer is, because the root of character is your motivation. And Paul says, you can do all kinds of great things. You could be very gifted. You could be exercising all of your gifts, helping people, giving away, teaching and preaching, even inside the church, without love. What's that mean? Remember what Hannah said a kingly character is? In other words, you can be doing it all to get superiority over people, to be getting power over people, to be getting influence over people, not really out of love, not really out of serving. The essence of kingly character can be absolutely gone right now. Let's sum this up. Do you see the importance of character? Do you see yet? Do you see to what degree we are victims of spiritual misdirection? Would you be willing to go to somebody who knows you well and says, am I happier than I was two years ago? Am I less worried? Am I less vain? Am I less sensitive to criticism? Am I less self-pitying? Am I less self-pitying? Am I less self-absorbed? Have I got more quiet joy? Have I got more peace? Have I got more wisdom? And if you say, that's too painful to do, or I'm really too busy to do it, you do not see yet how God sees. Listen, it is a sign of profound lack of character to be oblivious to the importance of character and instead be absorbed with surfaces and superficialities. But we are. So there's the importance of character. Second thing we learn here after we see the seeing God is the rushing spirit. Now, it's possible if you don't put this passage in the context of the whole Bible and even the whole rest of the David narrative, it's possible to think when God says, no, I don't want any of them as king. I look upon the heart. It's possible to think that David had an intrinsically good heart and these people had bad hearts, that the rest of the brothers were bad and David was good, that God's looking for someone who's really good, a person with really good character, and that's who he's going to make king. If that's true, as you read the rest of the life of David, you're going to wonder, how in the world does he do the bad things that he does? His record, and this is one of the most important and interesting things about the narrative, his record is really not that much better than Saul. He does some terrible things. He does some awful things, and we're going to look at some of them as time goes on. So there's no way he has an intrinsically good heart. But even inside the very passage, we see that. Because what does the passage tell us? Near the bottom, it says, then Samuel took the horn of oil, anointed him in the midst of his brothers, and the spirit of the Lord rushed upon David. I'm glad that the English translation... that say? Does it say the Spirit now was with him so that every so often David just needed a little bit of help? You know, he was basically a good guy. Every so often he just needed, you know, a little bit of a boost, you know, just a little bit of a, to get over a hump. That's not what it said. He needed the Holy Spirit to utterly flood his life, every second of the rest of his life, for him to develop kingly character. Now, what do we learn here? Number one, the unnaturalness of heart character. The unnaturalness. What do I mean by it's unnatural? It's just not there naturally. The Bible says that the natural human heart is so, sees itself as the center of the universe, and will use even God and anyone around for its own glory. That's the natural way of the human heart. It's not God kingly character. It does everything in order. Kingly character is my life for you. Kingly character is I'm happy if you're happy. Ungodly character or sinful character is your life to serve me. I don't care about you. All I care is, am I happy? And the Bible says that is the way the human heart is naturally unless the Holy Spirit comes in and intervenes. Now, Western society, if it ignores this aspect of this teaching, is in great danger. There's a very interesting book that's come out recently. It's a very important book, actually, by David Chappell called A Stone of Hope. And it's a history of the Civil Rights Movement. And it's fascinating for this thesis. As you know, the Civil Rights Movement in this country was one of the most successful social movements in our history because it overturned deeply entrenched legal segregation. The book points out that white liberals did not help hardly at all. It was black activists. Why? And here's what he says. It says, white liberals disliked segregation almost... Pardon me. While white liberals disliked segregation, they did almost nothing about it. Why? They expected it to go away gradually on its own because they were very optimistic about human nature, the power of reason, efficacy of education, and inevitability of social progress. But black activists, deeply rooted in biblical faith, knew that power corrupts and that the human heart was sinful. The story of civil rights, the Civil Rights Movement, is not, then, a story of the ultimate triumph of liberal ideas after decades of gradual progress. Not at all. Northern liberals' faith in the power of human reason to overcome prejudice was at odds with the Civil Rights Movement's goal of immediate change. But the prophetic tradition of the Old Testament lifted African-American activists to unprecedented solidarity and self-sacrifice. Black leaders believed, as the Hebrew prophets believed, that they had to stand apart from society and instigate dramatic changes to force an unwilling world to abandon its sinful ways, the sin of segregation. Isn't that amazing? The reason why things never would have changed if it wasn't for black Christian leaders who understood the Old Testament, understood the human sinfulness, according to this book, and it's very hard to disprove this book. It's the reason I'm saying it's so important. It's a lack of belief in human sin. A belief that human hearts were naturally good was the reason why nothing was changing. So first we learn here the unnaturalness of character, but secondly we learn the costliness of it. Do you know the minute the Spirit comes on David at this point in the passage, from here on his life is one trouble after another. The Spirit comes upon David. Next thing you know, he's fighting for his life with a giant. The Spirit comes on David. Next thing you know, he's hunted. He's running. He's hiding in caves. He's a fugitive. He's pushed to the edge. And I would challenge you to go through the Bible, and you will see virtually every time the Spirit of God comes on people, immediately what happens? Persecution, imprisonment, jail, wilderness, all the way up to Jesus himself. Baptized with the Spirit, and out he goes into the wilderness. In other words, when the Spirit comes, the trouble begins. Well, some people say, why in the world would that be? I want you to think for a minute. The Spirit's not after gifts and power, right? Because the Spirit's after, because those aren't real. That's not really who you are, your talents. It's your character, and the Spirit wants your character. Do you know people? Sure, I know you do. Who are having incredibly easy lives. For some reason, everything's falling into place. Everything is going smoothly for them. I know you do. and There's a superficiality about them. They don't really know themselves. They don't really know how to enter into the feelings of other people. They don't have a lot of wisdom and insight. They lack character. Character almost virtually always grows in the wilderness, in the deserts, in the trouble, with the Spirit's help. And somebody says, oh, you know, every two months or so, you talk about this, and it really bothers me a great deal. Would you listen for a minute? The main reason you're unhappy is not your bad circumstances. It's your lack of character. Think about a person who is not afraid of failure. It's going to be infinitely happier than a person who is. Think about a person who never gets bothered by criticism. It's going to be infinitely happen to the person who's devastated by it. Think of a person who has no need to prove him or herself infinitely better than a person who's driven and anxious and maybe cheating to get ahead, or at least overworking. Look at what really makes you unhappy. It's not a lack of happy circumstances. It's character. Why, then, is character so costly? It's costly. It always costs trouble. It's hard. Why is character so costly? Because it's worth everything. It's costly because it's worth everything. Character is doing the right thing, whether it makes you happy or not. And ironically, paradoxically, that's the only way you'll ever be happy in life is to have it. Character is the ability to do the right thing and forget your own happiness. And that's the only, Jesus said it, blessed, happy are those who hunger and thirst for something more than happiness. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. Not blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness. Happiness, character, excuse me, is doing the right thing, whether it makes you happy or not. And ironically, it's the only way you'll ever be happy. Character is costly because it's worth anything. It's worth everything. It's worth anything. Anything. So there we see the importance of character and the costliness of character, but we've got an issue. And the issue is that suffering per se doesn't necessarily make you a better person. Troubles don't necessarily do it. Saul had a lot of troubles, and it made him harder, and it made him nastier and not sweeter and softer and wiser like it did David. And humbler didn't do that. So the question finally comes, how do you get this character? You know, if it's so important, how do you get it? And the answer is, look at the third feature of this narrative, the forgotten son. Jesse has eight sons, and he parades seven in front of Samuel. And of course, you know, in the Bible, not just in the Bible, but in the Hebrew culture, seven is considered a complete number. It's a number symbolizing completeness. And therefore, when they all go by, Samuel figures seven sons. That must be it. I mean, wow. And yet God doesn't give him a green light on anybody. So he turns to Jesse, and he says, Jesse, is this it? And Jesse says, well, here's what he says. You can see it in verse 11. He says, well, no, there is the youngest. Now what he actually uses, the term he actually uses is the term, well, he says, well, there's the hakaton. And hakaton is hard to translate because it combines the idea of youth being young with the idea of inconsequentiality. And therefore, youngest isn't pejorative enough. Basically, if you want a good English rendering of this, basically Samuel says, is this all? And Jesse says, well, no, there's the runt. There's the runt of the litter. There's the one who's, you know, who's so far from being a king. I have no idea how tall he's going to be. I have no idea whether or how many kind of gifts. Who knows? I didn't even invite him. He's out with his sheep. You know, he's watching sheep, you know, that doesn't take much. Samuel says, I want to see him. And he comes in, and God says, this is the one. Robert Alter, the famous Hebrew literary scholar, says this about this incident. He says, David is a kind of male Cinderella, left to his domestic chores instead of being invited to the party. He has been excluded from consideration, but the tending of his flocks to which he had been relegated will turn out to give him exactly what he needs, both in the Goliath battle and later to lead his people. This David story is also a heightened and stylized playing out of the theme of the reversal of primogeniture that dominates Genesis. Instead of an elder brother or even a younger of the seven sons, the Hebrew number for completion, David is the eighth child and therefore not even there at all. Now, that's a mouthful. Let me just tell you what Robert Alter just said. Let me just tell you what Robert Alter just said. the Bible. The first theme is that in ancient times, though the world always gave the oldest son all the power, it's primogeniture, though in the world God gave the oldest son all the power and gave the most beautiful women the most powerful men. The oldest son got all the power and the most beautiful woman got the powerful men. Every place in the Bible where God works, he works in a way that reverses the world's values. Every place. He always goes with a younger son. So it's Abel, not Cain, and it's Isaac, not Ishmael, and it's Jacob, not Esau, and it's Moses, not Aaron, or the unwanted woman, the unsightly woman, or the old woman, or the barren woman. So it's Sarah, not Hagar. So it's Leah, not Rachel. So it's Hannah. So it's Tamar. It's always the girl. God always works with the girl that nobody wants and the son who's forgotten. But it's not just that he works through the weak and the foolish in the world's eyes. He doesn't just work through them in spite of their weakness and foolishness. He works because of their weakness and foolishness. As Robert Alter said, if David had never been, like Cinderella, relegated to the sheep, he never would have learned some of the skills he needed to bring down Goliath. Now, what does all this mean? Here's what it means for us. I hope that some of you will have already been starting to think, gosh, I better take more concern for my character. I should be, and maybe, I hope some of you are feeling that way. I hope some of you are saying things like this. I do not want my pocket spiritually picked. I do not want to be a victim of spiritual misdirection. Now, don't let anybody hear you say this because they're going to say, what are you talking about? You had to be there, you'll say. I want to be a person of character. I don't want to be obsessed with surfaces and superficialities. I don't want all the bad consequences that are coming to my life. If I pay much more attention in other people or myself, you know, to the superficialities, I want to be a person of character. It'll never work just by saying, today I'm going to be a person of character. I suggest, go find somebody who is. Anybody. You know, whether they, no matter what religion they are, no matter whether they have a religion or not, go to anybody you know that is wise, insightful, peaceful, happy. A person that you can see, there's something in there, some person of substance. And go ask them, how did you get like this? And I can guarantee you, they're going to say a lot of different things, but one thing they will not say is, because in 1995 I decided to be a person of character. You will find no matter what they tell you, the bottom line is, something happened to them. It's not just, they didn't just decide I'm going to be a person of character. And you know why? Something had happened to them? Because we said the essence of character is your motivation, the motivation of your heart. See, one of the things that drives us to work too much or to cheat. That's a lack of character. It's because of our fear of failure. Now, how do you get over fear of failure? Some people have a deep fear of failure. You know who you are. But, how do you get over that? Do you say, I'm not going to be afraid of failure anymore? Try it. Say it ten times. Say it into a mirror. It won't work. Many of us are, I hope some of you are recognizing the fact, that we are actually obsessed, maybe even addicted, to beauty in various ways, in ourself, in other people around us. We need to surround ourselves with beauty, or with polish, or with people who are successful, with all the outward stuff. But you would not be obsessed with outwardness if there wasn't an emptiness on the inside, a profound lack of security, or a profound inability to be absolutely sure of your own significance and worth. And how are you going to overcome that? By saying, I'm not going to be needy anymore? You can't do that. Something has to happen to you. What? You'll never develop kingliness without knowing the king. When Samuel looks at Eliab the first time, and he says, surely this is him. What does he say? What's the word he uses? This is the anointed. But you know, in Hebrew, the word he's using is Mashiach. And in the Greek Old Testament, the Septuagint, the word he's using is Christos. In other words, Samuel knows that everything hinges on, is this the Christ? And it wasn't Eliab, but actually it's not David. Here's what the New Testament tells us. There was another child of Bethlehem who was not allowed in, but kept out with the sheep and the animals. There was another who was anointed by the Spirit, and he was sent out into the wilderness, but not just to be hunted by Saul. He was sent out to all. . forgotten by his Father, but forsaken by his Father. On the cross, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? There was the most beautiful and brilliant and gorgeous person in the universe, Jesus Christ, lost his physical attractiveness. Isaiah 53 said he had no attractiveness by which we should desire him. The most beautiful being lost his physical attractiveness so that we, being spiritually unsightly, could be beautiful in the eyes of God, because Jesus on the cross paid the debt we owed eternal justice. Now, there's only one thing that is going to change your inner heart motivation. There's only one thing that's going to destroy that fear of failure. It's going to destroy that inner emptiness. It's going to destroy the root of why you don't have the character you ought to have. You have to know that the most beautiful being in the universe became ugly for you, that the most powerful being in the universe became puny, a runt, as it were, for you. Went through infinite agony just to get you, just to want you, just to have you. That's what will change you. That's what will change you. That's what will fill your heart with a joy beyond the walls of the world. That's the only thing that will do it. If that's true, then I would like you, then and only then are you going to be free to see as God sees. Here's your choice, you know. In The Great Divorce, which is C.S. Lewis's little fable about the author goes to the outskirts of heaven. He's getting a kind of tour of people who come out from heaven to the outskirts, and he has a guide. You know, it's very fanciful, but it's also very, very, very instructive. And at one point, he sees a woman coming toward him who is huge and beautiful beyond bearing, and she's surrounded by young men and women who are dancing and singing to her. And the author says, he says, I only partly saw, I can only partly now remember the unbearable beauty of her face. Is this, I said, is this? No, said my guide. It's no one you'll have ever heard of. On earth, her name was Sarah Smith, and she lived at Golders Green. Well, I said, but she seems to have been, well, a person of enormous importance. Aye, that she was, my guide said. She was one of the great ones who ever lived, but you'd never heard of her. Don't you know yet that fame in heaven and fame on earth are two quite different things? Well, I said, she must have had a huge family. Look at all the, are these her sons and daughters? No, said my guide. She had none. Well, then what are all these young men and women at her side? I said. Every young man or boy that she met became her son, even if it was only the boy that brought meat to her back door. Every girl that met her was her daughter. Every one that came near had his or her place in her love. In her, they became themselves, and now the abundance of life she has in Christ from the Father flows over into them. There is enough joy in the little finger of a great saint like her to awaken all the dead things of the universe into life. Even if you could be the supermodel, it's temporary, it's over, it's ephemeral, it's peripheral, it's not real, it's not who you are. Even if you could be the supermodel, only be for a moment, don't try to be a supermodel. Be Sarah Smith of Golders Green, and you'll be that forever. Forever. God saw the true king. He says, Samuel, stop your weeping. I see the true king. Do you see the true king? It's Jesus. Do you embrace him? Do you build your life on his kingliness? Then it will flow into you. And it's the only way to be happy, is to want him more than happiness, is to want truth more than happiness. Blessed is he who hungers and thirsts for something greater than blessedness. Jesus, let us pray. We ask, Father, that you would help us think now how this is going to apply to us. Your Holy Spirit, we need, we've touched on so many lapses in character, but your Holy Spirit has to show us, because as we saw a couple weeks ago, self-deception is operating here, as well as misdirection. We pray, Lord, that you would help us to understand these things so we would become wise in the Holy Spirit. We ask most of all, Lord, that you would make us like David, the great king that David became. Make us kingly, too. Anoint us with your Holy Spirit. But we won't be able to do that unless we first believe and rejoice in the one to whom David points, his greater son, Jesus Christ. Thanks.
