TITLE: The Prayer for David
SCRIPTURE: 1 Samuel 1:4-11,20; 2:1-10
TOPICS: Identity Suffering Hope
SERIES: The Gospel According to David
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-prayer-for-david/

============================================================

Whenever the day came for Elkanah to sacrifice, he would give portions of the meat to his wife Peninnah and to all her sons and daughters. But to Hannah he gave a double portion because he loved her, and the Lord had closed her womb. And because the Lord had closed her womb, her rival kept provoking her in order to irritate her. This went on year after year. Whenever Hannah went up to the house of the Lord, her rival perverked her until she wept and would not eat. Elkanah, her husband, would say to her, Hannah, why are you weeping? Why don't you eat? Why are you downhearted? Don't I mean more to you than ten sons? Once they had finished eating and drinking in Shiloh, Hannah stood up. Now Eli, the priest, was sitting on a chair by the doorpost of the Lord's temple. In bitterness of soul, Hannah wept much and prayed to the Lord. And she made a vow saying, O Lord Almighty, if you will only look upon your servant's misery and remember me, and not forget your servant, but give her a son, then I will give him to the Lord for all the days of his life, and no razor will ever be used on his head. So in the course of time, Hannah conceived and gave birth to a son. She named him Samuel, saying, Because I asked the Lord for him. Then Hannah prayed and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord, and the Lord my horn is lifted high. My mouth boasts over my enemies, for I delight in your deliverance. There is no one holy like the Lord. There is no one besides you. There is no rock like our God. Do not keep talking so proudly, or let your mouth speak such arrogance. For the Lord is a God who knows, and by him deeds are weighed. The bows of the warrior are broken, but those who stumbled are armed with strength. Those who were full hired themselves out for food, but those who were hungry, hunger no more. She who was barren has borne seven children, but she who has had many sons pines away. The Lord brings death and makes alive. He brings down to the grave and raises up. The Lord sends poverty and wealth. He humbles and exalts. He raises the poor from the dust, and lifts the needy from the ash heap. He seats them with princes, and has them inherit a throne of honor. For the foundations of the earth are the Lord's. Upon them he has set the world. He will guard the feet of his saints, but the wicked will be silenced in darkness. It is not by strength that one prevails. Those who oppose the Lord will be shattered. He will thunder against them from heaven. The Lord will judge the ends of the earth. He will give strength to his king and exalt the horn of his anointed. This is the word of the Lord. We're starting a look at the life of David, and it's appropriate to do that in Advent, because you'll see if you look or listen, so many of the stories about the birth of Jesus, the nativity of Jesus, have David in the background. So the angels say, I bring you good tidings that today is born to you in the city of David, David, a savior. The gospel writers know that you're not going to really understand who Jesus is and why he came unless you understand David, King David. Now, how would that be? Well, that's what we're going to see. But one thing we see right away that's pretty interesting, and that is the beginning of David's story, which is written in 1 and 2 Samuel, and therefore we're looking at the very beginning of that book. The beginning of David's story is exactly like the beginning of Jesus' story. The story of salvation always seems to begin with a woman, a woman facing an impossible birth, but who grasps the gospel. Now, let's notice what we can, from this life of Hannah, that's the woman whose story we have in front of us here, and let's notice her pain, her hope, and her story. As we look through her account, we see her pain first, then her hope, then her story. And if we look at that, we'll get a lot out of it. First of all, her pain. In the very beginning, we see that Hannah was one of two wives, and Hannah couldn't have children. And it says, As a result, because the Lord had closed her womb, her rival kept provoking her in order to irritate her. This went on year after year. Whenever Hannah went up to the house of the Lord, her rival provoked her till she wept and would not eat. Now, to understand how Hannah felt about not having children in that ancient society, we need to look at a very interesting Hebrew word. It's in verse 6. Unfortunately, it's not rendered, it's not translated in a way I think that it's at all illuminating. It says that she wept, she wouldn't eat, she was provoked, she was attacked, she was mocked, she was despised. And as a result, and as a result, says, she was irritated. Now, I think even an English reader just looking at that shows that that's kind of an inappropriately weak word. The word is a word, a Hebrew word that means to thunder or roar, as in a storm. In fact, when I looked, from what I can tell, this is the only place in the Bible where this Hebrew word is applied to someone's interior feeling, emotional life. Every other time, it's actually used to denote a real storm, thunder, roaring, a nor'easter, a hurricane. Why would this be applied to Hannah? The only conclusion you can come to is that Hannah was her inner life was characterized by a roaring agony. Her inner life was, she was as torn up by anger and by despondency as the sea is torn up by the stormy winds. Why? Why was it so bad not to be able to bear children? Well, you have to understand something about ancient societies and the realities that they faced. Think about this. Every family, in fact, virtually every nation, the prospects of every family in every nation was determined almost completely by the number of new children that were being born. For example, a family's prospects were completely determined by how many children you had. Your income, your status was completely a function of how many children. The more children, the more hands to work the field, the more hands to work the, you know, the shop or whatever. So the more children the family produced, the greater its status, the greater its wealth. And not only that, if you didn't want to literally starve to death in old age, you had to have adult children to take care of you. There was no other way. And if you wanted, pardon me, in order to have three or four children live to adulthood, you had to have at least 10 children. That's how bad the mortality rate was. And it's not just true for families, but a nation's economic and military security was completely dependent on the growth, the number of new children being born. So now let's conclude this quick. Bearing children was a life or death issue, literally for a family. Bearing children was a life and death issue for a nation. And if that's true, do you understand why women who bore lots and lots of children were heroes? They felt like heroes, they were treated like heroes. And women who couldn't bear any children at all felt completely useless, utterly worthless to their family, to their nation, and very often not only did they look like that in their own eyes, but they looked like that to the eyes of others. And as a result, Hannah's life was one of roaring agony. Because her culture said, if you don't have children, if you don't bear children, children and family is everything to you. If you don't have children and family, you are nothing. Now, I want you to know, before, oh, by the way, here's another interesting quote. Hebrew scholar Walter Brueggemann puts it like this. He says, barrenness in any ancient text, in any ancient text or narrative, barrenness is the effective metaphor for hopelessness. For without children, there was no foreseeable future for yourself, for your family, or for your people. Barrenness meant there was no human power to invent a future at all. And that's the reason why she felt that way. She had internalized what her culture said. Her culture said, women, if you're a woman, bear children, or you've got no worth, you've got no identity, no usefulness, see, no meaning. And you see this in Rachel. Rachel was, back in the book of Genesis, she had a long period in which she could not have children. And the cry of her heart was, give me children or I die. In other words, she had internalized what the culture told her. If you don't have children, you have no reason to live. There's no reason for you to even be. Now, before, so there's Hannah's pain. She was in roaring agony and pain. And before we move on and see what happened, let me just suggest something to you. Not to be too hard on ancient cultures, because it's very natural for us to respond and say, how awful. Those ancient cultures oppressed women. And they did. Oh, yes, they did. But let me just ask you a question as sensitively as possible. I don't know how you ask a question to 800 people sensitively, but you'll see what I mean as soon as I ask it. Let me be as careful as possible. Yes, those ancient cultures oppressed women. Here's a question, though. Do you think that the women in those ancient cultures had a lot of or nothing like today. Why would that be? Because, you see, ancient cultures were collectivist cultures. And in a collectivist culture, the culture was saying your worth is completely attached to your family's prospects, how your family does. But we live in an individualistic culture. And in an individualistic culture, our culture says your meaning and worth is completely dependent on your individual attributes, like money, status, beauty. In other words, there is no such thing as a non-oppressive culture. Because every culture, every culture values something. And every culture is saying to you right now, unless you have this, you are nothing. It says something. Every culture is a different something. You know, one culture says the family, one culture says the individual freedom. Every culture is different. But every culture is saying, unless you have what our culture values, you're nothing, you're worthless. Every culture is doing that to you. Don't you see that? Every culture has a game where maybe you should put it better like this. Every culture pushes on you a meaning system, a happiness, meaning, worth system. If you have this, you have happiness, meaning, and worth. And only if you have this. And Hannah's culture said, unless you have children, you're worthless. Before we get all upset about that culture, let's just realize every culture defines salvation in different terms. And every culture is going to suck you in to its happiness, meaning, and worth system, unless the only supercultural, transcultural force there is, God, helps you break its power. You say, how does that happen? Let's keep on going with the story. So first we see Hannah's pain. Now secondly, we see Hannah's hope. Hannah had two alternate hopes that were put in front of her, not just one, but two. It says in verse 8, Elkanah, her husband, would say to her, Hannah, why are you weeping? Why don't you eat? Why are you downhearted? Don't I mean more to you than ten sons? Now this is both admirable and disastrous, what he's doing here. What is he doing? First of all, one of the things is, let's talk about what's admirable about Elkanah. Elkanah knew that he had one wife who was losing the cultural game. One wife, Hannah, had lost the game. One wife, Penina, had won. But he loved Hannah. And he hated to see her just, he hated to see her agony. And so, and this is what's admirable, whereas most men of the time would have probably looked at Hannah simply as someone who was not producing. And they would have looked, he would have looked, most men would have looked at women almost strictly in terms of what they produced. But Elkanah loved her. And so, he actually offers her an alternate happiness system. What does he say? Notice, it says Elkanah, her husband, would say to her, which meant it was ongoing. And what he would do is, he would say, why are you weeping? Why don't you eat? Why are you downhearted? Don't I mean more to you than many sons? And up in verse 5, we see how he backed it up. Every year at the great sacrificial feast, when they went up to Shiloh to the tabernacle, and they had this great feast. It was a very public thing. Elkanah gave Hannah double portion. And this was his way of publicly saying to everybody, I love her, Hannah, more than her. And that's why you notice that Robert Alter, who's a great Jewish expert in Hebrew literature, says, notice that verse 6 comes after verse 5. That is to say, it was the more Elkanah tried to say, build your life, Hannah, on my love. Build your life and identity. Get your sense of worth, knowing that I love you more. And the more he did that, the more it poisoned Penina. And the more she attacked, the more he loved Hannah and said, I love you more than Penina, the more Penina came in and attacked her and mocked her and despised her and reminded her that she was a cultural failure. So, Akana is basically saying this. The culture says, make children your pride and joy. I'm saying, make my love your pride and joy. I love you more. And one day, verse 9, it says, Hannah stood up. Now, big deal, right? Notice it says, once they had finished eating and drinking. So, it was one of the years that they came up to Shiloh, they'd come to the tabernacle. And again, these two alternate ways of getting an identity, two alternate ways of getting happiness meaning, two alternate hopes. The sociological, build your hope on family. The psychological, build your hope on the fact that I love you more. They were there in front of her, but we're told, one day when they had finished eating and drinking and shopping, would the narrator say that? Because in Hebrew literature, this meant she decided to do something. In fact, I think you'd get a better sense if the translation used a slightly older English. In other words, some of the older translations say, once when they had finished eating in Shiloh, Hannah arose. Because the Hebrew idiom arose, when it says Abram arose, the Lord arose, what it really means is decisive action. To arise means I'm no longer thinking about it, I'm no longer trying to figure it out, I'm going to do something about it. And what we're told here is in verse 9, finally, one year, Hannah decided to get up. And she rejected the psychological hope, the slavery of building your identity on what your husband thinks of you. And she rejected the social or cultural hope, building her identity on fulfilling cultural expectations of her children, getting children. And instead, she went to God. In fact, Robert Alter says it's narratively significant that though Peninnah speaks to Hannah, and though Elkanah speaks to Hannah in verse 8, she never answers them, she only speaks to God. Because this is what she has decided. She's decided to reject the sociological hope, the psychological hope, the cultural hope, the husband hope, and she's going to take the big mess that her life is, and she's going to take it to God, and she's going to process it in prayer, and she's going to resolve it there. And so she does. And she gets healed there. After years and years and years, she gets healed there. What kind of prayer turns a roaring agony of an inside into peace? Well, let's look. Because the prayer is remarkable. It's in verse 11. And there's two things we learn about this prayer. In fact, two things we need to know about the kind of prayer that really changes us. First of all, it was emotionally real. Now, what do I mean by emotionally real? Well, let me read you the section that was not printed. There's a section, obviously, between verse 11. It starts from verse 12 and goes down to verse 19. Let me read you from that. She goes in there and she starts to pray. And Eli, the priest, is there. And we read in verse 12. As she kept on praying to the Lord, Eli observed her mouth. Hannah was praying in her heart and her lips were moving, but her voice was not heard. So Eli thought she was drunk. And he said to her, Woman, how long will you keep on getting drunk? Put away your wine. Now, the fact that Eli didn't recognize passionate, intense, personal prayer and spirituality, shows that the average person who went to the tabernacle came pro forma. It came in, here's my money, here's my sacrifice. What do I have to say? It was all done very mechanically. It was all done very cut and dry. And he wasn't used to seeing somebody who was passionate. But there was an emotional reality because she says, I am pouring out my soul to the Lord. What an interesting metaphor. What an image. I'm pouring out. I'm taking the deepest part of my life, which has just been stirring up in there and just been raging around. And I'm pouring it out. But not just expressing it. I'm pouring it out to the Lord. What we have here is the unique biblical approach to the emotional life. And it is unique. On the one hand, religious and moral people tend to deny their feelings. On the other hand, secular and liberal people tend to express and release their feelings. The Bible doesn't go either way at all. You see, religious and moral people tend to deny their feelings. Why? Here's why. Religious and moral people who don't grasp the radical grace of God believe that God blesses and rewards and takes to heaven the good people. Well, who are the good people? Good people are people who don't get mad at God. Good people are people who don't get, you know, despondent of life. Because they don't understand the radical grace of God, religious and moral people don't have the psychological ability to admit how deep and dark so many of their emotions really are. They just can't admit it to themselves. So they stuff their feelings. They deny their feelings. But on the other hand, secular and liberal people feel that emotional expression and release and ventilation of feelings is a good thing in itself. Except some of us, many of us, who have gone down that route, thinking somehow if you get, if you just ventilate, if you just ventilate. very often it doesn't go away at all. It's like if you ventilate a flame, the fire gets bigger. It doesn't go out. And the Bible doesn't go either direction. It doesn't say stuff your feelings or give in to your feelings. It doesn't say deny your feelings or ventilate your feelings. It says pray your feelings. It says pour them out before the Lord, not just ventilate, before the Lord. It means pour them into His reality. It means saturate your deepest feelings with the reality of who God is. And that brings us to the second point of what makes this prayer transformative. First of all, it's emotionally real. Secondly, it's theologically real. Now, what do I mean by that? It's a deeply theological prayer. Look how it starts. O Lord Almighty, she says in verse 11. And in the Hebrew, it means O Lord of hosts, which means she is stressing His exaltedness. She is stressing His transcendence. She is stressing how great He's the Lord of lords. He's the king of the galaxies. He set the stars, the size of Him. O Lord of hosts, she says, look upon your servant's misery and remember me. She has just pulled out one of the attributes of God, which is His high holiness and His transcendence. And now, she says, when she says, look on your servant's misery and remember me, she is saying, she is assuming, she is saying that the broken heart of one obscure rural woman matters to this God. The broken heart, the broken life of one little obscure woman matters to the God of the galaxies, matters to the one to whom the Milky Way is like a piece of lint. This is a very interesting kind of God. This is not your traditional God of, I think, the conservative mindset that sees God as high and transcendent, but just smites you if you fail. God infinitely holy, but not infinitely merciful. Nor is this the liberal God, you know, of sort of an all-loving, all-accepting, sort of loving spiritual force in the world. This is a God that is infinitely exalted and absolutely transcendent and absolutely imminent, absolutely holy and absolutely merciful. And it's when she puts those two things together, and I want you to consider this, when you put those two things together, that's only in the Bible do you have a God like that. Not just personal, not just infinite, but infinitely personal and personally infinite. Not just transcendent, not just imminent, not just holy, not just loving, but absolutely all of those things. When you put those together, when they come together, it changes you. It's changing her. She's not just pouring out her soul, you might say. She's pouring in. She's pouring her soul into God's reality of who he is. And think of how that works. The more you think about his greatness, you say, well, you know, he must know what he's doing. And the more you think of his mercy, you might say, he couldn't possibly keep from me anything I really need and truly need. And the reason we know this is working, the emotional reality and the theological reality put together changes her. Because look at the petition. Lord Almighty, if you will look on your servant's misery and remember me and give me a son, I will give him to you. And no razor will ever be used on his head. Now, what's that? Here's what that is. What is that? If she only said, if you give me a son, I'll give him to you. That could have just been pious rhetoric, huh? You know, a kind of subtle way of bargaining. Oh, Lord, I would like you to give me a son. I'll give him to you, of course. It could just be, what does that mean? But when she says no razor on his head, she put her money where her mouth is. You see, you couldn't just decide in Israel to become a priest or to become a Levite and work full-time at the tabernacle because those were inherited jobs. You had to be in the priestly line. You had to be in the priestly families. You had to be in the tribe of Levi and so on. But if you really, really, really wanted to give yourself an absolute and utter service, it's tucked away in the book of Numbers in chapter 6 as a provision for the Nazarites. And a Nazarite was someone who made an absolute vow of complete service to God. And the signs of the Nazarite was, you didn't drink any wine or beer, interestingly enough. And secondly, no cutting of the hair. And therefore, what Hannah is saying is, she says, well, here's what she's saying. She's truly saying, if you give me a son, I'll give him to you. Because he'd have to live in the tabernacle. She couldn't even raise him. So here's what's actually happening. Here's what's happening. When she put the, when she, and the theological reality came together. She said, Lord, all my life, here's the bottom line, she said, all my life I've asked for a child for me, but today I ask for a child for you. In the past, I've always said, give me a child for my sake, but now I say, give me a child for your sake. Now, how could she say that? What did that mean? And I'll tell you why she can say that. When you and I read the Bible, we tend to read it as a disconnected group of stories, just a disconnected group of stories, moral stories, like Aesop's fables. This tells us about this, and this tells us about that. That's not how the Israelites read it, and that's not how you should read it either, because the Israelites understood that the story of the Bible was a single story with one plot line, one incredible storyline. You know what that storyline was? This. God created the world to be a paradise, but when we turn from him and our relationship with him broke, everything else broke. That's why there's death. Everything broke physically. That's why there's war and racism. Everything broke sociologically. That's why there's loneliness and alienation. That's why everything broke psychologically. Everything broke, but God has not abandoned this world, because he comes down to Abraham, and he says, Abraham, I'm not going to abandon this world. I am going to create a new humanity. I'm going to create a faithful community out of your family, community. And as time goes on, after time has passed, someday out of that faithful community will come the salvation of the world. The Messiah will come and renew the entire world, and the world will become a paradise again. Ah, okay. Well, the Israelites at the time had no idea how that was going to play out, but one thing they did know, any Israelite woman living at that time who knew the promise to Abraham, who knew that incredible storyline, could decide if she bore a child, especially if she bore a child for the Lord's service, that she was going to bear a child in order to participate in God's program for the salvation of the world. And so what she was actually saying to God was she was saying, Lord, I still want a child, but I have utterly and deeply and profoundly changed why I want that child. Lord, I don't want to build my life on a child, because if you give me this child, I won't be able to raise him. I won't be able to walk around and have people say, oh, look it, there goes her son. Here goes that woman with her son. I'm not going to build my life on my child. I'm not going to build my life on my husband. I'm going to build my life on you and your mission. That's my passion. You are my hope. And I just think this is the best way I know of to contribute to that. I want to build up the community through which the salvation of the world will come. In other words, she said this, Lord, if I'd had 10 sons before, they would have been from you. They would have been a gift from you, but I wouldn't have known it before. But now I do. And I think it's safe to give me a son. Before, I would have poisoned. We would have killed each other, me and my son, because my son would have been my life. But now I think it's safe. And guess what? It was. Because God gave her a son. But notice, and let me read the last part of the passage that we did not have actually printed in the bulletin, okay? After she's done praying and after she convinces Eli that she's not drunk and she's done praying, it says, and then she went away, her way, and ate something. And her face was no longer downcast. Early the next morning, they rose and worshiped before the Lord, and they went back to their home at Ramah. Elkanah lay with Hannah, his wife, and the Lord remembered her. And verse 20, so in the course of time, Hannah conceived and gave birth to a son. She named him Samuel, saying, because I asked the Lord for him. Now, would you notice something? Did you hear it? It did not say she prayed, she got pregnant, and she had peace. It says she prayed, and then what does it say? It says she ate. Very important. She couldn't eat before. Suppression of appetite, sign of depression. It says she prayed, and she ate, and she went her way, and her face was lifted up. In other words, her peace came before she had any certainty whether she was going to have a child at all. It didn't say she prayed, got pregnant, and had peace. It says she prayed, and she got peace, and only later did she get pregnant. Why would she have peace? How did she know whether she was going to have the child or not? She couldn't know she was going to have the child or not. How could she have peace? She had shifted her hope, and now she was free. She was free. She was free from any imposed happiness, meaning, worth system. Don't you see? And because she finally had her roaring agony turned to peace, because she finally had peace. her. Samuel, who saved the people, who became the next savior, as it were, of the people of Israel, Samuel was born as much through her faith as through her body. Now, don't you want that? Don't you want to have the ability to take your roaring, or, you know, even if it's not roaring, you know, but to take your restlessness and get peace so that God can start to do things in the world through you? Don't you want that? You say, well, yes, I'd like it. Well, go ahead. Go ahead and do it. Go ahead. And if you try, here's what you're going to find. You're going to find you can't trust God the way she did. Because the key was, she says, even though you're high and lifted up, high and holy, you know, Lord of Lords, I know that my broken heart matters to you. I know it matters to you. I know you haven't forgotten me. See, she was taking her emotional reality and putting it together with a theological reality, and she had that trust. And so you try it, and you'll see that in the abstract, it doesn't work. But in concrete, it does. Because we have something that even Hannah didn't have, and therefore, we have far more resources to get the same process of roaring agony to peace that she did. Why? What are those resources? Well, she intuits them in her song. This song is a fascinating song. It talks about the things that we've talked about already. Notice it says, the bows of the warriors are broken. So that shows the strength of this God. But he loves the stumbled, the hungry, the barren, and the poor. So here's what she's doing is she's simply singing about the same two attributes that healed her before. But how does she know this? How does she know a God, the God of the galaxies, that your broken heart matters to the God of the galaxies? How does she know that? And the last verse says, I know this because I've seen the way he does this through his anointed. And the word anointed means the Messiah, the anointed leader. Well, now, who is that? And the answer, of course, is most people say, well, this is a prophecy that she's getting to the Holy Spirit of David. But actually, she's going beyond David. Spiritually, she's thinking beyond David. Because centuries later, another woman who was facing an impossible birth began to sing a song. And the song is almost identical to Hannah's. When Mary began to sing, she says, my spirit rejoices in God, my Savior. He has filled the hungry with good things, but he has sent the rich away empty. He has brought down rulers from their thrones, but he's lifted up the humble. Isn't that interesting? Why does Mary sing like Hannah? Hannah. Because Mary is the ultimate Hannah. Because Mary's son is the ultimate Savior. How so? Well, you know what? Isaac, Samson, Samuel, and John the Baptist, they were all kind of mini saviors. They all saved the people. And they were all born to barren women. Why? It was God's way of saying, my salvation is impossible, humanly speaking. But Jesus, the ultimate Savior, was born not just to a barren woman, but to a virgin woman, which is even a more impossible birth. And all of those folks, like Samson and Samuel, they took power and saved the people economically and socially. But the ultimate Savior, Mary's son, lost his glory, lost all power, lost his life, but didn't just save us from economic and social oppression, but from sin and death itself. How? Here's how. Jesus also went before the Lord, poured, and he poured his soul out. Do you remember that? On the cross, he poured out his soul. He poured out his soul. He said, my God, my God. He quoted Psalm 22, where it says, I am poured out like water. But when he poured out his soul, what happened? We're told in Isaiah 53, verse 12, he poured out his life unto death and was numbered with the transgressors. In other words, to put it most bluntly, Jesus poured out his soul, and he wasn't heard, so that Hannah and you and me, when we pour out our soul, we can be heard. Jesus poured out his soul unto death, so we pour out our soul, we'll pour out our soul to God unto life. Why? Because when he poured out his soul, he wasn't heard. Why? He was taking our punishment. He was numbered with the transgressors. And there is the proof that we have that Hannah didn't even have. Do you want proof that God is great and holy? Look at the cross. That shows that God is so great, Jesus had to die for our sins. He couldn't shrug it off because that's how holy God is. And yet, do you want proof that God cares? Look at Jesus dying on the cross. Jesus dying on the cross. We have... We have... Yet, do you want proof that God cares? Look at Jesus dying on the cross. We have proof of what Hannah had the intuition of. And if you bring your emotional reality into the presence of that theological reality, it will change you. Now, let me just close this way. Three quick applications or so. Number one, God's power begins to work in your life at the point of your total inability. God's power begins to work in your life at the point of your total inability. Why is it so often that God sends his salvation through a barren woman? Barren women were women whose birth was impossible. Remember what Walter Brueggemann said, what barrenness always meant to the Israelites? That's barrenness in any Hebrew text is the effective metaphor for hopelessness. Barrenness means there's no foreseeable future and no human power to invent a future. What is God saying then? His power always begins working at the point that you get, at the point of total inability, at the point when you feel the most hopeless and the most helpless. That's when he begins to work. Let me give you the prime example, the new birth. How does the power of God come in and convert you? We've been talking about this for weeks. How does the power of God come into your life the first time and convert you? It doesn't happen when you look to God and say, Lord, I'm spiritually fertile. I'm producing lots of good works. I'm producing lots of prayers. I'm a good person. I'm better than most people. You know, reward me, bless me, save me, take me to heaven. It never works like that. You know where it works? Here's how the new birth happens. When you put yourself and you look to heaven, you say, I'm spiritually barren. I'm a moral failure. I don't deserve anything from you. Depart from me. I am a sinful. And at the point of total inability, of total moral inability, at the point you confess your spiritual barrenness, the power of God comes in. And not till then. It's only through repentance that there's salvation. And if that's true at the beginning of your life, I hate to say it. I know you don't want to hear this. It's going to be true the rest of your life, too. In general, God begins a new chapter of his power in your life at the point of your greatest hopelessness and helplessness. If you do with it what Hannah did, because what Hannah did was she took her barrenness, her hopelessness and helplessness, and went into the presence of God and says, in the teeth of her helplessness and helplessness, I'm going to obey you more than I ever have before. Take, if you right now are confused, if you feel like you are at your wit's end, if you feel like you're at your rope's end, if you feel absolutely hopeless and absolutely helpless, go to God and say, under these circumstances, I'm going to obey you more. I don't know what's happening. I don't understand what's going to happen, but I'm going to obey you more. Who have I in heaven but thee? And there is no one else on earth that I desire besides thee. Say that, and he'll begin to work. God's saving power, God's power works at the point of your inability. Secondly, God will always use your suffering, but don't expect within your lifetime to even understand how. Do you hear that? On the one hand, do not believe your suffering is meaningless. It's not. Look at Hannah. If she hadn't suffered, she never would have given Samuel to God, and he never would have become the great man he became and the Savior. So, in other words, your suffering is never meaningless, but don't think that you're going to be able to decipher what that meaning is within your lifetime. Hannah, obviously, her suffering was used, but does she have any idea to what degree? Do you think she knew that 3,000 years later, hundreds of people on a snowy Sunday night in New York City would be gathering together to learn from her? Did she have any idea that her suffering would be used like that? You will never in your lifetime know either. So, don't, on the one hand, think that your suffering is meaningless, but don't, on the other hand, think you'll ever be able to decipher more than 10% of it in your whole lifetime. And if you understand that balance, huh, if you understand the humility, if you have the humility of knowing you'll never decipher it all, but you have the hope of knowing that every bit of your suffering is meaningful, you'll make it. Third, do you notice how much God loves barren people? Loves poor people? Loves aliens? Loves immigrants? He always loves the people that the world doesn't like, thinks is a loser. Do you notice how he does that? How about you? What are you doing about the poor? What are you doing about the immigrant? What are you doing about the refugee? What are you doing about those people? God cares for them. He cares for them incredibly. He cares for the stumbled. He cares for the hungry. He cares for the poor. He cares for the barren. Do you? Is your concern for social justice something that really permeates your life? Do you? If not, do you? Hannah learned. Here's what I want you to learn. Most of our deepest disappointments in life come because we look to certain things, what we can only get from God. We look for things from certain things in people and groups we can only get from God. Our deepest disappointments come because of that. Do you understand that? God says, I'm your husband. I'm your worth. I'm your beauty. I'm your significance. And if you want your heart melted enough so that he becomes that to you, look at what Jesus Christ did on the cross. Do you want to be like Hannah? You're never going to be like Hannah just by trying to pray really hard, hard, hard. Oh, no, no, no. You're only going to become like Hannah when you start to believe in the one to whom Hannah points, the ultimate impossible birth, the ultimate son of promise, the ultimate remover of shame, the ultimate Savior, Jesus. And let us pray. Father, we ask that as we come to your table, you might make real to us your son's death so that he can be our husband. He can be our riches. He can be our honor. And we can be free, free from the cultural happiness systems, free. And we ask, Lord, that you would let that reality, your theological reality, be more connected to our emotional reality because we've spent this time in worship together tonight. We pray in Jesus' name. Amen.
