TITLE: The Last Supper
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 26:19-29
TOPICS: Communion and Baptism Atonement Redemption
SERIES: St. Matthew’s Passion; The World’s Last Night
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-last-supper/

============================================================

Turning your bulletin to the passage on which the teaching is based. We have, by the way, I have a real bad, vehement, nasty flu bug this morning. So I'm going to, I'll be leaving as soon as the sermon's over. My wife will take me home and take care of me the way I took her home and took care of her last week. I think reciprocity in marriage is very important. And so I went out looking for a virus this week. Well, we're starting, we're starting a, gee, I said something clear today. We're starting a new series because it's traditional. Wow, what an awful way to start. It's traditional for the last 2,000 years for Christians to consider and to think and reflect about the meaning of Christ's death in these weeks right before, right up to Good Friday and Easter. And what we're going to be doing is these, for about four or five weeks, we're going to take a look at St. Matthew's Gospel and at what he says in that last, about that last week of Jesus' life, those last couple of days, in Matthew 26, 27, 28, which is traditionally called St. Matthew's Passion. Maybe you may be noticing that we will be using some of, a lot in these next few weeks of Bach's music from St. Matthew's Passion, his version of that. But we're going to start reading Matthew 26, which is the account of the Last Supper. I'm going to read verses 19 to 29. So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover. When evening came, Jesus was reclining at the table with the twelve. And while they were eating, he said, I tell you the truth, one of you will betray me. They were very sad and began to say to him one after the other, surely not I, Lord. Jesus replied, the one who has dipped his hand into the bowl with me will betray me. The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man. It would be better for him if he had not been born. Then Judas, the one who would betray him, said, surely not I, Rabbi. Jesus answered, yes, it is you. While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it and gave it to his disciples, saying, take and eat. This is my body. Then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them, saying, drink from it, all of you. This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's kingdom. This is God's word. Now, there's so many fascinating incidents in St. Matthew's Passion. We're going to be looking here at the words of the Institution of the Last Supper. When you take a look at the deaths of the founders of all the other major religions, you see that they all are fairly similar. For example, Moses dies 120 years old, full of years, strong as ever, undisputed leader, has brought his people to the verge of the Promised Land. Buddha dies at the age of 80, or just going by the texts of the religions themselves. Buddha dies at the age of 80. He's just surrounded by a host of his devotees. He dies in peaceful serenity. He's a complete success by that time. Confucius. Confucius had originally been forced to leave his hometown, but he dies in his hometown. He comes back. He's received there with honor. He dies at the age of 72 at his hometown of Lou, surrounded by those who will continue his work. Mohammed. Mohammed dies in his 60s after having been the first political ruler of all of Arabia, the first political ruler of United Arabia, and he dies in the arms of his wife. Now, let's contrast that for a minute. When you come to Christianity, you've got a man who dies at maybe perhaps age 33, who has a ministry at the very, very most three years, and that when he dies, he's alienated from his own people. He's killed by the colonial power of Rome. He's abandoned by most of his friends. And, if you believe the texts, he's even abandoned by God. His death is premature. It's tragic. It's a disgrace. It's shameful because it's a crucifixion. And the crucifixion was the most shameful, the most degraded of all forms of execution, only for the very worst criminals, because you were stripped naked. And you died by inches with everybody just looking at you, watching you die by inches for days. Now, here's the question. It makes perfect sense, in some ways, why the other religions did work. other words, here's a founder. When you see a founder who teaches some great truth about faith or some truth about spirituality or how to live, and you see him, you see the peace and the blessing in his life. In other words, you see that his religion works. You see peace, you see blessing in his life. You see the peace of his, of the followers. And you see all that. Well, of course, people say, well, look, that works. I'm going to give it a shot. I'm going to look at it. I'm going to study it. And they do. And then they adopt it. But here's what I want to know. One of the great questions of history. Why would anyone have looked at Jesus Christ, looked at the way his life ended? Why would anyone have looked at his life, seeing him die that way, seeing him die penniless, see him die naked, see everybody? Why would anybody have looked at the way his life ended and said, that's the message for me. That's what I want. Why in the world? Now, the only possible answer, nobody would look at the cross and say, a badge of honor, a way of peace, a way to blessing. Nobody would look at that. And yet we know that in spite of the fact that created huge problems for people, early Christians adopted the cross as their emblem. I mean, you know, Cicero, I'll talk more about this next week. Cicero said the word crux, which is the Latin word, you know, for cross, was a swear word. Now, I hate to do this, and I probably shouldn't do this, but think of a four-letter word. Doesn't that make sense? Here I am. Think of a four-letter word. Okay. Now, imagine yourself starting a church and make that the name, the blankety-blank church of New York City, and see who comes. Why was the cross a swear word? Because it represented everything wrong. It represented shame. It represented hostility. It represented weakness. It represented defeat. It represented absolute, utter humiliation. It represented all those things. Why, then, did the followers of Jesus Christ say, this is what I want in my life, the cross? This is how I want to live. This is the message for me. This is what I want. Who would have ever, and the answer, the only answer to that historical question, what would ever have possessed them to pick that up and say, this is the life I want? And the answer is, the fact of the crucifixion would only make people shudder and withdraw. But it was Jesus' explanation of the crucifixion. Jesus' own explanation of what it meant. That afterwards, especially after his resurrection, his followers went back and now they saw it. You know, John Stott, a great old commentator, puts it this way. The fact that a cross became the Christian symbol and that Christians stubbornly refused, in spite of ridicule, to discard it in place of something less offensive, can only have one explanation, historically. It means that the centrality of the cross originated in the mind of Jesus himself. It was out of loyalty to him that his followers clung so doggedly to it. In other words, it would never have occurred to anyone, normal, no normal person, no rational person would say, that's the life for me. Jesus Christ explained, though, how the cross was a transforming, a transforming reality, the central reality. And he does that in his passion. Now, one of the places we see this is when he institutes the Last Supper. Now, it's a shame to call it the Last Supper. In many ways, it's the First Supper, the first of millions and millions and millions of these suppers. But in the Last Supper, which was a Passover meal, Jesus Christ, in the clearest possible way, explains the meaning of his death. Actually, every week in the next five, six weeks, we're going to say, what does his death mean? We're going to see different aspects, different perspectives. But what we learn here in the Last Supper is Jesus gives us some of the clearest teaching on what the cross means, what his death means. And by using the Passover meal, he wonderfully shows us three things, the centrality of his death, the purpose of his death, you know, the centrality, importance of it, the purpose, why he did it, and then lastly, how we appropriate it for ourselves. The centrality of the purpose and how we connect, how we appropriate it ourselves. So let's look. First one, a brief point, but important. Notice verse 19. In fact, yes, I'm going to have to skip the whole section about Judas because it's a different subject. Very important, very interesting, but not really what we're going to talk about today. But the reason I put that in was because I want you to see verse 19. So the disciples did as Jesus had directed them and prepared the Passover. What Jesus' Last Supper was, what Jesus' Lord's Supper was, was the Passover. Now, what was the Passover? Well, when Israel had been for many years in bondage in the land of bondage. under the deliverance engineered by Moses, the night before the great deliverance, the night before the great redemption, they were slaves and they were being taken out, they ate this meal. And this meal was a meal that then God comes to them and says, in Exodus chapter 12, 14, I want you to eat this meal over and over and over again. He says, this will be a perpetual memorial throughout all your generations. Never stop commemorating this night. And as a result, of course, the Israelites commemorated that great night of deliverance from Egypt with the Passover. Now, Jesus is doing that with his disciples and they're having a Passover meal. And you see, in verse 26, it says, while they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks and broke it, gave it to his disciples, saying. Now, what this means is, Jesus is the presider. At a Passover meal, you had to have a presider. The father, if it's a family, or, you know, if it's a group of people, somebody would be, in a sense, the presider. And it's not surprising that Jesus Christ, in a sense, maybe gets up here and he begins to speak. Why? Because the presider is supposed to, you're not just supposed to eat the Passover meal, you're supposed to explain it. And the presider's job was to get up and explain what it meant. And what the presider usually does, and many of you may have heard these words yourself at a Passover, ordinarily the presider would get up and say, this is the bread of affliction which our fathers ate in the wilderness. This is the bread of affliction which our fathers ate in the wilderness. They suffered. See, they suffered that we would be delivered. But instead of that, what Jesus does is he gets up and said, this is the bread of my affliction. This is the bread through which I'm going to bring you out of a greater bondage. What Jesus is doing at this point, and this is remarkable, he says, what I'm about to suffer is this. Years ago, we ate this supper on the night before God redeemed us and brought us out from under Pharaoh's bondage. But tonight, I'm going to pull off a greater redemption. We are, tonight are eating it on the night before God again redeems his people, but this time, not just from Pharaoh, not just from political slavery, but from sin and death itself. And what Jesus is saying when he gets up and says, this is my body, he's replacing the ordinary statements at the Passover. This is the bread of my affliction. And when he gets up and says, this is what he's saying. He is saying, in the most amazing terms, there's no better way to say it. He says, my death is the central and climactic moment in the history of the world. Everything, all the history of the people of God has been moving toward this moment. Every return from exile, every deliverance from any tyrant, every substitutionary sacrifice of an animal, everything, everything that's ever happened in the whole history of redemption, the whole history of God's work with his people, everything is moving toward this. This is the climactic moment in the history of redemption, in the history of the world. He couldn't say it in a more amazing way. And that's the first thing we see here. By taking the Passover meal, I mean, he could have just, he didn't need to use the Passover meal. He could have done it some other way. But by doing the Passover meal, he's saying, everything has been pointing to me. This is the climactic moment. This is the deliverance above all deliverances. This is the exodus and all exoduses. And he's actually also saying, interestingly, this is the only thing he ever tells people to do over and over. Even though the Matthew does not record his words, as you know, certainly, in Mark and Luke, 1 Corinthians, where Paul gives us his words, they come four times in the Bible. He also says, do this remembrance of me. He makes us bound to perpetually remember through this meal the way God originally had said the same thing about the Passover. Notice, there's only one thing that Jesus Christ tells you you must do over and over and over and over and over again. This is not a dramatization of his birth. This is not a dramatization of his miracles. This is not a dramatization of his life or of his teaching, not even of his resurrection. Over and over and over he wants you to dramatize his death, which means this is the main thing I came. This is the central thing. I have nothing to give you unless you believe and understand my death. Nothing. Nothing for you unless you grab this. So the first thing we see in an amazing way here in the Last Supper is Jesus saying, my death is central. And we'll see how central in a second. Let's take a look at the second point. The second thing we learn here is by taking the Passover meal, Jesus is also explaining the purpose of his death. I mean, the real question is why did he die? Why did he die? What was his purpose? What was he trying one, which was us looking at take and eat, this is my body, but the second statement. It says, then he took the cup, gave thanks and offered it to them saying, drink from it, all of you. This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins. That is so loaded. Listen, first of all, one of the problems in translating from Greek into English is the word for, the little word for. See, it says, it's poured out for, poured out for many. Now, you know, the English word for is way, way, very, very general, very general. It can mean so many things. To say, I'm doing something for you could mean I'm doing something because of you. You know, it could mean I'm doing something in response to you. But the particular preposition used here, and in the other, in all of the other places where Jesus' words are given here in the Last Supper, what he's really saying is, my blood is poured out on behalf of you, instead of you, in the stead of you. This is the language of sacrificial self-substitution. This is the language of sacrificial self-substitution. And boy, there is no better way for him to explain it. That sounds maybe, what's that? Sacrificial self-substitution. Well, look, let's go again to what's the Passover meal. There are three basic things, there are three basic elements in the Passover meal. One was unleavened bread. Why? It represented the haste, the difficulty of those times. They had to eat unleavened bread. They didn't have time to wait for it to rise. Okay? Secondly, they drank wine. There were four cups of wine that were passed around because they were the, they represented the four great promises in Exodus chapter 6, which were read as they were drinking the wine. So they had unleavened bread, and they had a cup of wine. But there was, what was the main course? Well, obviously, wine and bread is not enough for a meal. That's, wine is the drink, and bread is, you always have bread. What was the main course? A lamb. And the lamb was the point of the Passover. God had said to Pharaoh, let my people go, let my people go, let my people go. Pharaoh continually said, no, no, no. Finally, God comes to Moses and he says, I'm going to, I'm going to put a final stroke. I'm going to send a final stroke. I'm going to send the angel of judgment, the angel of death. I'm going to send the angel of judgment, and he's going to pass over the land. And the angel of judgment is going to smite oppression and violence. And the way he's going to do that is he's going to strike dead the firstborn son in every family. Then, God says to Moses, finally, Pharaoh will let you go. This stroke will redeem you. This stroke is the one that will get you out. But what's amazing, one of the most amazing things, which I didn't realize until last week when I was studying this, one of the most amazing things that God does here is he says to the Israelites, but here's what you need to do. You need to, to that night, you need to eat a Passover supper. And why is it called Passover? Well, because he says the main course is the lamb, and you slay the lamb, of course, and then you eat the lamb. But you take the blood of that lamb, and you smear it on the doorposts over your door, so that when the angel of judgment comes by, the angel of judgment will pass over you. You know one of the things that's most amazing about this? This is the most non-discriminatory thing I've ever seen. God does not say, when judgment comes, of course, it only hit the bad people, not you good people. It only hit the Egyptians, not you Jewish people. It only hit, it only hit those people have the wrong religion, not the people who have the right religion. No. What is he saying? He's saying, when the judge, when my judgment comes down, every single household will be subject to it. He says, don't you understand, there's a deeper thing that God is saying than what is, what Pharaoh is doing to you. See, politically, they're the oppressors, and you are the victims, but spiritually, you're all alienated from me. Spiritually, you all want to be your own gods, you want to be your own lords, and your selfishness is wreaking havoc on my creation. In other words, you're all sinners. And what God is saying is, you will not be saved tonight unless you put the blood of the lamb over your doorjamb, and you take shelter under it. And so, what did that mean that night? What would it have meant? Here's what it would have meant. First of all, the family would have had to admit that we're not going to be able to pass muster if the angel of judgment comes by. And the only way to do it is if a lamb is slain. In every home in that whole country, there was either a dead lamb or a dead son. It was one or the other. In other words, the lamb was slain. Every firstborn son that had to be a dead son. lamb died for me. Now, notice something interesting about the text. Jesus picks up the bread and says, this is the bread, you know, of affliction, my affliction. Jesus picks up the cup. But wait a minute, where's the main course? I mean, what kind of meal is this? Haven't you ever noticed that? I mean, you know, we do this once a month. It's not, you know, not very filling. You say, you know, bread, okay, rolls, you know, not even butter, but rolls and, you know, a little something to drink. Where's the main course? There is no main course. Jesus is the lamb. Jesus never refers to the lamb. Jesus never points to the lamb. You know, we don't even know if there was a lamb there. But there was. See, in other words, Jesus Christ is saying to them, do you really believe, friends, that our firstborn children were saved because of some little woolly quadrupeds? He says, our firstborn sons were saved because God was going to offer up his firstborn son. And tonight he does. And Jesus Christ, therefore, is saying, I am the substitute. I take the judgment. I am slain, so you're not. And, you know, you do not know how completely that whole idea suffuses everything he does. It is amazing how it suffuses everything he does. I never noticed it until recently. We'll talk about it later on. I mean, for example, you know the place where Jesus says, it looks at Jerusalem, and he says, Jerusalem, there's going to be judgment day. And then he says, he says this both in Matthew 26 and in Luke 13. He says, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you that kill the prophets and stone those who are sent to her. How I want to gather your children as a hen gathers her chicks under her wing. But you would not. You say, well, that's sweet. You know, Jesus is likening himself to a mother hen. But no, wait a minute. It's in the context of judgment. And N.T. Wright, a very interesting, a great New Testament scholar, says, do you realize what Jesus is saying? He's saying that judgment's going to come down on you, and I would be very happy to put you under my wings. And do what? National Geographic, some years ago, National Geographic said this about, do you remember the Yellowstone fires? There were the fires in Yellowstone. After a forest fire in Yellowstone, forest rangers began their trek up a mountain to survey the damage. One ranger found a bird literally petrified in ash, perched statuesquely on the ground at the base of a stick. Somewhat sickened by the eerie sight, the ranger knocked the bird over with the stick. Three tiny chicks scurried out from under their dead mother's wings. When the blaze had arrived, the mother had remained steadfast because she was willing to die. Those under the cover of her wings would live. She was a substitute. She took the blaze. She took the heat. Jesus Christ, at almost every place, even when he said, oh, I wish I could just take you under my wings. What is he talking about? He's talking about that. He's likening this to a fire in the barnyard, and he says, come under my wings, and I'll take the heat. Over and over and over again, I'm the lamb. Now, what does this mean? Now, we have to get on to the third point, but again, we'll be able to look at this over the weeks. But here's what it means. It means at least two things. The first thing it means is this. If Jesus' death is substitutionary, if it's substitutionary, then Christianity is an all-or-nothing thing. Years ago, in the early days of Christianity, the emperor, Alexander Severus, was very impressed when he realized that we had a new religion here, Christianity. So the emperor said, well, all right. So he put an image of Jesus Christ in his chapel along with all the other gods. You know, might as well be safe. And he bowed down to it. But the thing that really bugged everybody, though, was that the Christians wouldn't return the favor. I mean, here was the emperor willing to bow down to Christ. Why wouldn't the Christians bow down to the emperor? And see, the Christians said, we can't worship Christ at all unless we worship Christ alone. Why? It's for this reason. Why did Jesus die? You've heard many people say, to show his love. Have you heard that? Now, imagine a boy and a girl walking along the river. And the girl's not really, you know, interested in the boy. He says, you don't know how much I love you. No, I guess I don't. I'll show you how much I love you. And he throws himself into the river and drowns. And does the girl say, oh, my word, he really, really did love me. No. What he says, she says, is what a jerk. You know, what an idiot. You see, that doesn't show any love at all. If you're going to die, if you're going to die, that's your... it's wicked it's wrong if you're going to die for somebody you can only die for somebody if it's the only way see suicide is a bad thing suicide isn't is does not show anybody that you love them if the girl was in the water and the boy jumped into the water and risked his life or died saving her then she would say oh how you love me now here's the point if jesus christ died and nobody doubts that unless he died substitutionarily unless he died in our place unless he died to take our sins unless he died in other words in order to really save us because we means that uh his death is ridiculous it's stupid it's awful now what does that mean to people who say well look there's many ways to god and i believe that all good people can reach god christians can reach god they're good people and everybody who's a good person can get to god but no wait a minute wait a minute there's nothing good about christianity unless it's the only way in jesus death on the cross unless it's the only way unless unless there was no other possible way for us to get to god is his death is is terrible it's wrong it's wicked it's stupid it's irrational and therefore either christianity is based on as we see here the centrality of the cross it's based on something stupid and wicked and irrational and therefore it's not one more way to get to god or else it's the way to get to god see what jesus is claiming here is a way of saying you can't put me in a pantheon it's all or nothing it's all or nothing well listen i i uh there's one other thing that the substitutionary death means well we don't really have time for it every other religion says the covenant is based on your commitment to me in other words in every other religion god says and as it were your commitment to me if you're really committed if you really work hard jesus christ is the one that says oh no your salvation is based on god's commitment to you this is the blood of the covenant and the covenant is a word i mean it's he's what he's saying is here's how you see how much i'm committed to you so christianity is is the substitutionary death of jesus christ makes christianity unique it's either it's either at the the inferior religion or the superior religion and it's it's just because of the it's because it's the claim of what he did on the cross i mean we can't help that you see we don't have really we as christians we really don't have control over this it's just what he claimed the average modern american hates this all or nothing they definitely want to move christianity into the pantheon it's so important because they see so much good in it jesus christ says no this blood was poured out for you i have died for you and my death is meaningless and wicked unless it's the only way that you can be rescued lastly one of the most interesting things of course we said about jesus using the last supper the passover is number one it tells you the centrality number two it tells you the purpose of his death substitutionary but number three it tells us that you have to make it yours the death of jesus christ does not necessarily or automatically do anything for you just like you could starve to death in the presence of a meal you got to eat it notice that jesus christ does not say this is my body he says eat it he doesn't say this is my blood he says drink it and so what he's saying is you must learn how to make the benefits of the cross yours you must pick it up you must take it now you must know right that these words have been tremendously uh debated and i think it's only fair to for me to tell you at least basically about the debate on the one hand you have the very high view of the lord's supper the catholic church but but also luther i know a lot of you think of luther as the enemy of the catholic church not in this area because you see the catholic church and and martin luther believed that when jesus says this is my body he meant that the that the actual physical uh food was his body and that if you you know and martin luther used to just bang the tables hawk es corpus meum this is my body doesn't say this represents my body he said this is my body and the high view says if you want to appropriate it you just you get the bread and the wine and you eat it and you if you have the bread and the wine if you have the physical elements you got jesus on the other end of the spectrum you have the the typical evangelical protestant i guess you ought to say which says no this just represents his body this is nothing but symbol it doesn't really it's just a memorial service it doesn't really do anything special to you now without going into any detail i want you to to know that i believe you compromise. On the one hand, when Jesus Christ said, this is my body, this is my blood, it had to be representational. I'm sorry, because Jesus Christ's actual body was holding the bread. Right? So, how could that, you know, and because Jesus' blood, when he said, this is my blood, his blood hadn't been spilled yet. So, that night, at least it had to be representational. So, being able to say, this is my body, this is my blood, does not necessarily mean it literally is. On the other hand, on the other hand, there's another place where Jesus speaks about this need that I think goes beyond what the Protestants very often claim for the Lord's Supper. It's in John 6, where Jesus says, I tell you the truth, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up on the last day. Does this offend you? This is why I told you that no one can come to the Father unless the Father enables him. The words I have spoken are spirit and they are life. Now, here's my, see, that goes, seems to go beyond what the Protestants are willing to grant. And here's what I will give you, real brief, and I'll show you how it works for the last couple minutes. Remember when Jesus Christ says, right there in John 6, my words are spirit and life. That's a weird way to put it. Here's what I think it means. When you take the Lord's Supper, and by the way, we're not doing it tonight, today. We're doing it next week. I'm going to give you a week to get ready. A lot of you might say, oh, wouldn't it have been nice to have the Lord's Supper after a sermon like this? I don't think we're ready. You're going to take time to think about it. Now, I believe that when I understand the words of Christ about his death, when I eat and drink the bread and the wine, when I eat and drink the bread and the cup, remembering and thinking about what his death means, that the Spirit of God, in a more profound way than any other place, more profound than your quiet time, more profound than a devotional, more profound than a small group meeting, and those are all pretty important, okay? But in a more profound way than anywhere else, Jesus and the Holy Spirit takes the cross and really shapes your heart with it, really brings the cross into your experience. Remember, we talked about this last week. It makes it a controlling consciousness. You say, well, why? What's the big deal? Think about this. For example, the cross is an emblem of shame, but for us, Paul says, we should glory in the cross. Why? Well, why would we glory in the cross? Well, here's what Paul said. Paul says the cross is a source of glory, a significance of worth, because when you see that the Lord of the universe was willing to take the shame of the cross because he valued us that much. Think of how much he loves us. Think of how much worth we have. Think of how much he values us. The cross means we are of infinite value. Now, do you feel that way? Do you walk around with that kind of confidence and joy? Huh? Do you not care what people think about you? Do you have that kind of incredible self-image? No. And how are you going to get that? Well, I'm just going to say, I know God loves me. I love God. Well, no, no, no. I know God loves me. I know God loves me. No. Come to the Lord's Supper and take his words, their spirit and life, and take the elements and by faith, tell yourself what the cross means. And as you partake, the Holy Spirit does a deep work and it brings that glory into your life. Let me give you another one. The cross is a symbol not only of shame, it's also a symbol of hostility. The cross is a symbol of the fact that Jesus Christ went up against the Romans and went up against the authorities and lost. But Paul says the cross is our peace. He says the cross is our peace. He's brought down the dividing wall. The cross is brought down the dividing wall between Jew and Greek, between slave and free, between male and female. He says that in Ephesians 2. Why? Well, here's what Paul is saying. He says if the cross is a living reality in your life, that means you know that it's a humbling thing. You know that you are so lost that there was nothing less than this that could save you. And that humbles you. So groups of people that you always felt superior to, you no longer feel superior to. And the cross also represents Jesus Christ dying for us while we were his enemies. It's the ultimate pattern of someone doing self-donation to the other. To the other race, to the other gender, to the other class. Jesus Christ's cross humbles us and gives us a pattern so that if it becomes a living reality in your life, you will be able to have relationships with people that otherwise you never could. People that you couldn't bring yourself to embrace. Let me just show you what I mean. Let me keep going. Are you suffering? The cross completely transforms your suffering. you know, life. Why? Because of all the gods, of all the religions, this is the only God with scars. And the cross means, even though suffering remains a mystery, the cross means that God stands with you in suffering and he works his will in suffering redemptively. Or I'll press you a little further. If the cross is something really, really central to your consciousness, you will not judge a book by its cover. You will not judge a book by its cover. In other words, it's very typical, especially in New York. We look at how people are dressed. We look at whether they're sleek or slick or not. You won't do that because the cross was an apparent defeat and it was apparent weakness, but it was really strength and power. And if the cross is central in your mind, you're not going to write people off. You're not going to look at a situation and say, oh, it's lost. You're going to be very, very discerning. You're going to look beneath the surface. You're not going to judge a book by its cover. Over and over and over again. The cross gets rid of your guilt. Okay? The cross leads you to say, if he died for me, then I'm going to be risky and I'm going to be adventurous for him. If the cross is put into the center of your mind, your being through the Lord's Supper and the particular way that Jesus Christ says, I'll meet you at the table, more, more, more, more, more, you will become a person of the cross and you'll be filled with confidence and you'll be filled with humility and you'll be filled, you'll be able to handle suffering and you'll be, and you'll live a guilt-free life. All the things we're just talking about. What is the Lord's Supper? Interesting. He says, the last thing is, I tell you, I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on until the day when I drink it anew in my father's kingdom. My favorite story, by the way, I've been so sick for the last two days. All I do is read fantasy fiction. So I've been reading Lord of the Rings again. It's the only thing I can do when I'm sick and I can't think. One of the hobbit heroes, a hobbit named Pippin, he's standing at the gate of the fortress and the gate has been broken through and the demon king is this terrible villainous thing that is about to come in and is about to destroy all the good people inside the fort. And then just as it looks like the most terrible moment, looks like it's all over, suddenly Pippin hears horns in the distance. Horns, horns, horns. And what are the horns? The horns are the cavalry, basically, who've come. The king of Rohan comes and he rides to his death, but he saves the city. And we're told in the novel that from then on, for the rest of his life, whenever Pippin heard a horn blowing in the distance, he burst into tears. Why? Because whenever he heard a horn blowing in the distance, he received a living memory of his salvation. I mean, of course, he spent all of his life going along saying, oh, I know I've been saved. You know, I remember that day I was saved. I would have been dead, but if it wasn't for that, the king who rode to his death for my sake, I wouldn't be alive. He knew it. But whenever he heard the horn, he knew it in a deeper way. Remember, we talked about this last week. He got a living memory. He burst into tears. Now, the fact of the matter is, when you look at the elements of the bread and the cup, what is that? That's a horn blowing in the distance. It's reminding you not only of the day in which that great king rode to his death in weakness on a little donkey, but it's also reminding you of the day in which he comes back again and he will not come riding on a donkey, but riding on a cloud in absolute triumph to put everything right. And that's what Jesus is saying. When you eat this thing, you're not only remembering that day, that sad day, but you're remembering that incredible day that's coming. And you're between these two days. And I tell you that I will give you a living memory of the reality of your salvation whenever you eat and drink in faith. So now I know it's pretty amazing for Presbyterian to say, small group, Bible study, prayer, you know, give your life to Jesus. There's another thing that Jesus is telling us here. You will not have the benefits of the death of Jesus Christ in your life and have that transforming reality in the center of your life unless you eat and drink of the Lord's Supper. So next week, get ready. Let's pray. We thank you, Father, for giving us a day in which your son can show us just what his death meant. We pray for the next couple of weeks he might continue to understand it so that the cross can be reborn in our lives. And much of the greatness and much of the power and much of the love that can be ours would be generated in our life by the power of the Holy Spirit. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Amen.
