TITLE: The Crossing
SCRIPTURE: John 6:16-25
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Seeing Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-crossing/

============================================================

The scripture reading for this morning is from John 6, 16 through 25. When evening came, his disciples went down to the lake, where they got into a boat and set off across the lake for Capernaum. By now it was dark, and Jesus had not yet joined them. A strong wind was blowing, and the waters grew rough. When they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water, and they were frightened. But he said to them, It is I. Don't be afraid. Then they were willing to take him into the boat, and immediately the boat reached the shore where they were heading. The next day, the crowd that had stayed on the opposite shore of the lake realized that only one boat had been there, and that Jesus had not entered it with his disciples, but that they had gone away alone. Then some boats from Tiberias landed near the place where the people had eaten the bread after the Lord had given thanks. Once the crowd realized that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there, they got into the boats and went to Capernaum in search of Jesus. When they found him on the other side of the lake, they asked him, Rabbi, when did you get here? The word of the Lord. Now, in January and February, we're looking at these accounts in the book of John, helping us understand who Jesus is. Now, this is a very famous passage with Jesus walking on the water in the storm. The disciples had decided to go from one town on the shore of the Sea of Galilee to another town by boat, and during their voyage, they became caught in one of the very violent squalls and storms that often came up over the Sea of Galilee. The Sea of Galilee was actually below sea level, and hot air would very often come pouring in, and it was a place where there were lots of storms. They get stuck in the storm. Jesus comes walking on the water to them. It's a very famous incident. But remember, I mention this every week, the gospel writer, John, says at the end of his gospel that Jesus did many miracles, but John has chosen miracles to recount that symbolize not just, they don't just tell that Jesus is a powerful God who does these great things, but also symbolizes who he is and why he came. And therefore, every time we look at one of the miraculous signs in the Gospel of John, we should be asking not just how this shows his power, but also what does this tell us about who he is and what he came to do? And therefore, when we look at this miraculous sign, I think we're going to learn at least three things. There's many others, but the three I'd like to talk about this morning are, it shows us his uncontrollable force, his wonderful counsel, and his costly salvation. Okay, first of all, his uncontrollable force. The key to understanding the meaning of this whole incident, it's very, very famous, but the key to understanding why he did it and why he did it where he did it, what he was trying to say in it, is to read the two verses right before, not the two verses that were actually read to you, but right before this particular account, it says, after Jesus had fed the 5,000, miraculously, 5,000 families, we think, probably, he had miraculously fed them in the wilderness by taking five loaves of bread and multiplying them. And, of course, the people who saw this were steeped in what we would call the Old Testament, the Hebrew Scriptures, and they knew of someone else who had miraculously fed a multitude in the wilderness, Moses. Moses was the greatest leader they'd ever known. He led them out of slavery, led them out of oppression. And he had fed a multitude miraculously in the wilderness. And now this man has done it, too. And in verse 14 and 15, right before, right after the feeding of the 5,000, we read this. Quote, after the people saw the sign Jesus performed, they began to say, surely this is the prophet who is to come into the world. Jesus, knowing that they intended to come and make him king by force, withdrew to a mountain by himself. Now, you see, what they were saying is, here's a man with incomparable power. Here's a man who did what Moses did. We're also now under oppression. We're under the boot of Rome. We also need a deliverer. Let's make him king. And Jesus knew they were about to do that. And his response to this profound misunderstanding... understanding. away and he himself removes from the crowd and goes up on a mountain. Now, there's a lot of perplexity very often when people are reading this part of John. Why, I think I've already told you, or we've been noticing this every week, most of the miracles that Jesus does are called signs by John. He calls them miraculous signs. And he even numbers them. This is the first sign. That was the second sign. That was the third sign. This is obviously a big miracle, but John never calls it a sign. It's interesting. He never calls it a sign. And I think the reason is because this miracle needs to be brought together with the bread miracle with the feeding of the 5,000 miracle, because only together does the message come forward in a, you might say, this miracle, in a sense, supplements the miracle of the bread to make sure the message comes forward in a clear way. What's the message? Here's the message. Jesus did not come primarily to deal with Israel's economic, political, and social problems as important and as bad as they were. He did not primarily come to deal with their political and economic and social problems. And if he had just been made a king, that's all he would have ever done. And you and I wouldn't have helped us, would it? Other than maybe he created a wonderful, inspiring story. No. Jesus came to give us the bread of heaven. He came to bring us eternal life. He came to conquer sin and death itself. He came to reconcile us to God. God. And see, that is our most fundamental problem and issue, and we don't even know it. We do not know it. None of us know it. I even think no matter who you are in this room, you hardly know it. The Bible talks about our need for reconciliation with God, that there's alienation, that we're fighting God. And virtually all of us say, I'm not fighting God. Very few people say that. Non-religious people say, I'm not fighting God, I just don't believe in him. And religious people say, oh, I'm absolutely not fighting God. I'm not alienated from God. I'm baying him. I'm trying very hard to live a good life. But if you go into the book of Romans, St. Paul does a remarkable job of deconstructing religion, where he says, you know, if you are trying to live a good life so that God has to bless you and take you to heaven, you're trying to control God, you're trying to be your own savior and Lord, you're fighting God. You're all fighting God. We're all resisting him. We're all hostile to him. We don't want his control. We're finding all sorts of ways of throwing it off. And we hide how hostile we are toward God under all sorts of, I don't know, self-deception. But Paul says, your most fundamental problem is you're alienated from God. You're hostile to God. You're out of relationship with God. And Jesus Christ says, I have come into this world, not just simply, not just simply to, to, you know, help you with these economic and social and political problems in this one location. I'm here to deal with the problem from which actually all of our economic and social problems come, the problems of sin and death and alienation, us from God and therefore us from each other. And so I'm going to the cross, says Jesus. My body's going to be broken. I'm the bread of life. My body's going to be broken so you can be made whole. I'm going to the cross. I'm going to pay for your sins and I'm going to take away, not only God needs to be reconciled to you, but then we need to be reconciled to him. And when our hearts are healed and we have that relationship, everything changes. Everything changes. Our relationship with God, our relationship with ourselves, our relationship with each other, everything. everything. That's the profound thing I've come to do. And the problem is that the bread miracle looked like Jesus had a power that we can just use and fit into our agendas. Okay, wow, you've got this power. We really need a King. We really need a Messiah. We really need some, a political leader. And Jesus says, no, no, you can't control me like that. So what does he do? This. What is this? How does he refute that, that complete misunderstanding of him and that desire to, in a sense, control him? Well, there's a storm. And here's what verse 19 says. This is one of those passages in which very careful attention to the original Greek text actually really helps a lot. In verse 19, it says, uh, they were out there, by the way, of course, they were in a storm. As I mentioned, the Sea of Galilee is not big place, but you can still sink and drown in it. And, uh, Mark and Matthew also tell about this, uh, recount this, and they give a little bit more detail. And they were straining at the oars. They were in trouble. They couldn't get to land. And it says in verse 19, and when they had wrote about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, walking on the water. a little surprising when he uses the word walking. You know, in Greek, there's a number of different words. One of the words that could have been used for walking would be just a normal word for treading. And, you know, I guess I've always thought that somehow, you know, that Jesus would be slogging a little bit, you know, and saying, I'm glad I reached you guys through the water or something like that. But what actually the word is actually used there is a word that means to amble or to stroll. As a matter of fact, it's a word that means usually to stop on your journey and to get out and walk around and do sightseeing. It's a word for sightseeing. It's got to be deliberate. It actually looks like, and some of the other texts, the other passages, the other gospels indicate this too, that Jesus was very casually strolling. Now, storms, hurricanes, storms, especially over water, are the most chaotic, destructive, and uncontrollable powers on earth. I mean, there's really no more uncontrollable, destructive, and chaotic power than a hurricane, especially over water. You know, you can drop a nuclear warhead into a hurricane and it doesn't bother it. And yet there's two places in the New Testament where Jesus is in the middle of one of these great storms over the water. And he's surrounded by terrified sailors. And one time, he speaks a word and it goes instantly calm. And this time, he's casually strolling through it, which means the greatest uncontrollable forces that we know in the world, not only does he have absolute power over them, they have no power over him. Now, you know what this means. Here's what it means. Jesus isn't just the ultimate Moses. He's the God of Moses. Jesus is saying, yeah, okay, you want to go back where Moses, you know, led the children of Israel out of the wilderness and he fed them in the wilderness. If you want to go back to Moses, fine. But don't just go to the story about Moses feeding the children of Israel in the wilderness. Go to the Red Sea. Here's Psalm 77. You are the God who performs miracles. With your mighty arm, you redeemed your people. The waters saw you. God, the waters saw you and writhed. The very depths were convulsed. Your path led through the sea. Your way through the mighty waters, though your footprints were not seen. And Job, in Job, it recalls the passing through the Red Sea. It says, he alone, talking about God, he alone treads on the waves of the sea. God led Israel out through the waters. Jesus is deliberately saying, I'm not just Moses. Sure, I'm Moses. Of course, I'm the ultimate Moses. Of course, I'm the ultimate leader. But I am the God of Moses. I'm the one who parted the Red Sea. I'm the one that has infinite power, and you cannot control me for your own ends. You may not use me. You may not use me. I'm not here just simply to help you with the problems. I'm not here just to fit into your agenda. I bring a whole new agenda. You must deal with me on your own terms. I am the uncontrollable force. I'm the untame Lord. Now, just before moving on, let's just think about what that means practically. I mean, that's the principle. How does that apply? Oh, it applies in a lot of ways. It certainly applies to, there's a danger to what some people call the prosperity gospel, that you say, I'm coming to God, but basically, I'm coming to God expecting that if I'm right with God, bad things will not happen to me. Storms won't happen to me. Bad things aren't going to happen to me. Everything's going to be fine. I'm going to be healed. I'm going to be rich. Jesus here is saying, you can't make me a king. You can't use me, as it were, in that sense, just to sort of to fulfill your ambitions. And by the way, every place where Jesus has almost literally made a king, like with the Crusades, like when kings said, we're a Christian country, and we're going to conquer this pagan country, and we're going to make everybody Christian, that happened a lot. Wherever that happened, wherever Jesus was literally, in a sense like that, made a king, it's been a disaster. Not that, by the way, becoming a Christian doesn't have amazing political implications. If you are reconciled to God, and your identity changes, and your relationship with God, and yourself and others change, it leads you to becoming agents for peace and reconciliation and justice in the world. Oh, yes. Absolutely. It changes the way in which you function in the world. But you can't reduce Christianity to a political program that is put into place by coercion. a complete perversion of what I came to do. But I'd like to be a little more subtle, because most of you are saying, well, I'm not into the prosperity gospel, and I understand that thing about politics, and you've got to be careful now. Okay. But just, we're more subtle about this. Let me just tell you the story. If you've been around Redeemer a long time, you would have heard before. In fact, you're even, I can even anticipate an objection. I'll get it to you in the middle. But when Kathy and I were young, we had a teacher of our, we had a teacher, and the teacher had a teacher, and his name was John Gerstner. John Gerstner had a recording of a very famous sermon that went around called, Your Life, A Living Sacrifice. Your Life, A Living Sacrifice, and had a story in it. And that story was about a young girl. I won't, since some of you heard it, I will be, I'll get right to the point. But those of you who haven't heard it need to hear it. A girl, a true story of a girl who lived years and years ago, a long time ago. And she decided, I wanted to be a missionary. But she lived at a time in which a single woman would not have been able to go into the lands where she wanted to go. So she went into missionary training knowing that though she was going to get ready for missionary training, all God had to do was give her a husband. And then she'd be able to go, you know, do what she had trained to do. So she says, that's an easy deal. I give my whole life to missionary training, and that means I'm giving my life away to God, and all God has to do is give me a husband. And John Gerstner tells a story about how the night, after years of training, the night before her final graduation, when she was all done with her training, she had no husband. She hadn't any prospects for a husband. And she was bitter and angry. And that night, she suddenly realized what? That she'd been using God. She thought she'd given herself away. But basically, she was saying, if I do this, then you'll do this. Or another way of putting it is, most of us say, God, I'll serve you if. I'll serve you as long as. And if you say to God, I'll serve you if, or I'll serve you as long as, what's on the other side of the if, or what's on the other side of the long as, is the real God. And God is an instrument. He's a means to an end. If you ever serve God conditionally, Lord, I'll be with you, and as long as this happens, if this happens, as long as this happens, that's the condition. It's the condition that's the real God. It's the condition that's the bottom line. It's the real thing you're living for. And God is just a means to an end. Jesus says, you can't use me like that. I won't be used like that. And John Gerstner said, that night, this girl, this young woman, who had all her life, for years, had thought, I was really living for God, realized she'd just been using God. That night, she took her hands off her life. And the way he ends the story is, if that girl who had spent, done all of that, for Jesus, realized at the end that she had not taken her hands off her life, have you, do you think? And by the way, every time I tell that story, and then I'm moving on, I'm going on to the next point, we always get emails coming to the office saying, whatever happened to the girl? And the point is that, well, John Gerstner didn't tell me. And the reason he didn't tell me is because he knew that once she took her hands off her life, that was the end of the story. Now, if she had a husband, now it would have been safe. If she didn't get a husband, she'd still be living okay. I mean, really, that was the end of the story. You don't need to know how the story ended. That was the end of the story. So the bread miracle wasn't enough. You needed the storm miracle to see that you must drop your conditions when you come to Jesus Christ. He's an uncontrollable force. Secondly, and thirdly, secondly, he's a wonderful counselor. Notice, as usual, Jesus' miracles are never simply naked displays of power. They are ways of ministering to people. And here is Jesus Christ, and he's up on the mountain, as it were, and he's looking down into the world, and he sees his people, and they are struggling with forces beyond them. He sees them sinking. He sees that they're overwhelmed. He sees them struggling with problems that they cannot handle on their own. And so he comes to them, and he speaks gently to them. And what does he say? It is I. Don't be afraid. Now, let's just meditate on that for a second. It's not too hard to understand what that's supposed to be telling us, or what John was trying to tell us by including this particular miracle here. You know, storms at sea, there's no refuge. If you're in a storm and you're in the mountains, you've got caves. If you're in a storm and you're somewhere else, you know, you can get under a tree maybe, or you can get into a home, or you can get into a... storm. But if you're in a storm at sea, there's no refuge now. Most people, I think, think that life is more like a land journey. I recently read an interesting psychological study that said that when people hear about, see, or read about other folks whose lives have blown up, really blown up, terrible things have happened, studies have shown that most people tend to blame the victim. Most people tend to say, well, that person either wasn't wise or they didn't save or they should have thought about this or they shouldn't have done that or they should have avoided, that there's a strong psychological bent on most of our parts to when we see someone suffering to assume that they probably contributed to it in some way. It's self-defense. We see somebody else's life blow up and we desperately, desperately want to believe that we don't have, that doesn't have to happen to us if we're smart enough, if we're savvy enough, if we're competent enough, we do our diligence. There's a deep sense in which we feel that way because we think that life is a land journey. But the Bible says, no, life is a sea journey and darkness is upon the face of the deep. There are storms coming in your life that will be beyond you. You will be out of your depth. Let me just give you four. Bereavement, illness, relational betrayal, financial disaster. I don't care how hard you work, how smart you are, how many good connections you have. I don't care what you do. You're not going to avoid those things. Just those four. They're going to happen. They're going to happen to you and you're going to be out of your depth. Life is not a land journey. It's a sea journey and darkness is on the face of the deep. In other words, there will be things coming into your life that you will not be able to handle. There will be no refuge unless it comes from outside of you. In fact, unless it comes from outside of the world. And that's the point. And just notice one other thing. What this is saying is, here's Jesus and he's tender. Notice how he comes. He doesn't say, you fools, why didn't you trust me? He comes tenderly. He's the wonderful counselor. Hey, he says, it's me. Don't be afraid. And if you put the first two points of the sermon together here, his uncontrollable force with his wonderful tender counsel, think of how that can comfort you. What you say is, if someone like this, with this kind of power, loves me like this, I can handle those storms. I will handle those storms. Just remember one thing. There's two storm stories in the New Testament. Two times in which Jesus is in a horrible storm with terrified people around him, terrified sailors around him, one time he just speaks and it goes away. The other time, he brings them through it. He doesn't stop the storm. He comes next to them in the storm and he gets them to land. And sometimes the way Jesus helps you in a storm is he actually does take it away. Sometimes it doesn't happen or sometimes it just lifted. And other times it doesn't go away. But he comes in, gets into your life with you, takes you, turns you into something great, turns you to gold through it. So he's not only an uncontrollable force, secondly, he's a wonderful counselor. But thirdly, and this is where you have to look carefully, but it's so rewarding. We also have here a sign, not just of his uncontrollable force and his wonderful counsel, but also of his costly salvation. What do I mean by that? Well, one thing that many people notice, and you may have noticed on a reading through, is that when Jesus shows up, he doesn't immediately comfort them. He makes them, they were probably scared. I mean, Mark and Matthew, the other accounts we have of this, tells us that they were very afraid. They were very worried and very anxious out there. But when Jesus showed up, they got more afraid and worried. Didn't immediately resolve their fear and worry. See that? It says, when they had rowed about three or four miles, they saw Jesus approaching the boat, verse 19, walking on the water, and they were frightened. That's a nice way to put it. They were terrified. Jesus coming terrified them. Why? We say, well, it would have been scary to see somebody walking on the water. Yeah, I'm sure. But there was more to it than that. And the reason is because of what he says. Now, the translators have, we really have to be, I don't want to hear any criticism of the translators. There's no way they could actually put down what Jesus said. It wouldn't make any sense to the English readers. He doesn't say it is I. He says, ego eimi. He says, I am. He uses a Greek construction there that is extremely unusual. He says, I am. What would that mean? Actually, nobody doubts what it means. When Moses met God for the first time, face to face as it were, in the burning bush in Exodus chapter 3, the bush is burning, and he's speaking to Moses, and he says, I'm going to send you to Pharaoh. Moses says, when I go, people are going to say, who sent you? What is your name? What is your name, he says to God? Who should I say sent me? And God says, tell them I am has sent you. Now, again, that's a strange state. It's just the Hebrew word to be, you know, indefinite Hebrew word to be. Tell them I am has sent you. But the Jewish thinkers and theologians over the centuries and Christian thinkers and theologians over the century almost completely agree on what that means. When God says, I am, he's saying this. I always am. There was never a time in which it could have been said about God, God will be, because he has no beginning. And there never was a time in which someone will be able to say about God, God was, because there's no ending. And you know why? Because God has no cause. God is the only one who is his own cause. He depends on nothing. Everything depends on him. This is God's way of saying, I don't just exist. I am existence. Everything that exists, exists because of me. I'm not just a being. I am being. Tell them being itself sent you. I'm the unconditioned cause. Now, you know, it's interesting. When Jesus says, I am, in fact, in John chapter 8, he actually says, before Abraham was, I am. And they immediately tried to kill him. Immediately. He didn't say, before Abraham was, I was. That would have been astounding. Because he would have been saying, I'm older than Abraham. But he says, before Abraham was, I am. And they knew exactly what he was saying. And they immediately tried to kill him. And I'm glad he said it that way. You know why? Because if Jesus had just said, I'm God, and we here in New York City read that passage where it says, Jesus said, I'm God. We could have read into that anything we wanted to. You know, because we have such weird ideas of God. So you say, oh, Jesus said, I'm God. Well, you know what that means? He's the spark of love in everybody. Or he's that spiritual aura that binds all of creation together. Or he's this, or he's that. No, Jesus says, I am the infinitely exalted, above the universe, transcendent one. I'm the one who created the world. I'm the one who sustains at every moment. I'm the one without beginning and without end. That's the God who I am. It's astonishing. It's an astounding statement. But what's even more astounding is he says, I am, and then says, don't be afraid. Now, that is completely different than anything you ever, ever, ever see in the Hebrew scriptures in the Old Testament. Every time in the Old Testament God reveals himself, he immediately says, get back. So, for example, when he says to Moses, I am, he immediately says, take off your shoes, take off your sandals, you're on holy ground, don't get too close. When he reveals his name on Mount Sinai and Moses says, show me your glory, God says, no, I can't, it'll kill you. When he comes down on the mountain, he says, don't touch the mountain, you'll die. Every time in the Old Testament, where God says, I am, he says, basically, get back. My I am-ness might kill you. You are, I'm infinite, you are puny. I am utterly holy and pure, you are flawed and sinful. You can't live with my greatness. You can't live with my glory and my holiness. My I am-ness will kill you. I am, be very afraid. And yet here, it's the other way around. See, when Jesus shows up, they're terrified because they know they're in the presence of something. They know they're in the presence of something from another plane. They know they're in the presence of the holy. And he says it, I am. But then he says, don't be afraid. And what does it say? Then they were willing to take him into the boat. And immediately the boat reached the shore where they were heading. This is utterly different than the Old Testament. the boat and he saves them. Something has happened. Jesus' infinite glory and God's infinite glory and power, because that's who Jesus is, is now for them, not against them. How do we explain this? Why wouldn't he say, I am, don't be afraid? Why wouldn't he say, I am, be very afraid? But he doesn't. What changed? I'll tell you what changed. Mark is a little easier. When the gospel writer Mark talks about this, he makes it even a little clearer. But you know, when Jesus is in a boat, filled with terrified sailors in a storm, and he saves them, who does that remind you of? If you are steeped in the Old Testament, if you're steeped in the Old Testament scriptures, if you knew the Hebrew scriptures inside out, who does that remind you of? Sailors scared in a storm and suddenly being delivered. Jonah. In the Old Testament, Jonah was a prophet. God tells him to go to Nineveh. Jonah disobeys God, gets in a boat filled with sailors, goes out to sea, trying to get away from God, and a huge storm comes up, and it terrifies the sailors. Why? The storm is the storm that Jonah deserves. And the way in which they're delivered is Jonah says, I'm the one who deserves the punishment. Throw me into the storm. And they throw him into the storm, and the sailors are saved. Do you realize that Jesus says, he's the ultimate Jonah? He says, a greater than Jonah is here. He says in the book, in Matthew, he says, I'm the ultimate Jonah. What can that mean? Here's what it means. The storms of this world, literal storms and all the other storms. They really are here because we have turned away from God. That's what the book of Genesis says. It's the consequences of our turning from God, trying to be our own saviors and lords. The whole world doesn't work. Those storms, the brokenness of creation is something we've brought about. Jesus did not deserve it, but he's the ultimate Jonah in what? The reason why he can save us from these storms, and eventually he's going to end all storms. It's going to be a new heavens and new earth, no more suffering, no more death, no more tears. He's going to be able to save us from storms because he was thrown into the ultimate storm. He's the ultimate Jonah. He bowed his head into the storm of divine justice and wrath on our sin so that we could have peace with God. Reconciliation. Now, if you understand that, do you know that he did that for you? See, if he did that for you, if he took the ultimate storm, do you think he's going to abandon you in the storm that you're in right now? Never. And that's how, if you know he did that for you, you'll be able to handle storms. You'll be able to look over the edge of the boat, and you'll be able to sing a John Newton hymn, which we don't sing, but he wrote it. His love in time past forbids me to think. He'll leave me at last in troubles to sink. By prayer, let me wrestle. Then he will perform. With Christ in my vessel, I smile at the storm. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you that you have sent us your son, and he's an uncontrollable force. He's not tame. He's not someone we can use for our own ends, but why would we want to when he has this purpose to love us, to counsel us, to save us, to bring us to shore, to bring us to shore. We ask, Lord, that you would help us to trust him, and especially trust him in storms, and obey him unconditionally. But most of all, believe in him that we might have eternal life and reconciliation with you. And we pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
