TITLE: The Promise of David
SCRIPTURE: 2 Samuel 7:4-19; 25-27
TOPICS: Hope Understanding the Gospel Jesus' Birth
SERIES: The Gospel According to David
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/the-promise-of-david/

============================================================

in 2 Samuel chapter 7, verses 4 through 19 and 25 through 27. But that same night, the word of the Lord came to Nathan. Go and tell my servant David, thus says the Lord, Would you build me a house to dwell in? I have not lived in a house since the day I brought up the people of Israel from Egypt to this day, but I have been moving about in a tent for my dwelling. In all places where I have moved with all the people of Israel, did I speak a word with any of the judges of Israel whom I commanded to shepherd my people Israel, saying, Why have you not built me a house of cedar? Now, therefore, thus you shall say to my servant David, Thus says the Lord of hosts, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, that you should be prince over my people Israel. And I have been with you wherever you went and have cut off all your enemies from before you. And I will make for you a great name, like the name of the great ones of the earth. And I will appoint a place for my people Israel and will plant them, so that they may dwell in their own place and be disturbed no more. And violent men shall afflict them no more, as formerly from the time that I appointed judges over my people Israel. And I will give you rest from all your enemies. Moreover, the Lord declares to you that the Lord will make you a house. When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a son. When he commits iniquity, I will discipline him with the rod of men, with the stripes of the sons of men. But my steadfast love will not depart from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away from before you. And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure forever before me. Your throne shall be established forever. In accordance with all these words, and in accordance with all this vision, Nathan spoke to David. Then King David went in and sat before the Lord and said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that you have brought me thus far? And yet this was a small thing in your eyes, O Lord God. You have spoken also of your servant's house for a great while to come, and this is instruction for mankind, O Lord God. And now, O Lord God, confirm forever the word that you have spoken concerning your servant and concerning his house, and do as you have spoken. And your name will be magnified forever, saying, The Lord of hosts is God over Israel, and the house of your servant David will be established before you. For you, O Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have made this revelation to your servant, saying, I will build you a house. Therefore, your servant has found courage to pray this prayer to you. This is the word of the Lord. All through the songs about Christmas, all through the stories about the birth of Jesus, all through the narratives in the scripture that have to do with the birth of Jesus, you'll see the name David all the time. Very, very beginning of Matthew chapter 1, verse 1, the beginning of the account of the birth of Jesus, it says, This is the record of Jesus, Son of David. First thing, Son of David. Or when the angels announced the birth of Jesus, of course, they said, Unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior. The gospel writers are telling us that unless you understand David, you won't understand Jesus. Unless you understand the story of David, you won't understand the meaning of the birth of Jesus. It's pretty strong. And especially, you won't understand Jesus unless you understand this particular incident that's been read to you from David's life. What do we see about this incident? It's very interesting. It starts at the top of the chapter, which we didn't read, and it's in chapter 7, verse 1. It goes like this. Now, when the king lived in his house and the Lord had given him rest from all his surrounding enemies, the king said to Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells in a tent. And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in your heart, for the Lord is with you. Now, what's going on here? David, we were told, was getting rest from his surrounding enemies. Now, Israel had been in bondage. Israel had been... years, centuries. The Philistines and the Midianites and various other powers around, surrounding enemies, would come in and oppress and exploit the Israelites. And David, the second king, was beginning to get military success. He was beginning to stabilize the political, economic, civil environment, and things were looking up for Israel as a nation. And he was successful, and he now had a house with cedar paneling, which was incredibly beautiful, incredibly fragrant, and incredibly expensive. And he calls Nathan the prophet to him and says, it's not right that I should be living in a house while the Lord is living in the tabernacle, a tent. A moldy old tent that used to go around with us when we were homeless wanderers in the wilderness. Just imagine, by the way, it's been…this thing…the tabernacle will be hundreds of years old, and it is made…it is a tent. It must have been rather moldy by now, or maybe threadbare or something like that. And so David says, listen, I want to build God a house, a temple. And what does Nathan do? Nathan is like a lot of ministers. If, you know, some wealthy person comes and says to the minister, I want to make a huge donation to the ministry, what does the minister say? Go and do all that is in your heart, for the Lord is with you. I mean, Nathan just said, well, of course, it makes perfect sense. You've got all this money, and you want to build a temple? It sounds like a great idea. Verse 4, but that night God came to Nathan and said, no, I don't want David to build me a temple. Why not? There's two reasons given in the text. The first reason is the incarnational principle. Now, you see that in verse 6 and 7, where God says, listen, in all the years did I ever ask anybody for a temple? Did I ever ask anybody for a house? No, and here's the reason why. I am the kind of God who actually lives with my people. When my people were wandering, I wandered. What my people experience, I experience. If my people still do not have, they don't have fixedness and establishment and security, then I don't have it either. See, obviously David had begun to establish peace and prosperity and national security, but it still wasn't there for most of the people. And what God is saying is, I do not want to live like a king when my people still have needs. I'm going to live with my people. I will experience what my people experience. If my people are poor, I'm poor. If my people suffer, I suffer. The incarnational principle. It's amazing that a God would say something like this. And so the first reason is he's saying, things have not really gotten stabilized yet. I'm not ready to leave the tent. I'm not ready to be in a house yet. The second principle, though, is not the incarnational. It's the grace principle. And the grace principle is pretty interesting. In verse 8, God says to David, and it's fairly vivid, he says, I took you from the pasture, from following the sheep, that you should be prince over my people Israel. It's pretty vivid. You used to just follow sheep until I got a hold of you. You followed sheep, but now you lead men and women. Why? It's all because of me. He says, David, you're not doing anything for me. You only do things through me. It's by my sheer grace that you've got power. It's by my sheer grace you've got success. You will not build me a house. I will build you a house. Now, what's all that about? The reason it's significant, and it's extremely significant, is because in those times, in ancient times, we know from our own historical archaeological records, it was typical for a king who began to develop military success to build some god a huge temple. And when they built the god the temple, the priests of the god would come with an oracle saying, oh, the god says…so, for example, Thutmose, pharaoh of Egypt, built a temple for Amon-Re, the god Amon-Re. And then the god…the priests of the god Amon-Re came and said, Thutmose III, since you…actually, I got it right here out of the history books. Since you have built my dwelling place and you have outstripped all other kings in building my monuments, now I will establish your throne unto distant days. Sound familiar? We have one after another after another of examples of these where ancient kings, they'd build a god a house, and then the god would establish the king's power and establish the king's reign and they'd establish the king's victories. Now, David's about to do the same thing. And what is God saying? It's radical. God is saying what the average person in New York City thinks is wrong. All religions are not alike. to worship the same God. He says, God says, every other religion works on the principle, you build God a house, then God will bless you. You do something for God, then God will bless you. But I'm a God of sheer grace. I build you a house. You don't build me a house, says God. Utterly different. In every other religion, every other religion, divine blessing is achieved conditionally. But with the God of the Bible, divine blessing is received unconditionally. God is saying, is I'm utterly unlike every other one of the so-called gods. And my religion is not just a little different, but it's utterly opposed to what every other religion tells you about how you approach God. The grace principle, he's saying, if I let you, after all your military victories, build me a house, not only will all the people, but you will slip into the belief that I am like all the other gods, that our religion is like all the religions and all religions are not alike. That's what God is saying. And Eugene Peterson puts it beautifully in a comment on this text. He says, do you know what I think? I think that David was just about to cross over a line from being full of God to being full of himself. David, riding the crest of great acclaim, having decisively defeated the opposition, united God's people and captured the allegiance of all Israel. He was steady with success, and he'd begun to think he could do God a favor. But if David continues to develop along these lines, he will be ruined as a representative of God's kingdom. If any of us, this is Eugene Peterson, if any of us develop an identity in which God and God's grace is less important to who we are than our own action and performance, our ability to represent God's kingdom is utterly ruined. So for the principle of the incarnation, the incarnational principle and the grace principle, God says, I don't want you to build me a temple. Not you, not now. Well, that leads us to a question or two. If you're reading along, this is just amazing. God says, I'm absolutely different than all the other gods. The way you approach me is completely different than the way every other religion tells you to approach God. You follow them, and you'll never find me. So how could God be a God of grace? How could any God just lavish grace on people? Don't build me a house. Don't do anything for me. I will build you a house. How can God just do that for people, regardless of their sin? The answer is in God's counter-promise. You see, David promised, and God says no. And sometimes God just shuts doors. You don't understand why. In this case, God sent Nathan the prophet to explain why. Most of us don't get a Nathan the prophet. He just shuts the doors, but you trust him. He's got reasons, great reasons. But after he shuts the door, he then comes back with a counter-promise. And what's the counter-promise? Well, it tells us everything. The counter-promise is, you will not build me a house. I will build you a house. Now, when God, pardon me, when David talks to God about a house, I'll build you a house, he's talking about a building, a literal building. But when God talks to David about building him a house, he's not talking about a building, obviously. He's talking about a dynasty. And he says here, I promise to make your descendants a dynastic kingship. I promise to make your descendants a dynastic kingship. And I will so graciously and unconditionally commit myself to them, regardless of their merit, regardless of their pedigree. I will so graciously and unconditionally commit myself to them that neither death, sin, nor time will break my commitment. And he shows why. Look, verse 12 and 13, not death. Death won't stop my commitment to your descendants. Because even when you die, it doesn't matter. I'll still be committed. Then 1415 talks about sin. He says, some of your descendants, especially like Solomon, the one who's going to build me the house, unlike you, and your other descendants, many of them will be sinful. Some of them will commit iniquity in spite of all their sin. In fact, some of them really were incredibly wicked. In spite of all that, he says, that won't stop my commitment. I will still continue to be utterly committed to you. So death won't stop it, and sin won't stop it. But most amazingly of all, even time cannot condition it. Because in verse 16, you have actually the key verse of the whole passage. He says, and your house... forever. And is that just hyperbole? Is that just, you know, rhetorical flourish? You know, no, because there's no doubt that over the years, people who would serve in a very servile way come before great kings were always talking about, oh, king, may you live forever. You know, of course, that's the way slaves talk to kings who you're trying to, you know, impress. But this is God talking to a human being. God wouldn't do this. And He says it twice to make sure you know He's not just spouting. He's not just making rhetorical flourishes. He says, your house and your kingdom will be made sure forever. Your throne will be established forever. Now, how can that be? That's impossible unless it's a rhetorical flourish. But it's not. Because one of His descendants, God is saying, will therefore not simply have a kingdom, but the kingdom. Now, what do I mean by the kingdom? The eternal kingdom. What do we mean by that? Well, the plot line of the Bible again. What's the Bible say? The Bible says that God began the world in paradise. He created the world to be a paradise. But when we turned from Him, everything in the world blew apart. Everything fell apart. That's why we have war. That's why we have disease. That's why we have death. That's why we have sickness. That's why we have natural disasters. That's why we have racism. That's why we have conflict. That's why we have unhappiness in our hearts. Everything fell apart. Well, what will heal it? Listen to the Psalms. Let me give you a very famous one. Have you ever thought of the implication of it? Psalm 96, let the heavens be glad, let the earth rejoice, let the sea roar and all that fills it, let the fields exult and all that's within them. Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before the Lord, for He comes to rule the earth. When the Lord rules, when the King comes back, when the true King comes back, the trees will sing and dance. You say, well, trees can't sing and dance. Trees rustle a little bit, but they can't sing and dance on a windy day, you know. But that's because they're just shadows of what they were created to be. They're just shadows of what they can be. They're just shadows of what they will be. Because the true kingship of the Lord, the true King returning, makes everything a paradise again, more than a paradise. Because I don't think the trees sang for joy in Eden. It's the kingship that will make you, everything you were meant to be, make you blossom, all the hidden potentialities. And you see, if under the true kingship, if under the eternal returning King, the trees sing and dance, what will you and I be able to do? I mean, if the trees can sing and dance, and they're just shadows of what they are going to be, so are you. So am I. What David is saying is being told, one of your descendants will not just be a king, but the king. Will not just have a kingdom, but the eternal kingdom, the kingdom that will heal everything. And this is the answer to all the riddles. This is what draws it all together. Father, the baby born in a manger was not just a savior, but the Davidic king. He was a Davidic child, and he literally overcame death when he rose triumphant over the grave. He literally overcame sin when he died on the cross and paid the debt the human race owed to justice. And he literally, of course, triumphs over time because he's not just the son of David. The baby born in the manger is not just the son of David. He's the son of God. And therefore, as George Friedrich Handel has said so memorably, he shall reign forever and ever. Hallelujah. And Jesus is the only one who really fulfills the incarnational principle, right? You know, the idea that God says, well, you know, I don't want to be in a house. I want to be in a people and I want to wander with my people. And you say, oh, come on. Just because the worship of God is in a tent doesn't mean that God is experiencing what his people are experiencing, that God is poor when his people are poor. No, it was just a symbol. But here's what it is a symbol of. A God who talks like this, a God who makes promises like this, has to eventually become the one who literally was poor, the one who literally was suffered, the one who literally was killed, the one who literally wandered, who said, foxes have holes, birds have nests, and the Son of Man has no place to lay his head. Jesus fulfills the incarnational principle. Jesus fulfills the promise of a king whose throne endures forever. And Jesus fulfills the grace principle. How can God just lavish grace? other religion says, I build you a house, then God blesses. But Christianity is, God builds you a house, and then he blesses you on top of it. Oh my gosh! Because every other religion says, you give God a good record, then God owes you blessing, etc. But Christianity says, God gives you a perfect record through Jesus Christ, who lived the life you should have lived and died the death you should have died. God gives you a perfect record through Jesus Christ, and then you live for him. And you don't live for him the way in religion you have to live for him. It's going to be really hard to do all these good things. It's the only way I'm going to get to heaven. Instead, not you give him a record, but God gives you a perfect record, and now you live for him in joy, in gratitude, in beauty, and attraction. Utterly different than religion, absolutely different from religion. Every other religion, that's what God says, and in Jesus Christ we see why. That's what the baby born in the manger means. A Davidic king, triumphant over death, triumphant over sin, triumphant over time itself, fulfilling the incarnation principle powerfully, literally, fulfilling the grace principle powerfully, literally, that's what it means. Now, what does it mean, though, practically to you and me? That Jesus is not just a Savior. You know, the text don't say he's just a Savior. It says he's a king. He's the son of David, which means he's not just a Savior, but he is the eternal king. What difference does that make? Quite a lot. Let me give you a quick list. Practical, quick, but here it is. First of all, the kingship of Jesus means hope, hope for the world. What do I mean by that? If Jesus was simply a Savior, then Christianity would just be an individual thing, and our future would be that by giving our lives to Christ, he forgives our sins, and then our individual souls are saved out of the material world someday. But if Jesus Christ is also the king, then the future is not our individual souls leaving the material world. The ultimate future is the eternal heavenly kingdom coming down into the material world to transform it and renew it, which means that Christian salvation is not just an individual thing. It's not just, I'm a sinner, and I receive Christ, he forgives me, and then I go to heaven. It's also a corporate thing. Christian salvation is the world was created, it is fallen and broken, but it's going to be redeemed, and it's going to be utterly restored, which means we do individual renewal. We get converted. We're born again. You know, our identities are transformed. We've been talking about that all fall. But we also do corporate renewal, community renewal. We rehab houses. We care for the poor. We mend bodies. Because Jesus is not just a Savior, then it would be an individualistic soul salvation. He's the king. What do kings do? They get rest for their people. They bring justice. They bring peace. They bring prosperity. A king comes back and makes his place a good place to live. Jesus is a king. So our salvation is not just individualistic. It's also got a corporate side. It's not just, you know, individual conversion, but it's also renewing the world. It's also working for justice because there's hope now for the world. See? So first of all, Jesus Christ being the king means hope. Number two, Jesus Christ being the king means service. Service, the incarnation, at Christmas means the one who was rich became poor. The one who didn't just live in a house but lived in heaven came down amongst his people. And J.I. Packer has a really hard-hitting famous quote about what the meaning of Christmas is in his old famous book, The Knowing God. He says, We talk glibly of the Christmas spirit, rarely meaning more by this than sentimental feeling, especially for family at holidays. But the Christmas spirit is not the spirit of Christians, alas, there are many, whose ambition in life seems limited to building up nice middle-class homes, making nice middle-class friends, bringing up their children in nice middle-class ways, and who leave the sub-middle-class parts of their community and world to get on by themselves. The Christmas spirit, rather, is the spirit of those who, like their master, live their whole lives on the principle of the one who became poor, that others might become rich. They spend, and they're spent, giving time, trouble, money, care, and concern to others, and not just the people like them, in whatever way there seems to be need. The kingdom of God means hope for the world. Thirdly, the kingdom of God means service. Thirdly, the kingdom of God means obedience. If Jesus is a king, it means you have to do what he says unconditionally, or you're not really obeying. You see, when you, if you say, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I've, I it means you have to do what he says unconditionally, or you're not really obeying. You see, if you say, I've often heard people say, I tried Christianity and it didn't work. Well, whatever they did, there was no obedience in there, and here's why. When you say, I tried Christianity and it didn't work, almost always that means there were some non-negotiable things I want in my life. I want happiness. I want health. I want to be married. I want to be this. I want to be that. And Christianity didn't give it to me. What that means is, I obeyed God if. I obeyed God conditionally, which is not obedience at all. That's not obeying God. That's using God. You're serving something. Everybody serves something. Everybody has a non-negotiable. But when you say, I tried Christianity and it didn't work for me. I'll serve if. I'll obey if. Unless you drop the ifs, you're not obeying at all, at all. You're still on the throne of your life. You're still holding on. You see, either you're on the throne of your life or something else more likely is on the throne of your life and not him. Listen, my friends, the hardest thing to give is in. The hardest thing to give Jesus is in. He did the impossible for you, marched right into hell. All he's asking you to do is to do some difficult things. If he's the king, that means you serve him even if it's not working for you. You serve him even if it's just not…even if things don't seem to be paying off. You must obey him unconditionally. Number four, the kingdom of Jesus means trust. It means hope. It means service. It means obedience. It means trust. What do I mean by trust? Martin Luther understood that worry was a form of ruling the world instead of letting God do it. In other words, when you're really worried, you're just really worried. You know what that means? You know exactly how the world needs to go. You know exactly how history has to go, and you're sure God isn't going to get it right. The only way you could possibly be frozen with anxiety and worry is because if you are ruling the world, which you just happen not to be, but you know exactly how everything has to go, how do you know? How do you know? See, Martin Luther had a friend named Philip Melanchthon, and Philip was a terrible worrier. And Martin Luther used to come up to him and put his hands on Philip's shoulder and not say, Philip, stop worrying. He had a little better, more theological way to put it. He said, let Philip cease to rule the world. Stop trying to rule the world, Philip, and you'll stop worrying. You can't worry and let God be the king. They just don't go together. So if Jesus is the king, there's hope for the world. It means service. It means obedience. It means trust. It means expectation. One of the great things about the prayer at the end, which we don't have time to go into. David's prayer, if you look at it carefully, you'll see all he's doing is what? He's simply saying, Lord, I don't think I can live without your help in awareness of all you have just promised. I'm afraid I can't practice it. I'm afraid I can't live consistently with it. He's not asking for anything. He's saying, let me live consistently with the incredible promises here. If he's the king, he's going to do great things in your life. If he's the king, he's promised to do great things in your life. And John Newton has a great hymn, Thou art coming to a king. Large petitions with thee bring, for his grace and power are such. None can ever ask too much. Thou art coming to a king. If you're coming to a king, large petitions with thee bring. So expect. And lastly, if Jesus Christ is the king, it means hope. It means service. It means obedience. It means trust. It means expect big things, but it also means joy. The last of the three Lord of the Rings movies is going to come out. It's called what? Return of the King. And it's going to probably make $400 million. And the reason it's going to make all that money is because it's going to play on the fact that we get really drawn in as human beings into stories of heroes slaying dragons and great kings that come back and put everything right. But there's two ways to watch a movie like that. The one way is you go in there, and people are going to go in. They're going to go in. Why are they going to go in? Because it makes them feel like good will triumph. There is a point to things, right? It'll make them feel that way when they're in there, but when they walk out, their worldview will take over. And that is, you know, who's to say what is right and wrong, and everything is relative? When they're in there, they will feel joy for a while, for a moment. There's another way to watch the movie. I found a very interesting webpage, and it's a sort of message board and discussion list. page it says it's for middle-aged women with teenage children who love Tolkien. And one of the women started a little message thread called Tolkien and Christianity. She's a Christian. And she said, you know, I've gotten to know you so well over the years, and I hope nobody's offended by this, and I love you all, but I just want to know, do you see the Christian stuff in Tolkien? And almost everybody says, no, we're not offended, but we really don't see it. And so what helps you? How does Christianity relate to you as you read this? And here's what she wrote. It's perfect. She says, I think the reason I find this so fascinating is because of the deeply seated and frantic hunger I have inside that these stories be somehow true. It's a yearning I suspect many of you share. It's as though I'm watching the shadows move sometimes, playing their parts against the screen, thrilling me with the story, and yet hurting me so terribly because they're just shadows, as ephemeral as time. But once I detected that there was a real person behind all the shadows, a character who is Frodo, Sam, and Aragorn distilled all into one, and as human and as intense and as romantic and as honorable as any, it eased a desperate sorrow that nothing else in the world can. What's the desperate sorrow? That somehow this is true. And when she realized who Jesus was, the true King, she realized it is. And as a result, instead of going into that movie and getting a joy for a moment about somehow the world has meaning and there's a point to everything, and walking out and losing it, the gospel infuses joy into the very depths of your being as something permanent. It will grow and grow and grow until a billion years from now it'll make you all a burning joy and strength. He's the King. Act in accordance with it. Practice it. Be different because of it. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for this promise that Jesus is not just simply a Savior born in the manger. He is the King. He is the Davidic King. He is the one, the eternal King, who's going to put everything right. That changes everything right. That changes everything. Give us the hope. Make us servants. Humble us into obedience. Comfort us into trust. Stimulate us with expectations and infuse us with joy because your Son, Jesus Christ, was born. In Jesus' name we pray. Amen.
