TITLE: Three Models of Masculinity
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/three-models-of-masculinity/

============================================================

Our Father, I thank you that you're a God who decided in your wisdom to create human beings and create them in two modalities, male and female. We pray that you'd help us understand better what you meant us to be as one of those modes. We thank you that your Son is not just a model for us in our humanity, but also a model for us in our masculinity. And we ask that you'd enlighten us to those features tonight, for we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen. Here we go. I want to give you a talk tonight that, I cannot tell if this is going to be, this could be pretty short. I hope so, because it'll be a lot easier for you to respond to it. The name of the talk is, or the subject of the talk, came from reading all the little notes that you wrote to me. Last time, a lot of people wrote a lot of, I mean, some of you probably weren't here at all. A lot of you who were here last time aren't here now. That's normal. But afterwards, there was a number of people that talked to me and wrote me letters, little notes, and said, here's the sort of thing that I need to wrestle with. So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to give you a talk that I told Jim to entitle, Three Models of Masculinity. Three Models. And you've got to realize that this is all oversimplified. It has to be. You know why? Because it would be so boring if it wasn't. You came here and you want to hear a talk. And you, you know, you basically got an attention span of somewhere between 20 and 40 minutes. And you know that I'm not going to be able to say anything in a detailed way. You know this is going to be oversimplified. So, I don't want anybody to complain afterwards saying, well, this is oversimplified. Of course it's oversimplified. It wouldn't be interesting if it wasn't oversimplified. And you wouldn't have time. Now, I could give you a reading list of 3,000 pages. We could come here four hours, you know, a week for the next 16 weeks. And then nobody would accuse us of being oversimplifying things. But that's not what we're doing. We're going to do it this way. And so, let's talk about it this way. Three Models of Masculinity. The three models are the pagan model, the modern model, and the Christian model. And I'm going to do it in this order. The pagan model, the modern model, and then the Christian model in that order. Now, let's start with paganism. Now, first of all, you've got to for a moment try to comb out of your mind the negative, the necessarily negative connotations of the word pagan. When we think of the word pagan today, we usually mean debauched, you know, or something tremendously vile or primitive. But that's, when I talk about paganism, I mean it's the old worldview. In some ways, it's older than the Christian worldview, that's for sure. Not older than the biblical one, but, of course, which goes back to Adam. But I'm saying that as a reigning philosophy or worldview, paganism is really very, very old. And paganism was the idea that everything's divine. That there's water gods, and there's mountain gods, and there's forest gods, and everything, everything is divine. And witchcraft has come from paganism. In fact, a lot of the Eastern religions, like Buddhism, are just much later derivatives of this idea that the divine is a force in everything. And that's what I mean by paganism. Also, paganism was dualistic, which meant they believed that there was, that all of reality had a kind of equal opposite sides of good and evil, always warring against one another. And yet, the yin and the yang, you know, the good and the evil, that's the old dualism, runs right through all of us. And therefore, we all participate in that. There's always a kind of a good and an evil side, and everything is divine. Now, in the old paganism, the old pagan idea of manhood and masculinity stressed the fierceness of being a warrior and being a hunter. And so, you see, it was recognized that women were interdependent in paganism, but men were independent. So, there was always, in the life of a man, in the old pagan religion and pagan worldview, there was always a period of time or a spot in a young man's life in which he was taken away from the women. And he was taken away from his, certainly from his mother, so he didn't have to listen to her anymore or obey her. He was brought out and usually was sent out into a battle or sent out to hunt, was sent out into a kind of adventure in which he was on his own. And in the process was almost always hurt somehow, wounded or beaten up or was always put in some sort of danger. And when he'd gone through that ordeal, he was considered to be a man, and he was welcomed into a fellowship of other men who had taken away from his own. a sense, through the same kind of battles. And so that was the old paganism. The old pagan idea was fierceness, the warrior, the hunter, independent. And the emphasis was on fierceness. And the old kind of heroism, the old pagan hero, was what we would today call a barbarian. Now, I know for a minute when I talk to you about these kinds of folks, I want you to see there's a big difference between the old pagan heroism and the Middle Age or the medieval Christian heroism. But for a minute, let's think about the old pagans. When you read Homer, for example, you read the Iliad and the Odyssey, and you look at his heroes, it's astonishing how they act. Achilles, one of the great heroes. Achilles, he was a hero. Homer put him forth as somebody who clearly was supposed to be admired. When you read him, you see how incredibly cruel and violent and barbaric he was. When his enemies would plead for mercy, he'd smile and he'd kill them even as they were asking for mercy. Or he might capture them and take them home so he could kill them at his leisure. And it was very clear when you read Homer that these people had no concept of the idea that a brave warrior was supposed to be modest and merciful. There was no concept of that at all. And when we read it, it's amazing to us to imagine that the poets really believed that these people were heroes, people we should admire. Look at how they treat their enemies. Look how they take them, in a sense, and take the children of the places and dash their heads against the rocks and so forth. And these are the heroes. You take a look at Attila the Hun and read about Attila the Hun, and what little we know is that he so enjoyed watching people die that when he would execute people or slay people, his eyes and face would quiver with joy. That's the old concept of a man. Somebody who's pretty violent. Even the Romans, when they would defeat a gallant enemy, they would march them through a town for show and then put them in a cellar and slit their throats at night. The idea that a real man is not only brave, but also modest and humble and tenderhearted and merciful was absolutely unknown to the old pagan idea of masculinity. Totally and absolutely unknown. C.S. Lewis was in World War I. He's an English author. And he says what was interesting, and I've heard this from other people, and in a sense, even today, we've even got a series of films about this phenomenon. He says, in World War I, and he was a soldier on the front in World War I, the people, the men who were the bravest soldiers, the men who were the ones that always you wanted to have on your patrol, the men who took the risks and who were always able to get the rest of the normal people who were much more timid about things out of a tough spot. He says they were our heroes. They were the people we all wanted. They were the people who came back and were decorated, and he said most of them could not function in normal society. In peacetime, they did not know how to get their problems solved through reason, through persuasion. He's all they knew how to do was sort of slap you. You know, that's all they knew how to do. And he says, and Lewis comes up and says, that actually is the old notion of heroism. It's natural heroism. It's the kind of masculinity that just grows rather naturally. And it's pretty violent. It's pretty tough. Or put it this way. It's hardness without any gentleness. It's fierceness without any tenderness. That was the pagan notion. When you read the old pagan myths, and you read the old pagan legends, and you see what they considered to be a hero, you see that there was a tremendous hardness and what we would call today a barbarism about them. Now let's jump and skip to the present. Let's skip over let's skip over the Christian ideal for a minute which came along next and skip to the present and then we've moved from paganism to modernity. Now, paganism believed that everything was divine. Modernity believes, modernism, you might say, the modern mindset believes that nothing is divine. Now, the modern mindset is pretty important for us to understand if we're going to see how it conceives of masculinity. Some people would say that modern thought really began with Immanuel Kant. Now, Kant comes along, German philosopher who never left town, practically, and who always got up at 5 a.m. in the morning and started to study. So people set their watches by when his light went on in his study. A very disciplined, rational person. reality into basically two parts. There was the part of reality that you could know about and the part of reality you really couldn't. He called it the phenomenal realm and the noumenal realm. And the phenomenal realm was the realm in which you could know things. And you can know things scientifically, things that can be observed empirically, things that can be observed as phenomenon through the senses. But the noumenal realm was the realm in which he put God. He put ultimate values, right and wrong. He put heaven and hell. He put the self. And he put the thing in itself, the ding on sich, the thing that the Greek philosophers used to always talk about. And he put all those things in there. He said, those are things that we really can't know anything about. We just can't. Nobody can know about them. You can only know about the things that we can taste, touch, see, hear, or smell. Now, Kant was probably a Christian. And he was doing his best to try to deal with the problem of the time. And the problem of the time was how, well, never mind, had to do with the place of reason in looking for knowledge. But today, what you've got because of Kant is this very, very, very fierce belief that you can't know anything about God or ultimate values or what's really right and wrong or about heaven or hell or any of those religious things. You can't know that at all. In fact, what's so funny about it is modern thought believes that no one should be dogmatic about religious issues, about morality. Nobody should be dogmatic because nobody can know. And therefore, nobody should be dogmatic. And yet, they're dogmatic about that. And they say, nobody should tell anybody else what to believe. But that's, what do you think that is? When you say, nobody should tell anybody else to believe, you're telling us what to believe. You're telling us to believe that nobody should tell anybody else what to believe. You see, you can't get around it. But nevertheless, that's another lecture. The point is, the modern thinking says there is nothing, there is nothing we can know about truth and right and wrong. Therefore, the individual conscience has to decide everything. And that means the highest law is the right of the individual to choose. And so, see, the modern age is actually an age of radical individualism. And in the modern age, we can't know right and wrong. We can't know truth or falsity. We can't know God or anything else. But one thing we do know is everybody has to be absolutely, the individual has to be absolutely free to choose. And nobody should be imposing any kind of higher law or reality or truth over an individual. The individual must not say, well, it doesn't fulfill me, but I know that I've got to be a husband or I've got to be a wife or I've got to be a citizen or I've got to be a Christian. And therefore, I have to sublimate my individual needs to this higher law. You see, Kant did away with that idea of a higher law. We can't know it. And the modern mindset says you can't know anything higher than the individual conscience. And therefore, the only thing that we know is important is that every individual has to be absolutely free and not oppressed. Not at all. And that's the reason why the modern way of thinking about things is sometimes, eventually Kantian thought has come down to this area of what's called deconstruction. Deconstruction said there's no right, there's no wrong, there's no truth, but there's power. And basically, there's just struggles for power, and the only thing we know is that nobody should be oppressing anybody else. Everybody has to be absolutely free to do whatever they feel is fit for them. So the only sins, in a sense, are saying they're sin. So the only sins are racism, sexism, and homophobia. Because as soon as you say, well, this particular kind of sexual morality is right, and this particular kind is wrong, that oppresses me. You mustn't do that. You mustn't do that. Now, the modern mindset, what does it do to masculinity and femininity? What does it do to masculinity? That's all our subject is tonight. Well, what it does is it completely, completely rejects the pagan notion of maleness. It completely rejects the notion that men are fierce, that men have a wildness about them, that men are the hunters and the warriors and the protectors, that men have anything particularly that belongs to them. And all the emphasis under modernity, of course, is to say that men and women, there should be no difference in their functions and their rights. So when a man and woman get together, they should both share everything. They both share work, they both share the child-rearing, the idea of the modern mindset, when it looks at the pagan mindset, is they see the barbaricness of the pagan mindset. Now, the problem with it. a lot about the pagan mindset that's terrible. And the old pagan understanding of masculinity definitely did not include modesty, vulnerability, or nurture. The modern mindset says so much of the violence in this whole world, so much of the violence is due to maleness. In fact, I was reading, here's a little quote I got out of the paper some months ago. Maleness is a or maybe the source of all the violence and all the oppression in the world. Men are not interested in relationships. They're only interested in power and money. All right? I mean, you've heard that and you've read that. And therefore, masculinity has actually been deconstructed under the modern mindset to say that there really is no such thing. Men have got to be as gentle and as nurturing as women and they've got to be as courageous as women. There can't be any differences. Everything's got to be shared. And so there's a sense in which the modern mindset is the exact opposite of the pagan mindset. The pagan model of masculinities is all hardness and no softness. The modern understanding of masculinity is really all softness and no hardness. The idea of war, the idea of hunting, the idea of protecting. In fact, the idea of heroism has almost been completely deconstructed by the modern mentality because a hero is someone who is standing for a cause, a cause that's more important than the individual. And there can't be such a thing in the modern mindset. There can't be such a thing. What is worth dying for? Huh? Under the modern mindset? And, you know, one of the things that bothers me a little bit is what happens if we really, if a Hitler does rise up again. When I watched the old World War II movies that were produced during World War II, in order to get people to deny themselves and to put, you know, God and country before their own needs, to sign up, to go off, to be killed in the name of democracy. See, and they had to do that in order to fight Hitler. They had to do that. They had, everybody, everybody had to pitch in and everybody had to ration and, and, and in a sense, people had to police themselves. They had to have the old understanding that there's higher rules and laws and needs than my own individual rights. And you watch the World War II movies and you see all that and you see the mentality that had to be fostered in America in order for them to deal with the tyrant. And I read, I look at those movies and I say, we would never be able to do that again. This country would be completely incapable of it. You, you, you look at those World War II movies and you just laugh. You laugh at them. Talking about God and country and, and the flag and fighting for mom. And all that stuff. And you laugh at it. And yet, you see what? If we would ever come up against a Hitler and laugh against that sort of thing, we would, we would be taken over. The modern mindset is against heroism. The modern mindset, in a sense, is against masculinity. It's all, you know, the man has to be soft but not hard. And the, uh, on the other hand, the pagan notion is you're hard but not soft. Now, before I get to the Christian, I want you to know that it's interesting to consider, in light of these two versions of masculinity, the new men's movement. The Robert Bly, the, the Iron John, you know, where's this, this, this thing. Iron John and the men's movement. It was pretty interesting to me to, to be doing some reading about it. Robert Bly, you know, is the, is the, sort of the leader of the movement. And he was on, uh, Bill Moyer's, uh, uh, PBS special called A Gathering for Men back in 1990. And let me say a couple of things. If any of you have been part of that movement, you gotta be, listen. Listen, I'm going to tell you what I know from reading Robert Bly. If you're, if you've been part of some local gathering that is connected somehow to this men's movement and you don't think that what I'm saying fits your little group of guys, that doesn't necessarily mean that I'm wrong. I'm just talking to you about what I see coming from the center, okay? It doesn't mean that your little group of guys might not be better than what I'm about to say, but I'm just telling you what I see from the center. Robert Bly has identified all the problems of the modern model of masculinity. He's done an excellent job. If you want to read a critique of it, you ought to get his stuff. He's great at that. Uh, for example, one of the things he points out is that the, he calls them, he calls modern mass, the modern masculinity model. He calls us the soft men. And he says, soft men are harmless. Soft men are very nurturing. Soft men are completely in touch with their feelings. Soft men wouldn't hurt a fly. Soft men are very good to their mothers. They never leave their mothers. And then they're very good to the lady that they're living with at the time. And they never leave that lady either. And they do everything she wants. And they're, and they're very nurturing. And by the way, he doesn't say it's all bad, but he says what's happened is the modern model of masculinity has completely destroyed the idea of the fierceness or the wildness or the heroic. today are very confused about who they are, which is, you know, it's true. Because we haven't been told by the modern mindset there's anything distinct about us a bit. Not one thing. And yet we all know we're distinct. We all know there's something different. And Robert Bly goes so far as to say, not only don't we like ourselves, but the women don't like us either. The women who have, in a sense, made us to be the sensitive men that we are, don't particularly like us either. So what he does is, Bly actually goes back to paganism. Now, it's not complete old paganism. It's a post-Kantian paganism. But it's still a paganism. What he does is, he goes back to the myths. He goes back to the myths. And he goes back to the Grimm's fairy tales, which go very far back. And he goes back to the Greek and the Roman myths and all these things. And he goes back and he says, we have got to see what these myths teach us. And he goes back to the pagan resources and he comes up with this. First of all, he says, men are wild. Men are independent. Men do not have the gift of interdependence. They have a need for on-their-own-ness. Got that? They have a need to be set out on their own. They have a need for independence and fierceness and wildness. And therefore, we're different. That's the first thing he says. And he says, you see that in all the old myths. But then secondly, and I find this really kind of interesting. He says, men need to help men become men. Women can't help men become men. He says, what we've been doing is we've been letting women tell us how to be men, but they don't know. And he says, if you look at the old pagan myths, if you look at all of the old pagan world cultures, you will see that young boys had to go to the men and had to be initiated into manhood through a group of men. And this is, Bly, by reading all the old myths and things, he comes up with four parts to the old initiation procedure. And he says that initiation procedure was, number one, separate from your mother. Come away from your mother. So you're going through an initiation period so that you're taken away from the women and you come in with the men and you no longer have to obey the women. Secondly, he says, they're thrust out into some kind of new reality. They're put into some sort of adventure. It might mean having to go out and hunt with nothing but a bow and arrow for like two weeks and they have to live off the land. Or it might mean something more. It might mean some kind of ordeal or ritual in which they're cut in some way or they bleed in some way. But the point is, they're taken away from the women, number one. Number two, they're set out on some adventure on their own to deal with a new reality. Thirdly, they're hurt. They're beaten up. They're wounded. They're scarred. Something happens along the way. And then fourthly, they are then welcomed into a fellowship of men who have been through the same thing. Separation, adventure, you might say, wounding, and being brought into a fellowship of men who have been through it and who can help them through it and can help the young boy become a man and deal with what it means to be facing the world on your own. Now, what's interesting about this, as Christians, what are we supposed to make of all this? And the answer is that Christians can... Christians, when it comes to a person who's making great criticisms of the modern masculine model, but from a different platform than us, a pagan platform, a neo-pagan platform, what we have to do is we have to say he's a co-critic with us. We can really enjoy and appreciate his critique of the modern masculinity movement, but he's not an ally. See, what's good about it is he's pointing out the fact that, hey, guess what? Modernity's wrong. There's a difference between us and the women. And he's also right in saying that men have got to get together to talk to men about being men, that we can't listen to the women on how to be a man. And he's right in all those things. The problem, of course, is that he has been very careful to build everything on a dualistic old pagan base. A lot of the people around him who have really moved him along are Jungian psychologists. And they are really careful to never talk about God or right or wrong. In fact, Robert Bly does not like the evangelicals at all, and he doesn't like the Christian church because he thinks the Christian church won't really let men be fierce and wild. He thinks the Christian church feminizes them. And he thinks so because the Christian church is always talking about what's right and wrong. For example, Bly would really have none of the traditional Christian sexual morality. Men have got to be fierce. They've got to be able to go out and sow their wild oats and so forth. And this is the reason why last week in the Village Voice there was a cover article. the men's movement was because it's pagan. The first thing they say, and they say, look, a lot of us here and the radical left don't, you know, are nervous about this idea of men getting together to talk about being men. You know, it sounds like they're out in the woods burning crosses and they're getting ready to, you know, do oppressive things. But what's great about the men's movement is they never talk about God. That's what I said. They only talk about the gods, small g. They'd say there's no real answers. You see, this is sort of a neo, it's pagan, but it's a post-Kantian paganism. Nevertheless, the problem is that what Robert Bly does by getting back to the old paganism is in a sense, it's in some ways it's better than the modern masculinity, but in other ways, there's a great danger. And the danger is this. Do we really want to go back to Achilles? Do we really want to go back to the Romans and Attila the Hun? Paganism is dualistic. That means it believes in a yin and yang. It believes that evil and good are equal opposite realities. Very different than the Christian notion. The Christian notion is that the only ultimate reality is God who is good, and evil is a temporary and defeated enemy. In dualism, they're both there and they're both in all of us and they actually have to embrace it. Dualism always says that the bad in you, in a sense, is something you have to accept. It's part of you. And therefore, Robert Bly's men's movement cannot make a distinction between true masculinity and sinful masculinity. And even though right now we're not in any danger of this because we're coming out of modern maleness into this pagan maleness, the real problem is where do you stop? Do you get back to Achilles? Do you want to be barbarians? What does it mean to be fierce and wild? And how can you say, well, the Christian church can't tame us. That makes us feminine. Are you really trying to say that if you obey the law of God, like thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not steal, do you really want to go back to burning villages and raping women? I mean, that was the heroic model. That's natural heroism. The trouble with the men's movement is they won't make any distinction between true masculinity and barbarianism and sinful masculinity. They won't make oppression. So the problem is the pagan view of masculinity shows that there's no way to distinguish between true and evil masculinity. The modern view won't even admit there is such a thing as masculinity. Well, what's the Christian view? Now, the Christian view came along in the Middle Ages, and it was rejected along with Christianity by the modern world. And that's one of the reasons why in most people's minds, in fact, probably in your mind, when you think of the heroes of old, you have a tendency to think of King Arthur and Sir Lancelot, and, you know, Achilles and Odysseus and Ulysses and all those guys is all the same kind of heroes. They're not. There is a huge difference between Achilles and between Sir Lancelot. Listen, the Christian ideal of manhood was called chivalry. Unfortunately, the word chivalry today means almost nothing good. But anyway, the whole idea of the Christian, the Christian idea of the night in the Middle Ages, the Christian idea of masculinity and manhood was incredibly different, huge difference between King Arthur and Lancelot and, say, Achilles and Ulysses and the Romans and Hercules and those people. Extremely different. And if you want to see the difference, when in the death of Arthur, Mort de Arthur, that famous old ballad about King Arthur, when Lancelot is lying there dead, one of his co-knights, Sir Ector, looks at him and says, Thou wert the meekest man that ever ate in a hall with ladies, but thou wert the sternest knight that ever put a spear into the breast of thy mortal foe. Now, the Christian understanding of masculinity is this. Under sin, men will either be hard or soft. They will either be fierce or tender. They will either be barbarians or wimps. They will either be warriors or poets, but they will never, ever be able. The Christian view is they will, without the grace of God, you will never be able to combine those two things. Ever. You'll either be a pagan man or you'll be a modern man. You'll either be a barbarian or you'll be a wimp. Only the grace of God can keep those two things together. But that was the ideal of medieval manhood. That's the reason why, for example, if you really read some of the old Arthurian legends, you'll see that what really happened, and by the way, this is the historic basis of it. The Arthurian legends grew up out of a time in... people who eventually lost Britain, and now are pretty much represented in the Welsh and in some of the Scots, and in some of the Irish, anyway. But you see, the older British, back in the 6th century, were Christians. When the Angles and the Saxons came and invaded Britain, and eventually won, hence the name Anglo-Saxon, but the Angles and the Saxons were Germanic, and they were blonde and blue-eyed, but they were pagans. They had the old pagan understanding of heroism, whereas the Christians had the Christian understanding of chivalry, and if you read those old legends, and you realize it came out of a period of time in which you didn't just have a battle between the Germanic ones trying to come and take over Britain from the British, but it was also a battle between two different kinds of masculinity. The one kind of masculinity was the older Achilles kind of masculinity, and when you beat your enemy, you wanted the person to scream for mercy, so you could cut off his head in the middle of a scream, and laugh. And you see, the women couldn't do that, and you could, that's what made you a man. But the medieval, the Christian understanding of chivalry was that you were not warlike, but you were a tremendous warrior, that you could beat anybody single-handed, but once you beat them, you showed modesty and mercy. You treated your foe as if your foe was a better man than you. And that's the reason why the Christian idea of masculinity that came up out of the medieval times was a Christian knight, a Christian man, was familiar with the sight of blood and guts and lopped-off limbs, and he was able to move into that world without any flinching, without his stomach turned at all. He was able to get in there, and he could live in that, and he could beat people in that. He could win. But on the other hand, remember what Sir Ector said to Sir Lancelot? You were the sternest knight that ever put a spear into the breast of your mortal foe, and you were also the meekest man that ever ate in a hall with ladies. The medieval understanding of masculinity was at the very same time, a knight, a man, was someone who was almost maiden-like. He could sit down with the women and talk up a storm with them. He would compose poetry. He had a tremendously strong aesthetic sense, and he was modest, and he was humble, and he was unobtrusive. And you have all sorts of examples of that. It means that when you defeated your foe, you showed him mercy and modesty, and in every way treated him like a gentleman. The word gentleman originally came out of the Christian chivalric tradition. It meant that you never wanted to go to battle, that you absolutely loathed the idea of war. You were not warlike, but in war, you were invincible. So, for example, there's a place in the old Arthurian legends where Lancelot has just beaten every knight on the field in a tournament. And he is declared to be the greatest knight on the face of the earth. And when he's declared to be the greatest knight on the face of the earth, it says, he broke into sobs and tears, and he cried like a child had been beaten. Why? Because he is the greatest knight on the face of the earth. And the greatest knight on the face of the earth is so modest and so humble that he blushes when he's told that he is the greatest knight on the face of the earth. He can hardly stand it. He's so embarrassed. That is not Achilles. That is not Attila the Hun. That is not at all like the old pagan heroes. This is a completely different kind of critter. However, if you read really carefully and see, the Christian understanding of masculinity was not the old pagan view that was all hardness and no softness, or the modern view, which is all softness and no hardness. And this was not an in-between. The Christian man, the Christian hero, was not a kind of halfway house between fierceness and gentleness. He was fierce to the nth degree, and he was gentle to the nth degree. At the same time, now this is very, listen to, look at these three models. The modern model is unnatural and impossible. It's unnatural because we know that we're, we know there's a wildness about us. We know there's an independence about us. We know we're different. We're not as soft and as gentle and nurturing as we're supposed to be. It's impossible and it's unnatural. When I say it's impossible, it means eventually we're not going to like ourselves if we try to stick up with it, but at the same time, the women aren't going to like us either. But then secondly, the pagan notion, I said, both possible and natural. It's natural. When you seek to just follow your instincts as a man, you will find yourself being independent and not vulnerable. You will find yourself being tremendously competitive. You will find yourself being in total control, you might say, of your emotions. Total control, and therefore totally out of touch with them. But the Christian notion of masculinity, now listen, is possible but totally unnatural. The modern view of masculinity is impossible and unnatural. The pagan notion is impossible, pardon me, is possible and natural, but the Christian notion is possible and unnatural. When I say it's unnatural, I mean just what I said before. It is not natural for people to be both fierce and meek at the same time. Almost all of us have temperaments and maybe family backgrounds that push us one way or the other. It's only by God's grace, it's only by the power of the Holy Spirit, that anybody could combine those two things. The notion of the medieval knight was an ideal. They were myths. They were paragons of virtue that were held up to people, but the fact is that you always fall short. That doesn't mean we're not supposed to strive for it. C.S. Lewis says that when he first went to school, this would have been back in 1910, 1905, he says he was always taught by his school teachers that bullies were always cowards and brave men were always gentle. And he quickly found out it was absolutely wrong. He says it took him two days in the schoolyard to find out that a lot of the bullies were quite brave and beat him to smithereens. And a lot of the most gentle, nice people were unbelievable cowards. And he said, you know, he used to think as a kid how unfair. Here I was told that bullies are always cowards. And brave men are always gentle. And he says it just isn't true. But then he began to realize as he grew up, the reason it was unfair for the schoolmasters to say that, because they were missing the fact that this has always been a Christian ideal. That to be able to combine fierceness and meekness is not something that happens naturally. It takes the grace of God. It takes the work of the Spirit, because that's how Jesus was. See, Jesus, with a dirty look, emptied the temple. Can you imagine? Listen, that's masculinity. That would be sort of like, you know, going to Canal Street when everybody was out on the street, you know, hawking their wares, and having enough power in his voice and in his look without really lifting a finger. You know, just throwing a whip around to get everybody to scatter. Everybody saying, well, I don't want to mess with him. There was that kind of masculinity in him. On the other hand, of course, he was incredibly meek and gentle. He was always hanging out with the women who thought he was the only man that understood her. And always hanging out with the children who instinctively knew that he loved them and would be gentle with them. This is a different kind of critter. A Christian is hard and soft. A Christian ideal is to bring the two together. And by the way, even though it's an ideal, even though it can only happen with the Holy Spirit, I want you to know that there's no hope for our society if we can't do it. Because, you see, if we can't do it, then you're going to have either criminals or bleeding hearts. If you can't do it, you're going to either have nothing but Democrats and Republicans. Now, you figure out who's who. Or look at it, which, you know, to some degree, I think that's really unfair for me to even suggest that ideological and political differences are really just due to the inability of people to keep the two sides of human nature together, the softness and the hardness. But there's probably something to that. In fact, there's a place where C.S. Lewis says you can actually understand the history of the world, at least for a long period of time, in terms of the inability of the human race to be able to really create the Christian man. Keep those two things together. He says, basically, this is the way that the history of the world went. The barbarians would come in and set up the empire. And within 500 years, the barbarians would all become soft, wimpy people. And then new barbarians would come in and knock them down because the old civilization had become soft. And they didn't have any sense of fierceness. They had no sense of discipline. They had no self-control anymore. They were all addicted. So the new barbarians would come in with their self-control and with their discipline, you see, and with their nobility and with their ferocity and with their violence. And they would wipe out the old civilization and set up a new one, which would be stronger until they went soft, too. And they were never able to keep the two together. Okay. Now, what does all this mean for us personally? I think it means, and I know I'm speaking here again. I have to oversimplify. Most of us, let's see. christian faith are coming from the modern model not all of you not all of you some of you come from the pagan model but i would just i'm just trying to say all right some of you uh basically you're going to come from one model to the other and you're going to have to add the other side and that's what it means for you to ask christ to heal you and turn you into a real christian man now it's because i think that most of the men i know who are coming to christ or have come into the church have come from the modern male side the soft man of robert bligh into the gospel i think what we have to ask is for jesus christ to to bring us back the willingness to be adventurers the willingness to be ferocious the willingness to take risks and the willingness to get out there on the front lines and maybe get hurt and some of you are different but i'm going to say since i you know i i can identify with that let me just say that so let me say a couple things about that see last time i mentioned that i think what what men need to really become christian men is they need to learn commitment and they need to learn mission and i'd like to apply my model to that and just and just give you a little bit more detail one of the reasons see here's our problem we've come from the soft male side we've come we have a problem taking risks we have a problem being uh willing to be wounded being willing to to to take risks and be adventurers to get out there and and to uh and do the tough work and yet because we're human beings because we're men we still have this independent streak in us that means that i would say that our unwillingness to commit ourselves in relationships is a failure of masculinity and remember i said this last time i'll say it again let's let's be real real specific i think it's in general it's true in general that our unwillingness to commit ourselves to people in relationships that want to be free keep our options open is a failure of masculinity it's a gutlessness of a fear of hooking ourselves up to a situation in which is where we may have to take some hard hard blows it's just simply a lack of nerve but let's get real real real specific why can't you commit yourself to a woman why is it so scary why is it that many of us admit that as soon as you start to get serious into a relationship you suddenly find that you become incredibly perfectionistic your critical your critical evaluation apparatus starts to work overtime and you and you find a million flaws in this girl until you start to say she's not for me why is it that we're so incredibly critical why are we such perfectionists my guess is to some degree it's because of a lack of masculinity a fear of adventure we're afraid to be committed to a flawed person but you see what makes you think you're so choice anyway you're full of flaws too but that you see the perfectionism is a lack of masculinity in two ways on the one hand i'm afraid to commit myself to this woman because i see all kinds of problems in her life of course she's a human being what it means to really be a man here is to see that whoever i get hooked up with whoever i marry is going to be full of flaws and i'm full of flaws too and it's an adventure to find out whether we're going to be able to help each other grow that's a risk why aren't you willing to take that are you afraid of that then that's a lack of masculinity there's there's another side you may be afraid to commit because you're afraid to be rejected be a man you see you're afraid that they're going to find fault with you or you're afraid that your own flaws are going to be obvious and so you're afraid to set out you're afraid to be rejected that again is a lack of masculinity it's because we've come from the soft male side our fear of commitment is an unwillingness our perfection of an unwillingness to be men our fear of uh of hooking ourselves up to a perfection of a less than a perfect woman is is one of our problems in other words whenever i hear a guy say to me there's just no prospects out there you know i i'm a pretty objective person more objective than you are i'm happily married so i can look around and i can look at the women i say you know you know i i'm happily married i've got a wife who i love very much and who's a very good wife to me so from my perspective i think maybe i may be doing better maybe i have a little bit better perspective on it than some of you do who either haven't been married or have been unhappily married there are plenty of good prospects out there i'm not just talking about my church i just see them all over the place and my question to you is why don't you see them so i have to figure it could be that you're just not called to be married right now maybe that could be but it could be that you are being run by fears you that many of them around anyway. And besides that, even when you find one that's perfect physically, they've only got about a five to ten year window in which they're going to stay perfect. All right? You see? So the first thing is, it could be that our fear of commitment and our lack of willingness to commit in relationships is a lack of masculinity. The second thing is a lack of mission. I feel that because we're coming from softness into Christian masculinity, where do we get our sense of being heroes again? Where do we get our ferocity? Mission. Now, here's what I mean by mission. Mission means I can change the world. I see a dragon out there that's tearing up a part of the world, and I'm going to slay it. Now, I want to know why, as long as I've only been here two years, and I don't think this is quite fair, but I look at other churches, I look at the rest of the city. I want to know why that the people that got together and said, we're going to have an AIDS ministry were basically women. The people got together and said, we're going to do something about all the unemployed people and the people hurting in jobs were women. This is in our church. The people that started the homeless ministry was a woman. The person that says, we're going to do Habitat for Humanity and we're going to do housing is a woman. I want to know why two-thirds of all the missionaries, the people that say, I see a dragon out there in New York, and I don't know how I'm going to do it, but we have to do something about it. We've got to get out there and be involved, put our lives on the line, put our time on the line, put our money on the line. Why is it the most of the people that want to be committed to ministry and to start creative ministries in Redeemer are women? And I also want to know why that's true all around the city. Now, my guess is, one of the reasons is that female leadership is very different than male leadership, but it's very effective. Female leadership, I think, to some degree, comes out of a, women have a particular, because they were, God created Eve to be a helper, and to be a helper means to take and give somebody power and to empower somebody. Women have got a tremendous ability to empower other people. They do better job of it than we do. We can wield power better than they can, but they can empower people. They can give power better than we can. Some people are going to think that's a sexist statement. I think research bears it out. Everybody who's done any research on the difference between the way women CEOs and male CEOs operate say the same thing. And therefore, their leadership is very effective. Fine. So we've got a bunch of Joan of Arcs, and that's great. That's a, that is a, that is one, that's female heroism. Great, we need Joan of Arcs. Where are the Sir Lancelots? Where, where are the King Arthurs? What you're going to have to do at a certain point is to see, if you are not really able to slay dragons through your job, you've got to do it through ministry. You've got to do it through volunteer work. You've, and I've got to ask you, and there's not that many of you here, but I know a lot of people hear this tape, and that's another reason why I wanted to do it. A lot of men will hear the tape. Why aren't you willing to put your lives on the line in mission and in ministry? I think it's probably because we're coming from the soft side. We're coming from the, uh, the modern view of masculinity, and we need to be healed. We have to be bringing it together. Now, what can we do at Redeemer? Here's my suggestion. I'm going to try to create a place, I hope, but I don't know what, and this is where I need some questions from you or some, some ideas from you. The elders, there's only, you know, there's only four elders and a couple pastors, but we've been meeting for breakfast to try to talk about how can we do this. I think the pagans had a point. Men can help men become men. Women can't help men become men. They can't. That's something we know from history and common sense, and if I say to you, get out there and be men, start to commit in relationships and get out there and do mission, we're going to get hurt. We're going to get wounded. It'll be just like, we have to have a bunch of men who are able to get together and who have been through it and can talk to each other about it. You know, men who have just been through a breakup of a relationship with a woman need to be able to talk to other men who have been through it. Men who are involved in mission need to be able to talk to other men who are involved in mission, who are being disappointed in certain ways. In other words, we have got to find a way for men to encourage each other to be men. Where should that be? Now, see, the women who are doing something right now, women have this thing called a friendship network where they do one-on-one relationship stuff. I don't know that that's the way that we should do it. Maybe we need to gather in a group. But the point is, we have to have three things. We have to have men being encouraged to make commitments in relationships. We have to have men being encouraged to do mission. And then we have to have a place where men can build one another up and support one another in these kinds of forays. can lick our wounds together. That's the heroic ideal. That's what it means to be a Christian man. Those are the three models. Very oversimplified. Maybe somebody's going to tell me. Now, my time's up. What I want from you is, first of all, you can ask questions about what I just went through to make sure you understand, but then also, at any time, you can start to say, that's great. Here's my suggestion about how men can help men be men in this church. I don't know that we can do it the way the women have done it. I don't know. The elders are not sure that everybody put their name in a hat, and then we pair each other up, and you have, you know, you have lunch together. Maybe that'll be okay. We're not sure, and we're wrestling right now whether we're going to have breakfast on Friday, and we're going to try to talk about how men can encourage other men to be Christian men, and to be healed, and to move toward that ideal of knighthood, the ideal of the fierce, meek, Christian hero. All right. Questions about what I said, or insights about how we can do a better job of it here? We got about, you can leave whenever you want, but I'm going to do this for one half hour, and then we stop at nine. I'm doing my part, Harry. What I'm doing is I'm making a tape that people will listen, and maybe it'll embarrass them into being more willing to do something besides come to church on Sunday. No, I know what you mean. And so you've been actively involved in another church in town, right? And was it about the same there? No. Was there a similar? I mean, it's not, by the way, it's not, when you sit down on Sunday and you look around, you don't feel like you're totally overwhelmed with women, no. But it's when you get into mission groups, the people that are actually putting their lives on the line and doing something about mission, that's when you notice, if you're a man, that it's a very feminine-looking room. It's the people who are willing to put out the extra effort and commit themselves to more than just coming to church. which, that definitely separates the men from the girls. Well, I don't think we should just start with that. The missions committee is not as good an example. That meant that Arthur sat down as an elder, started asking people, and as soon as, I'm sure he didn't ask more men than women, but what happened was it had a limited number of spots, and the first people that said yes were the women, and they filled it up. But, the missions committee is not as good an example, Steve, as these other ministries, because these other ministries are, you might say, entrepreneurial things. Most, if you look carefully, the missions committee is the only committee we have in this church, and I, I'm doing everything I can. I got this vision when I started this church. I got this vision from God. The only thing I ever got from God, and that is never have any committees. And I'm going to, I know this won't work, but I'm trying as much as I can to run the church without committees. Instead, I'd rather say, if you've got a ministry you want to do, or if there's a ministry that we want to challenge people to do, organize yourselves and do it. I think that's much better than standing committees. And, in a way, because the church is so oriented toward that, in more bureaucratic churches, you have about 18 committees, you know, and every year, people are elected to it or appointed to it, and you can just sort of, in some ways, you can artificially just draft the men, and draft the women, and kind of create some balance. But in a church like ours, where we say, we want things to be done by the people who have a burden on their heart and are willing to commit themselves to do it, I can see, that, that's the sort of thing that says there's a lot of women who are doing things. Anyway, listen, yeah, I was going to say, I better repeat the, well, it's, it's not a question. Steve was saying that we live in a city that actually encourages anonymity, and it also encourages detachment. It's an easy place to live and not be bothered by anybody else. And because of that, it takes extra effort to become involved, and it's pretty easy to avoid, avoid being recruited or being enlisted. And I think that's true. But it is, just to give you a quick example, I don't know whether you've noticed this, but one of the things we've done in small groups is we, a lot of churches, very often put a list of every small group, where it meets, when it meets, and who to call, right? That's sort of typical. You know why we don't do that? Because most churches have found out, but it's especially bad in Manhattan, is that means instead of the groups feeling like it's their job to invite people in, that, that is a, that means that the groups can be passive, and whoever wants to come, just come. So, you put it on the back of the bulletin, and everybody in church sees that if you want to be in a group, it's up to you. Ninety percent of the people who will take the initiative to come to a new group will be women. If you took a survey to find out how many people wanted to be in a group, it might be much more even, men and women. But who's actually the one who takes the initiative to go into a new group? It'll be the women. the gift of interdependence. And that's why I'm saying that it takes a certain, you have to get, it doesn't take as much courage for them, but it takes more courage for us, because we're men, so then let's muster up the courage and do it. Okay, but that's a very, very important point. You see, whenever you're in a situation where it's a completely volunteer way of enlisting, if the small groups go and ask people, if a target ministry goes and asks people, we can get men and women. But if we wait for the people to take initiative to step out, it'll be the women. And that's one of the reasons why I'm saying we do have to help each other be men. There's a sense in which when you, as a man, go and ask another man to come up to Washington Heights into a very foreign kind of turf and to tutor a kid, you are inviting someone to be a man, in a sense. You're inviting them to get into mission in a way that maybe, it doesn't mean a woman couldn't invite you to do that, but we need to be inviting each other. That's an example, and it's a great case study. There can't be any way, I hope, of construing anything I'm saying as wishing there were fewer women coming forward to do ministry. I mean, boy, I sure hope that doesn't sound that way at all. In fact, I take a great deal of pride in the fact, and I've gotten a lot of compliments about the fact that here we have a church, partly because it's so entrepreneurial and not bureaucratic, I've had a lot of people say they really admire the fact that women clearly can be ministry leaders here and that their opinions are taken seriously. And it's a great source of pride that in a bureaucratic church that may not happen. So I'm not, it's a little bit like, as I try to say, it's a little bit, you know, my wife and I know that one of the big problems we have spiritually is that we love each other more than God. You know, if God's unhappy with us, well, that's bad, but if my wife's unhappy with me, it's a disaster. And we know the answer is not to love God any less. It's not to love my wife any less or her to love me any less, but to love God more. So in the same way, nothing I'm saying here should be construed at wishing there were fewer women leading here, but rather that there would be more men who would be willing to volunteer too. Has anybody got any ideas about how we could do what the women do? And that is women encouraging women. And what their friendship network is, they're meeting downstairs, they team people up. They basically pair women off with each other, meet every so often twice a month for lunch or breakfast over a period of time, read a book together, encourage each other, and then they move on. Now, I don't know whether you all think that's a good idea, but the elders feel like it's their job to be thinking about how men can be encouraging men in mission and commitment and Christian growth. I think how the apostles, I think Paul is a fine example of the Christian understanding of maleness. Outside of Jesus himself, I think it's fairly, I mean, you can do character studies of Peter and a number of other people, obviously, but Paul's the easiest one to get inside of because his letters are so powerful and self-revealing. I think it's very, very clear. You know, Paul says, there's a couple places where Paul says, I know what you say. You say his letters are powerful, but his personal presence is weak. In fact, I've gotten this from a lot of people myself. I don't mean to be comparing myself to Paul, but, you know, it's one thing. When I preach, I've got a calling to preach and I've got a calling to teach, and I have people tell me, you know, that I'm willing to say things that are real hard and yet when you get me in a corner and sit down and ask me personal questions, I really hate confrontation. I hate confrontation. I think that's probably, in my case, I think that may just be a lack of maturity, but in Paul's case, it looked like he had this combination of hardness and softness that was pretty clearly something that was supernatural, and Jesus certainly had it. And, Mike, I still think that most people come from one side or the other, and when you become a Christian man, if you've come out of more of a pagan model, you need to be sensitized. If you've been a Marlboro man, you've got to be turned into somebody who can cry and nurture, and if you've actually been somebody who's come from another, you know, if you're a modern man, you need to be turned into a knight. I can see it in Paul. I can see it in Jesus for sure. Or the other apostle is a little bit harder. I would have to say, you know, Paul was a gentle scholar type, whereas Peter was probably a big, rough fisherman type. And so it's a little harder to see it, but I think I see it in Peter being moved into being a soft-hearted person, and I see Paul the scholar type being moved into being a courageous person. But it would be hard for me to document it. I'd have to go back and kind of look through it. That's the best answer I could give you on that. Steve, let's find out what they're doing. Well, I'll have to see. But it basically... tell you. It's not so much a gathering of question and answer type. And I know that when the elders have talked about how to encourage men in their walk, how men can encourage men in their walk, there was some question as to whether or not that would work for, or the same model would work for men or not. Now, you're saying, well, you know, it's temporary. But I say it's not like this person is your mentor forever. But you do try, by and large, I know this. One guideline is that for a definite period of time, it's not like forever. So it might be like three months, and that you meet twice a month, something like that. The second thing is they try to hook up people who've been Christians a long time with people who have not been Christians as long a time. Trying real hard not to be too rigid in the categories, since it's very clear that you can't always work it out that way. Nor are they saying that necessarily the long-time Christian has to, in a real structured way, teach the other person. But we just decide that they meet together and decide what they want to talk about in their agenda. In other words, they say, we're going to get together probably six times. Should we read a book together? What is the sort of stuff we ought to talk about? Now, maybe that would work. If you all like that, you know, vote here. So let's, I'm going to move, I saw Glenn's hand. But you're saying that actually if we had maybe, well, there are people, I think, who we have to let the people identify themselves, maybe, and gather them and say, now go ahead. So you're saying you're not sure who, when you look around, you don't know who would be interested in the same thing you're interested in. So the church needs to help you all identify one another. One of the main things that men are struggling with is loss of meaning in their work. And so they do need to talk about that. So maybe you're saying we could do something in helping men get together would be to try to focus on that subject. Nevertheless, that's, you're, you're still saying that it might be better to gather men. When you see there's too many women to choose from, it takes courage to go ahead and do it. Because the thing, the fear that's about to choke you is what if I haven't chosen the best one? Or the wrong one. That's another place we have to say, come on, be a man. You know, this is part of what it means to take a risk and to do something. But you see, what you're saying, which is good for me to hear and for the elders, too, to think about it, is you're saying maybe men need to be really given good instruction and encouragement on making decisions, especially about, say, something like a mission. Yes, you're remembering this. There's a little triangle, you know. One of the reasons I left seminary was I got tired of drawing it. Because in seminary, all you ever do is talk to people who say, I don't know if I'm called into the ministry or not. I mean, you know, every day. There's only two pastoral problems. Every day, about 20 people come up to you and say, I need to ask you a question. I need to talk to somebody privately. You know, it's either going to be, I don't know if I'm called into the ministry, and I don't know if I should marry this girl. You know, after a while, in seminary, you just want to hand them a tape. You know, say, all right, is it tape one or tape two? You know, I'm really busy. Can you just say? But one of the things I discovered was, the little triangle was, you have to look not only at what the need is, and you have to also not only look at what you're good at, but you also look at your own feelings and your own passions. I think women are better at figuring out what their passions are. And as a result, they're able to make decisions about what they want to do more quickly. I know this because I'm living with a woman, and I know that she always seems to know, not her mind, it's not like I'm less decisive necessarily, but I'm always less decisive when it comes to figuring out what I want. And she's usually better at knowing. Now, this isn't all across the board, please. I'm not trying to say all men are less in touch with their feelings than all women, but I'm saying that there's a lot to that caricature. There's a lot to the stereotype. And therefore, I think one of the reasons men are a little more reluctant to move into mission is the whole idea of calling is something they struggle with, almost worse than the women. And so there needs to be some talk and instruction and some case studies and illustrations and testimonies about that. So I write that down, too. This is a speech in favor of options, multiple options. Which, by the way, almost always, I have to say, as a minister still new to New York, I find that that's usually the case. It's not just for men, but it's for New York. It's good to give options, and you'll find you'll have better participation. And mission may actually develop out of a discussion, even amongst a couple of people. I'm going to close in prayer, and I thank you for your insights. They've been very encouraging to me. I hope my insights were encouraging to you. Let's pray. Father, it's obvious that we do need to meet as men, and I am particularly encouraged by the, especially the one idea and thought. of the regular and routine meeting of men with men, talking about challenges and fears. Father, I pray that that will happen. I thank you that you sent this church to us, and that therefore you intend to do many good things through it. And we know that you're going to do all sorts of things to all sorts and in all sorts of people's lives, but we thank you that you've included us in it as well. Now, help us to move along, lurch along, listening to your will, and until we find ways to push each other out into the greatest adventure of all, which is the spreading of your kingdom. We thank you also for the masculinity that comes from submission to you as king, and therefore the impartation of your kingly and royal nature into our lives, even as we seek to obey you submissively. We ask that you would just work that in our lives, because we ask for it in Jesus' name. Amen.
