TITLE: To Die For – Success (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/to-die-for-success-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now, for those of you who are new at the Open Forum, now comes the hardest part to concentrate on. Let's collect what we've learned. In the 80s and the 90s, the United States has known the greatest, longest, most sustained run of economic success ever. If you can trust what everybody says, but they all say it. And huge amounts of money, of course, have been made in Silicon Valley and here on Wall Street. But I think it's fair to say that it's more than just a lot of people have made a lot of money. There's a culture of success that's growing. What I mean by culture of success is there is more emphasis on career success and more even experience of career success than ever before in our history. Now, it's a hard thing to prove, but here's just a couple of things. One, of course, is there are more millionaires than there have ever been in the history. There's something like 10 million people belong to households worth over a million dollars. Not only that, but there are now 50 percent, pardon me, more than 50 percent, more than half, of all the millionaires are under the age of 50. That's never happened before. I used one other little vignette, then I'll try to draw it together quickly. I'm a baby boomer, as you can tell. And my generation was the biggest generation there's ever been. We were bigger than every other one. We had 75 million of us. And I remember that when I went off to college, it wasn't all that hard to get into the top 10, top 15, top 20, top 100 schools. Today, we have a far smaller generation of young people coming through, yet there's a far greater percentage of that generation is trying to cram into those top schools. There's never been the kind of skyrocketing number of applications that every top graduate school has never been there before. Why? Why 25, 30 years ago, when there were far more people of that age, where there were so far, so many fewer of them were trying to get into the top? All this means, I think, what I just said, there has never been so much emphasis on career, never been such a culture of success before, never been all that. Now, in the whole world, well, I'm sure there's a couple other cities that can vie for it, but New York would certainly be tied with a very small number at the top of the cities of the world in which this culture's success is strongest. And therefore, I feel that I'm bringing an unclean thing into the temple when I say, success is a failure. Now, wait a minute. I know that sounds like saying long is short, but no, I'm not saying that. I'm not saying 2 plus 2 equals 5. Success is a failure. Two very, very recent magazine articles bear testimony to this. One of them you can get right now on this newsstands. It's the October 98 edition of another business magazine, sort of a business lifestyle magazine called Fast Company. Fast Company. And in it this month, there is an article by Helen Rubin that's extremely interesting, and it's called Success is Excess. Pardon me, Success Excess. It's by Helen Rubin, and here's the opening paragraph, and I quote, All of the subjects we obsess about, of them all, success is the one we lie about the most. That success and its cousin money will make us secure. That success and its cousin power will make us important. That success and its cousin fame will make us happy. It's time to tell the truth. Why is our generation's smartest, most talented, most successful people flirting with disaster in record numbers? People are using all their means to get money, power, and glory, and then self-destructing. Maybe they didn't want it in the first place, or maybe they didn't like what they saw when they finally achieved it. Unquote. And she goes through, and I'm going to get back to this. The article tells a very, very dirty little secret, and that is there have never been so many people driving to the top, never so many people getting to the top, and never so many people self-destructing. Well, what do I mean? Well, another article I read recently was in a little business newsletter, and it's called Nothing Produces Failure Like Success. That's where I got my idea. 44-year-old CEO, Rogers Kirvan, just so you know I'm not making this up, had started six companies, and he'd started them up. He was the CEO of two of them, and he was an overseer of all six of them. And of course, like an entrepreneur, he had paid a price. His family had paid a price. His body had paid a price. His soul had paid a price. Emotionally and spiritually, he hadn't been feeding it. He gets to 44, he has six companies, and in comes a buyout offer. And suddenly, he said to himself, this is what I've been waiting for. Why have I paid a price? pay? And why did my body pay? And why did my soul pay? So that when I'm still young, when I've still got my health, when my family's still with me, I can do what I want to do. I can cash out. I can be financially free. I can go where I want to go, do what I want to do, buy what I want to buy, live where I want to live. But just before he did it, he called up three of his friends that he lost touch with, of course, like all successful people. And he called them up on the phone and he said, you recently have done this. You had a buyout. You cashed out. How is it? And all three of them gave him what he says here. They gave him litanies of despair. They were so discouraged. They were so depressed. And he said, what's going on here? So he took it upon himself, like a good entrepreneur that he is, to interview 26 other people who in the last five years had cashed out. 26 other people who had made it to the top, had sold out, now were absolutely financially free. And he discovered that 22 of the 26 had gotten divorces. And this is what he says. He says, every one of them had started with a strategy. They said, my family is sacrificed. I'm going to pay them back. I'm going to develop my soul since it's really suffered. And he says, their lives though now, though financially in no trouble at all, are in ruins. They lurch from the euphoria of one new project to a new love affair, only to get to, only to become depressed not long after they arrived there. Like Mike Tyson, he said, they all had a strategy until they got hit. Now, what does this mean? These people are saying success does not deliver the three things that promises. There's a lie. There's a lie. And the lie, and I already read it in the Helen Rubin article. Success, she said, promises to give us three things. Security, importance, and happiness. And security, importance, and happiness, and it doesn't. Now, what I'd just like to do is kind of run through those three because I think that's a fine outline, a fine way of sort of surveying this and making the case. How and why doesn't success deliver security? How and why doesn't success deliver importance? And how and why doesn't it deliver happiness? That's the problem. It doesn't. So let's first of all look at this. She says, first part of the lie is success delivers security. Now, how does it fail? Well, boy, that's not that hard. There's so many stories I could tell you. Maybe the most recent one is if you're in the business world, you know about it. And if you're not in the business world, but you just read the paper, you know about it. In the news the last couple of days, there's this interesting hedge fund called Long-Term Capital Management. Now, these kinds of numbers, I'm sorry for an amateur like me, I'm just absolutely, absolutely blown away. This is a hedge fund that was just bailed out and taken over. The enormity of it, it owned $125 billion of securities. And, here's a quote from the paper yesterday, it used those securities as collateral to enter into derivatives and forward contracts with a total value of $1.25 trillion, more than the total annual economic output of China. A hedge fund greater than the total annual economic output of China. Because of the takeover, the article said, now the original 16 partners are suffering huge losses, shattered reputations, and word is spreading on the street that some are facing possible personal bankruptcy. Well, what's the point? Here's the point. Why do people put so much money into that thing? Because something that successful had to be secure. Something that huge, something that successful. That's what all the articles are saying. Everybody said, something like that couldn't fail. Something that successful couldn't possibly be insecure. But it absolutely is. You see, success itself is insecure. And that's the reason why success can't deliver security. But not only that. It's not just that success itself is insecure. But success cannot shield you from the insecurity that life is. Life itself is unbelievably insecure. I was just reading also this week about a young woman who graduated the same college I was. It was actually in our alumni paper. 25 years old, on the way up the ladder. Good schools. Doing well in business. Ate right. Didn't smoke. Right weight. Exercised every day. On the way up the ladder. In February, she got a little cold. Inside the cold was a little virus. It attacked her heart. Two months later, she was laying in a Boston hospital where their chest saw it open and her heart gone. And she was being kept alive until somebody could put another heart in there. She got a heart transplant. But almost for sure, she's worried there's having having problem with rejections. And she wrote and she said, you know, her life is going to at least be much shorter. Her life is utterly changed. Why? That's just... The perfect eyes Jest hasn't been Unеч des представzeń, as I said. have managed more services forfi. And I apologize. You, in any comment, I just can do it with my odyssey, for sure. I'll have something to give you three minutes later and it's figure out the opportunities for the pulpers. Number one is spreading. Esto is one of the having problem with rejections and she wrote and she said, you know, her life is going to at least be much shorter. Her life is utterly changed. Why? That's just, that's life. See, all the gems, all the success, you can't keep that kind of thing out. It just can't. I mean, success can't possibly deliver. In fact, not only can't success deliver security, I'll go so far as to say success so deeply fails to deliver security that it actually takes away the security you have. Didn't you listen to that great song, Porgy and Bess? What does Porgy say? He says, the folks with plenty of nothing, no, no, no, the folks with plenty of plenty got to pray all day. Seem with plenty, you sure got to worry how to keep the devil away. Now, the point is, he is saying, not only does success fail to deliver security, but not only that, it takes away the security you've got because it introduces all kinds of worries and all kinds of fears and all kinds of suspicion, all kinds of fear that you're going to fall from the position. So it doesn't deliver security. Well, why not? Well, there's a psychological, and yeah, of course, I'm a minister. There's a spiritual reason. Sorry. There's a psychological and there's a spiritual. Here's the psychological reason. If you're trying to move up that ladder, this is not, this is going to not sound plausible to some of you. I'm just going to warn you ahead of time. If you're bright and you're moving up that ladder and you're getting more and more successful, if your life is going along fine physically, if it's going along fine relationally and economically, and you see other people whose lives are being blown up because of insecurities, a virus attacks the heart or, you know, laid off or all kinds of things. You see other people blowing up because you're successful in one area of your life. It is natural, but it is deadly. What you will do is you will, you will infer, you will take responsibility for everything that's going well in your life. You'll say, because I'm savvy, that's the reason why my life's not blowing up. You'll hear these awful stories or you'll see other people whose lives just suddenly fall apart and you say, that's not going to happen to me. Why? Because I'm being successful over here because I'm smart, because I'm savvy. That's just not true. Successful people do not believe how insecure and how devastating life can be. Successful people almost always believe the reason that they're being successful is because of them. Because I've, you know, I've got my T's crossed. I've got my I's dotted. I'm smart. I'm looking ahead, you see. I know what my options are. I've made a lot of good moves. The people who are losing in life know the truth. Life is broken. Life comes out of nowhere. Life eventually will knock everybody down. Successful people think they're in control. And as a result, successful people, when life finally breaks through, successful people are absolutely unready for it. They are shattered far more than a humbler and simpler person is. They're sure because of all of the things they're doing that they're going to be secure. And that's the reason why. Success doesn't just fail to give you security. It makes you absolutely unable, absolutely vulnerable to life as it hits you. Now, there's a spiritual reason for it, too. And the spiritual reason is this. The insecurity of life is not an economic thing. We can't overcome insecurity material ways. It's ridiculous. It's ridiculous. If you stand back and look, a friend of mine some years ago, he was a professor of philosophy, a professor of theology. He taught. And he told a story about how one day he blew up. He lost his temper. And here's what happened. Years ago, when he was a teacher, there was a couple of young women in his college classes who had given their life to Christ. They were converted. They became Christians. They hadn't believed, and then they believed. And as a result of that, they decided they were brilliant young women, and they had great careers ahead of them. They decided to change their career path, and they decided they were going to go overseas. They were going to be teachers, and they were going to be workers amongst the poor. And when their parents heard about this, their parents went through the roof, and they came up to the college, and they sat down with the professor that they believed, certainly because he was an adult, certainly he would see. And they sat down, and they began talking to the professor, and they began talking to their daughters, the young women. And they started to say, now, dears, you've had a religious experience. Isn't that special? And it's very enriching. It's very good to have a religious... But, but, you don't realize how insecure life is. You don't realize how tough life is. You don't realize how hard it is, how dog-eat-dog it is out there. You don't know what reality is like. Young ladies, you're going to go get your master's degree. You know why you're going to get your master's degrees? Because you've got to have marketable skills. You've got to have a degree from a good, a good school for security. And my friend kind of blew up when he looked at the, at the parents. See, this is a mistake everybody's making. said, let me ask you a question. See, when philosophers get upset with you, he had a PhD from Oxford. When philosophers get upset with you, they can really do a number on you. And he looked at, he said, let me, let me ask you, he says, stand back and look. Reality, huh? Tough reality. Masters agree. He said, we are all on a little ball of rock called Earth. And we're spinning through space at millions of miles an hour. And even if in your lifetime that little rock does not bump into the sun or a comet or something, even if that doesn't happen, someday, under every single one of us, a little trap door is going to open and every one of us is going to fall off. And underneath will either be the everlasting arms of God or nothing at all. And maybe we should get a master's degree for some security. Now, here's what he's saying. The insecurity of life is not an economic issue. It's a spiritual issue. I'll put it another way. Here's what he was trying to say. Underneath, if there is no God, then no matter how good things go, you are utterly insecure. Everything is random. Everything's a crapshoot. Eventually, everything is going to be just blown away. But if there is a God, and you know him, and his arms are underneath you, then no matter what happens in this life, no matter what happens, you're utterly secure. And there's nothing in the middle. If there's a God and you know him, you are secure no matter what happens. And if there is no God, or you don't know him, then no matter what happens, you're absolutely insecure. There's nothing in the middle. Success will never deliver security. Second, not only that, it'll take away what you have. Okay, we said the second part of the lie was success will also not deliver importance. Remember? She said, Helen Rubin said in the beginning, success, you know, and it's cousin power will never give you importance. Now, why not? Well, let's think about this for a minute, and I'd like to give you two, let me tell you how it feels. Let me give you two very famous people, and I'm going to get back to this in a second, but basically, the only people to really ask about success are the people who made it to the top. They're the only ones that know what it's like up there. I mean, if you see a mountain, and you've never been any, five miles from the top, you've never even gotten that close to it. Don't tell me what it's like up there. The people who are up there can tell you. Now, here's two interesting ones, one who's very famous, and one who's not very famous, but still reached the top. Can it deliver importance? This is one of my favorite quotes. Madonna, in an interview in Vogue magazine, wrote this, or said this, I have an iron will, she said, and all my will has always been to conquer a horrible feeling of inadequacy. I push by one spell of it, and I discover myself as a special human being, but then I get to another stage, and I think I'm mediocre and uninteresting. I find I have to get past that again and again. My drive in life is from the horrible fear of being mediocre, but even when I feel like I'm somebody, I still find after a while I have to prove I'm somebody. My struggle will probably never end. Now, all by itself, that's not as helpful, even though I think that's very true, not as helpful unless you put with it this next little testimony by John B. Evans. Now, John Evans lives downtown somewhere. He launched Elle magazine. He launched Premier magazine. He was once in charge of the Village Voice. He's actually enormously successful in the magazine business. Now, listen to this. He says, I think you have to imagine life as two barometers. One is how the world sees you. The other is how you feel about yourself. As your worldly position, okay, as your worldly position rises, your self-image crashes. See? Why do CEOs who are sitting on top of the world have a problem with self-esteem? It's very simple. People who feel like bags of excrement overcompensate and act like gods. Now, you say, oh, that's an exaggeration. You, some of you maybe, have you been to the top of the mountain? They know. Here's what they're saying. They're saying, every time I get an achievement, that achievement, just for a moment, promises that it's going to make me feel important. And almost immediately, it goes away. And I find I have to go higher and higher and higher. And the higher I go, the harder it is to get that feeling back. John Evans actually says, what? There's two barometers. Imagine this. The higher you go in the world's esteem, the lower you go on your own. You feel like an imposter. See, success not only does not give you importance, according to Evans and according to Madonna. Success, if anything, actually takes away. would that be? So, let's ask, we're doing a how and why for each of these points. That's how it happens, why should it be? In the same article by Helen Rubin, she interviews a counselor, says something fascinating, and that counselor says, achievement is the alcohol of our time. The top people today don't abuse alcohol, they abuse themselves. And here's what she says, achievement, the achievement addict is no different from any other addict. And then she goes on and says this, when you're a drug addict, you need greater and greater amounts of the substance to deliver the same high, right? You need more and more to get the same high, which means the more and more you use, the less and less pleasure you feel. She says it's exactly that same way with achievement. If the main way you experience importance, if the only way you experience importance is through achievement, success, she says it operates exactly like a drug. And that would explain Madonna, that would explain John Evans absolutely to a T. You become addicted to it almost the minute it hits. There's a euphoria, but almost immediately in comes a depression. And you need more, you need higher, you need to get higher, you need to make more money, you need to have a bigger hit, you have to have a bigger concert, up and up and up. It never, not only does it never deal with the mediocrity, it makes you feel worse. You need higher and higher doses for less and less payoff. Now what's the spiritual reason for that? Well, you know, it's this reason. If you don't already know you're important, if you don't already know you're important, then achievement becomes addiction. It's not just achievement though. If you don't already know you're important, anything becomes an addiction. You need more and more and you're locked in. Recently, for example, Joyce Maynard wrote an autobiography called At Home in the World. And she, a big part of the autobiography is devoted to the fact when she was 18 years old, she had a love affair. She had an affair with J.D. Salinger who wrote Catcher in the Rye. And she admits, now a lot of people said, oh gosh, you know, she's dragging his name into the mud and why is she doing this? And she says so, right here. She says, though I made the choice long ago to put away the story of my experience with Jerry Salinger, okay, long ago she decided, I'm not going to talk about it. I'm not going to drag it out. I'm not going to tell it to the world. I'm not going to do this exhibitionistic thing. Long ago she decided she didn't, wouldn't do it, but she did. So why? She says, because over over two decades, a part of me continued to believe that the greatest evidence of my value was my ability to inspire however fleetingly the affection and approval of this man. The greatest evidence of my value was my ability to inspire however fleetingly the affection and approval of this man. This quote was put in large print on the cover, you know, of the New York Times book review. And Kathy and I looked at it and Kathy said, clearly you don't put a quote like that up there. It was a pullout, a big blow up thing, unless you think it makes her look bad. And it does, it makes her look so weak. She has her value attached this man. And that's the reason she's addicted. That's the reason even after all these years, she's got to bring it out. She's got to tell the world because she, because she needs that to feel important, to feel valuable. Ah, we laugh at that. We say, what that poor woman, everybody has got something. You go to marriage, you go to love, you go to money, you've got something. Because if you don't know you're important, then whatever gives you importance becomes the thing that you are a slave to. Isak Denison, who's a great writer, puts it this way. Pride is faith in the idea God had when he made you. Most people are not aware of any idea that God had in the making of them. And sometimes they make you doubt that there has ever been much of an idea or else it has been lost and who shall find it. They have got to accept as success what others decide success is and to make their happiness, to take even their own selves at the quotation of the day. She said, you will be a slave to whatever you think makes you important. You will be an addict to anything that makes you important. Or another way to put it, if you have nothing to live for bigger than your own significance, you will increasingly feel insignificant. If you have nothing bigger than yourself, bigger than your money, bigger than your self-interest, if you've got nothing to die for, if you've got nothing bigger than the finite, if you've got nothing infinite, if you've got no bigger mission in life than your own significance, you will become insignificant. More and more. Because achievement is just like cocaine, just like alcohol. The top people don't use alcohol. themselves and that's why. Now lastly, she said there's three parts of the lie. Success can't deliver security and we saw why. Success can't deliver importance and we saw why. But last of all, success can't deliver happiness, she said. Now somebody might say at this point, is this point really necessary? I mean, if success doesn't give you security, in fact it takes away what you had, and if success doesn't give you importance, in fact it takes away what you have, well, isn't that bad enough? And besides that, what is happiness besides security and significance? And the answer is, I don't know exactly, but there is something else. Because there are people who get into their work and they get into their professions and they seek success and they're not really after security and they're not really after importance, but they're after something and it's still not there. There is something beyond. It's very mysterious. Let me give you one quote, and this quote kills me. This quote kills me. Kathy and I have always liked Sophia Loren. We always like looking at Sophia Loren. And beautiful woman, great actress, and in a magazine interview some years ago she said this, my life is what I have dreamed of. Films, marriage to Carlo, bearing his children, marvelous. I can even hear her saying it, can't you? You know, films, marriage to Carlo, bearing his children. Listen, my life is what I dreamed of. I only lack one thing. This kills me. In the center of my life there is a void impossible to describe. Wait a minute. What would be left? My life is what I have dreamed of. Films, marriage to Carlo, bearing his children. I only lack one thing. The center. The center. I got what I dreamed in the center. What would that be? There is something besides significance of security. She's pretty much got it. She had a charmed life. So one of the very, very, very, very, very few insecurity of life hasn't broken in on her, but she says there's still something going on. Something going on. Now here's my other favorite quote. The very first time I read the Village Voice nine years ago when I moved to New York, I opened up and Cynthia Heimel has a great column called Tongue in Cheek. I don't think she writes it anymore, but she's like a lot of people. If you've been in New York for a long, long time, one of the things that is kind of interesting is you probably know somebody who's now famous but used to not be. She remembered quite a few of them. She knew Julia Roberts when she was working behind the cosmetics counter in Macy's. She knew Sylvester Stallone when he punched tickets on the movie theater on Second Avenue. She knew quite a few others in this, and I won't mention all the names. She knew at least a dozen people who had been nobody and now they were famous, and this is what she says. She found out that they all became like Mr. and Mrs. Fitch, unstable, angry, erratic, and manic, and here's why. Here's her theory. That giant thing they were striving for, that fame thing that was going to make everything okay, that was going to make their lives bearable, that was going to provide them with personal fulfillment and ha-ha happiness had happened. And the next day they woke up, and they were still them. The disillusionment turned them howling and insufferable. Now what's she saying? Here's what she's saying. It is not, it is not failure or trouble that will tell you how unhappy you really are. The only way for you to see how fundamentally unhappy we are as people is through success, and only the most successful look into the chasm. Paul said, I have learned to be content in plenty and in want, and I want you to know it is far harder to be content in plenty. What Cynthia Heimel is saying, and what Sophia Loren is saying, is I had no idea how empty I was until I got successful, and only the people who've been to the top know that. Here's why. The rest of us, we're always unhappy, but what do we tell ourselves? If I got my life's dream. See, that's how we stuff it. That's how we go on. That's how we live in denial about what's wrong with our hearts. We say, if only I had my life's dream, what's your life's dream? You know, a house on the lake, happy family, enough money to do this, enough money to do that. What's your dream? Well, almost none of us get everything we dreamed of, and almost none of us get the life's dream. And as a result, we're able to deal with our hearts. We're able to say, yeah, I'm not happy, but that's it. I just haven't gotten my life. But what happens is success. Only the success can show you, see, success is horrible. Not only does success away the happiness that you had because the happiness you have, every human heart is based on a life lie. Henrik Ibsen says, everybody has a life's lie. Your life's dream is your life's lie. If only I had that, my dream, my greatest dream, if I had that. Sophia Loren said, I had it. And there's not many people who can say that. I had it, and there's something missing. Where? Over here? Out here on the left? You know, out here in the suburbs? No, downtown in my soul, it's gone. You know, I have everything except the center. Cynthia Heimel says, when they got their dream, they woke up the next day and it hadn't done it. You will never know how unhappy you are. You will never know how messed up your heart is. You will never know how utterly wrong your heart is about what will make you happy. And therefore, you will never know how disordered your heart is. And you will never know the enormity of what we clearly are built for unless you get incredibly successful. People that can drive 20 truckloads of gold into their heart and find that it disappears. It's gone. They're still empty. People that can have film stardom and marriage to Carlo and all that stuff. And everything in there, everything in there, and it's still empty. In other words, success will not give you security. Success will not give you importance. Success will not give you happiness. And success will take away what you have. But most of all, last of all, only when you're really successful, you see how utterly unhappy you really are. Everybody in this room is hiding from themselves how unhappy we are. It's called evolution. We're adapting to our environment. Well, then what will? What will deliver these things? I've already hinted at it. And that's all I try to do in a night like this. Listen, security, if there is a God you know, then no matter what happens in your life, you're secure. And no matter what happens in your life, no matter how bad it is, you're secure. But if there is no God or you don't know him, no matter how good things are, you're insecure. Uh-huh. Secondly, remember Helen Rubin said people are after glory? The word glory in the Bible means weight. The word glory in the Bible means something which lasts. If you know God, then everything you do matters. Everything you do is weighty. Everything you do will count forever, including you, no matter what happens here. And if you don't, if there is no God or you don't know him, then nothing you do matters. Nothing you do will change anything. Everything you do will be wiped away. You'll have nothing left. Thirdly, in Jesus Christ, we have the paradigm of a whole new approach to success. Because you see, the only way you're ever going to be happy is if you stop trying to become happy. The only way you're ever going to be a success is if you stop trying to be a success. The Bible is riven with this as a principle. This is, if anything, this is a spiritual secret, I might say. It says, blessed are those who hunger and thirst after what? Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after blessedness? No. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness. Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after something besides blessedness. But Jesus Christ is the ultimate archetype of the new approach to success. Because Jesus Christ, we're told in Philippians 2, though he was equal with God, he emptied himself of his glory. How did he get glory? He emptied himself of it. How did he become great? He lowered himself and became a servant. Jesus Christ is the one who says, the way up is to go down. The way to rule is to serve. The way to have power is to give power away. The way to get rich is to give your riches away. See? The way to freedom is to make yourself a servant. Jesus proved it. And that's why the only way you'll ever be happy is to admit how unhappy you are and to stop trying to get directly to happiness. The only way to become happy is to go to the only possible source of security, of importance, and happiness himself and say, command me. It's the only way in. In fact, what's so wonderful, when you read the myths of the other religions and the stories you see of the other religions, stories of Hercules and all the great heroes and so on, they're always strong. And then you go read the stories in the Bible, Abraham, Moses, David, Peter, and they're all falling apart and they're all full of doubts and they're all jerks and they're all wrestling. And why? You know why? Because at the heart of Christianity, you have something utterly different than in the heart of any other religion. You have a success that was a failure, a success through failure. You have a God who became... be saved by grace. And that's the reason why the first step to success is to admit you're a moral failure. The first step to faith is to admit you have none. The first step to security is to admit you're absolutely and utterly insecure. That's the way in. That's the secret. Lose yourself to find yourself. What does it profit to gain the whole world and lose your soul? Let's pray briefly. Our Father, we thank you that you've given us this. We thank you that you've given us this evening and this theme. And we thank you that you've given us this wisdom over the years in so many ways. Not just through your word, not just through the Bible, but also through art. Also through the wisdom of the ages. Also through common sense and experience. Lord, as we try to collate them all together and lay them out in front of people, we just pray that you'd help us to see the truth of it and apply it to our hearts. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
