TITLE: To Die For – Beauty (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Art and Beauty
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/to-die-for-beauty-an-open-forum/

============================================================

And now for the least melodic part of the evening. What do we learn when we try to pull the various clues and strands together about the subject of physical beauty and sexual attractiveness? I read, getting ready for tonight, I read a book that was a bestseller, a New York Times bestseller back in 91 by Naomi Wolf called The Beauty Myth. And essentially it's a convincing book. And she says there is such a thing as a beauty myth. I'm going to show, I think, in the next couple of minutes that I think it's not, even though it mainly hurts women, it really hurts everybody. And what is her thesis in there? Her thesis is this, that there is a powerful myth, and that is physical beauty is excessively, deceptively, and addictively important in our culture, and it's getting worse. Because beauty promises something it can't deliver. Okay? Beauty is, and I just, I read the book and I sat back and said, what is she saying? She's saying that the physical beauty, sexual attractiveness, is excessively, deceptively, and addictively important to us in our culture, and it's getting worse. Let me just break that down for you and give you a couple of reasons why I think that's basically true. First of all, excessively. This is an old problem, way, way, way back. And that is that beauty is, in many, many people's minds, it's sort of instinctive. Beauty is a way of validation. Physical beauty is a way of assessing a person's worth. Some of you might have been around, but a couple of, two or three weeks ago, I am a minister, and therefore I teach the Bible, and I was going back to a very, very ancient text. So that very ancient text was a story out of Genesis 29 of two sisters, Leah and Rachel. And Leah was very homely and very unattractive, and Rachel was absolutely gorgeous. And Leah is plunged into a terrible hellish life because no one will marry her. And her father says, I'm going to have tremendous trouble if no one will marry her. So he tricks a man into marrying her, who then responds by, what the Bible text says, hating her and ignoring her for the rest of her life and making her life absolute hell. And I think it was at one of the places where I was teaching that. And I said, isn't it awful for this poor woman to live in a culture in which her very worth, her very validation, her very being is essentially understood in the currency of how she looked? Wouldn't it be awful to live in a place like that? And everybody burst into laughter, mainly the women, of course. And you see, this is a very old problem, an extremely old problem. And that is that beauty promises validation. There is something validating about beauty. In other words, if a person is beautiful and is on my arm, that makes me feel validated in some way. It makes me feel worthy in some way. And, of course, the idea behind that goes to our second. First of all, not only is beauty excessively important and always has been as far as validating a person, making a person feel worthy and making a person feel, you know, that there's something important about me. But it's deceptively so. Now, here's what I mean by that. One of the big problems with a beauty myth is that we really do believe at an instinctive level, and if I had time, I could try to prove this to you. We really do believe that the outside really tells us something about a person's character. That a person who is overweight, a person who is sloppy, a person whose features aren't perfectly symmetrical, that that says something about them. And a person who's pulled together, and a person who's sleek, and a person who is sharp on the outside must be sharp and savvy on the inside. And we do believe that, and all the studies show that we believe that, and all common sense shows that we respond to people like that. And one of the big problems with the beauty myth is that, though that seems to be very instinctive, very deep down inside, that we believe that bad people should be ugly, and good people should be beautiful, and beautiful people should be... And we believe that very deeply. It's not true. It is not true at all. And it continually makes us fall into all kinds of difficult problems. Our middle son, Michael, when he was very young, I can't remember, I forgot to ask Kathy on the way over how old it was when this happened. And, you know, we were just saying to him, well, you know, you should never talk to strangers. You should never take things from strangers. You should never go anywhere with strangers. And he was what? How old, Kathy? About five. About four or five. And he says, oh, oh, of course. I would never do that with a bad person. I mean, I would never take candy from a bad person. I would never take candy from a... Or I would never go anywhere with a bad person. And Kathy says, well, how would you know? He says, well, bad people... And you know, he, he'd read fairy tales, or maybe he was just, it's instinctive. We say, ugly people with warts on their nose. You see, they're the evil ones. And great people and beautiful people, you see, have sparkles all around them and, and, you know, gold dust on their eyelids, and they look lovely. And, you know, if we had let him believe that, he'd probably be dead by now. And yet, we all know, as I said, we all believe that in another level. And we are all dead because of it. We're continually falling into this. There's no doubt that the older you get, the more you say, I must not judge a person on their looks. I must not judge a person on their looks. But the fact that we have to say that over and over again just proves the point. There's something about beauty, which is incredibly powerful, so powerful that it's excessively important, so powerful that it's deceptively important. You know, one of the, one of the most effective things about, you know, in all the genre of whodunits and mystery, one of the most effective figures is Columbo. And the reason he's so effective is because he's ugly and he's sloppy. Have you ever seen, you know, Peter Falk has the most unsymmetrical features you could possibly see. And he's an absolute slob. And as a result, week after week, when you watch the movie, I mean, the reason it's so effective is the murderer is absolutely sure that a person who looks like this cannot be brilliant. A person who looks like this cannot be wise. A person who looks like this cannot see through a brick wall in time, as they say in Brie. A person like this cannot, on the outside, can't have an inside like that. But over and over again, we find why we find that we believe that. And yet it's just not true. And we know it's not true. And we continue to believe that. And that leads to the third thing. What she says, and what I think is also true, not only is beauty excessively important, not only is beauty deceptively important to us, we're continually betaken in by it, but it's also addictively important. And what I mean by that is physical beauty does have the power to get us to do incredible things. Yes, literally to bleed, to fight, and to die for it. Either to have it on ourselves, or to have it in somebody that belongs to us. I mean, we all know the stories. I don't want, you know, I have to be very careful here. In fact, I've decided to be purposely vague, not only because I don't have lots of time, because some of the illustrations that I came with, a lot of them are too painful for people. I mean, over and over and over again, one spouse will go through real hell. Go through hell with his or hell with everything, because my partner isn't beautiful anymore, and I've got to have beauty. I mean, that's addiction. They will do anything to get somebody with beauty again. You know, and people who actually do have that very gift of nature, thin thighs, high cheekbones, you see, symmetrical features, you will find that people use you just like you use people. People want you on their arm. Now, did you see the article in the New York Times style section three or four weeks ago? It used the term arm candy. Do you know what arm candy is? He says, what arm candy is, a powerful or rich person, when they go to an event, there's now a kind of, it's an interesting kind of contract. If you are great looking, I'll have you on my arm. You'll be photographed with me. There is absolutely no obligation. I don't care if I ever see you again. In fact, I never want to see you again, but you get your photo opportunity with me, and I want somebody who's unbelievably stunning on my arm. Now, that's an extreme version of how beauty in you makes you use people and how you use beautiful people. You want them around. You open doors for them. You give them jobs. You bring them, you sit at their table. Why? Because there's this incredible power that we feel that beautiful people validate us, or me being beautiful validates me, and I'll do anything to get it. People will do almost anything. Now, who's at risk for this terrible addiction? And, you know, this is where Naomi Wolf and I, well, she's right. Naomi Wolf says, basically, young women are most at risk, and she makes a pretty good case for it, because if you believe the beauty myth, if you believe I've got to be great looking, if I look bad, then I'm in, you know, that I'm not worth anything. Now, she says that mainly hurts women, and she's right. I would have to say, especially, mainly hurts young women, because young women know that they are assessed continually. They are sized up immediately on the basis of their- it does not matter whether you are a traditional woman or whether you're a contemporary liberated woman in this sense. If you use your beauty the old way, the Cinderella way, I'm going to be beautiful so I get taken care of, or if you use your beauty in the most modern Camille Paglia way, which says, be beautiful, be gorgeous, because it's power, and it is, it's tremendous power. Either way, you are an addict. Either way, unless you have it, you're nothing. And you're an addict, you're devastated, you're terribly at risk, you're horribly at risk. Do I need illustrations to prove this, about the devastating effect it has on young women? Do I need, do I need to pull out statistics like the fact that 92% of all women in America think that they're overweight? I mean, I don't have to do that, do I? When you look in the mirror, you know what you see. But, number two, it's not just women at risk with the beauty myth. Secondly, it's everybody over 40. See, one of the things I liked about Faust was it showed it's not just women who are hurt by the beauty myth, it's anybody who's aging. Because, you see, when, to the degree, in a culture, beauty and looks are important excessively and addictively and deceptively, to that degree, everybody who's losing their looks as they're getting older is starting to get just ground into the ground. You don't think, you know, advertisers aren't idiots. They don't spend their hard-earned money on advertisements that don't grab you. And what do you think a person who's over 40, what do you think a guy who's over 40 thinks, like, when you see a picture of the same guy, two pictures, one with him and with hair, one without. And something, some kind of copy under there is basically saying, who would you give a job to? You'd give a job to this guy over this guy, right? This grabs you. And the devil shows up. You see, to avoid the possibility that you're losing your beauty as you're getting older. But it's not just that. I'd have to go so far as to say, now, here's what Naomi Wolf says, you know, young men have it great. Old men, older women, younger women, we're all devastated by the beauty myth. But you young guys, guys under 40, you're not hurt. And she's kind of right, in a way. She says, you lucky dogs. You know, in the culture, and all the studies show this, in the culture, the spectrum of what is considered a beautiful woman is so narrow. And the spectrum of what is considered a good-looking guy is much more broad, and therefore, you're just not oppressed. And that's true, but do you know how many guys, now, I'm not thinking about Chicago, I am not thinking about statistics. I don't need statistics. Do you know how many guys are addicted to pornography? Utterly addicted to pornography. You know why? Because real women don't look like what they have to have. Okay. Do you know how many guys are letting all kinds of women go by? They desperately want to be married, and they're letting all kinds of women go by, who'd be great wives, who'd be great spouses, great life partners, because they don't look right. And you know what's going on? That. That. That's an addiction, too. And so, what does that mean? Everybody's at risk. Everybody's in trouble. Everybody's being devastated. Now, that's the fact. Why? Now, I want you to know, this is where a Q&A comes in. And afterwards, you can ask me, like, I promise that I'm going to give you three answers that don't quite fit. Why would beauty have this kind of power? Why would beauty be validation? Why would we be so scared to lose it? Why would we do anything to get it? Why are we being ravaged and devastated by it? Why? Well, we know. We know. You can't judge a book by its cover. You can't go on looks. We know that. You watch Columbo, you know that. You tell your little kid, sorry, honey, you know, all the bad people don't have warts on their noses. You say that, you say that, and we're continually ravaged by it in all the ways I just mentioned. Why? Why? Well, Naomi Wolf suggests that it's a political conspiracy. And, hey, I'm very sympathetic, and here's the reason why. She says it's getting worse, and it is getting worse. She says that when her, she says 30 years ago when you read women's magazines, they were filled with the idol, the unreachable ideal of perfect domesticity. And if you ever go back to look at those ads from Red Book and, you know, from all of the women's magazines from 30 years ago, it's hilarious. It is absolutely hilarious to see women, you know, vacuuming like this. And, you know, of course, in high heels and pearls always, you know, I think it's because you can see it better from up here. I don't know. But the other thing, of course, and they're always, and they're just, just. got rid of all that, and Naomi Wolf says, but now, 30 years later, she says, the more liberated, the more progressive, the more secular, the more individualistic, in other words, the more progressive the culture, and the more power women have, now what you have in all these women's magazines, is something far more unreachable. She documents the fact that models, fashion models today, are, the median weight of a fashion model is 25% less than the median weight for everybody else, that's three times the differential it was 30 years ago, that you have a far more oppressive and far more devastating ideal now in women's magazines than you ever had, far more guilt producing, and she says, this is all just true, look, anorexia and bulimia, eating disorders that come from people being obsessed by the fact they don't have beauty, the more liberated and progressive the culture, the more those eating disorders, in fact, twice as many eating disorders amongst college educated women as non-college educated women, and so it does look like a conspiracy, doesn't it, even though it couldn't be, because in other words, the places where women have the most freedom, they are the most devastated by the beauty myth. Now, the fact, of course, is that in her preface, I read a preface that she wrote a couple years after the book came out, and everybody said, she said that the reason for this is a conspiracy trying to keep women down, and people said, how could this be a conspiracy? And, you know, in her preface, it's pretty clear that it can't be. How could this be a conspiracy? She just has to say, really, in the end, that even though the beauty myth does keep women down, that's the result of the power of beauty, it's not the cause. So what is the cause of the power of beauty? Well, postmodern, postmodern people say, and this is very true, that what's happened, because of technology, is image is more important than it's ever been. In the 1850s, you can read about this in Neil Postman's book, Amusing Ourselves to Death, and Neil Postman says this, in 1850s, when Stephen Douglas was running against Abraham Lincoln for president, if those two guys had walked down the street in any town in America, nobody would have known who they are. You see, you couldn't elect somebody on the basis of what he looked like, because technology just, these were photographs, there was no wire services, and that's the reason why everything had to be decided on the basis of ideas. You had to read their views. You know, the Lincoln-Douglas debates were all, in every newspaper in the country, not just New York Times and the Washington Post, but every paper in the country covered all of it, printed everything they said, because people were, at that time, idea-oriented, but now people are media-oriented, they're image-oriented, and feeling and image and impression is far more important than substance and ideas. Now, that's a big subject, but as a result of that, how you look is far more important than it's ever been. But see, that only explains why it's worse. That explains why eating disorders are up. That explains why it's getting more devastating, but it doesn't explain why it's always been there. I mean, Faust, you know, was there a long time ago before we had, you know, the internet. And therefore, it's always been here. That doesn't really explain it. The biologists explain it, and the biologists say there is a cross-cultural similarity, across 300 cultures, in spite of what they say on the street, beauty is not culturally relative. That across 300 cultures, people are, we know that people basically find a certain kind of face beautiful, and another kind of face not beautiful. And the biologists will simply say, ah, well, you know, it's just simply the fact that you know, instinctively, from years of evolution, that here is a person with this particular shape, with this particular look, who's more likely to be fertile, and this is the way in which my genetic code will be passed on down. And you see, the biologists say this beauty is not cultural. If it's so common across 300 cultures, therefore, it must be biological. Now, there's major problems with this. And the major problems are, that'll explain why we all seem to find faces beautiful, but it's very difficult why we would all find a Fabergé egg beautiful. It's very difficult to understand why there's really a lot of commonality across cultures on other sorts of beauty as well. Let me suggest to you what the Christian evaluation and response would be to why beauty is this powerful, why we fall prey to it all the time. So, it goes like this. The Bible says there's two very, very important reasons, and they're both back in the early stages of Genesis, the early book of Genesis, the early chapters of Genesis, to explain why. When Adam and Eve ate the apple, when they reached out and took the fruit, when they decided to be their own masters, now, this is, what happened was almost immediately two things. First of all, they realized there was something wrong with them. They had been unashamed. cover up with fig leaves. And the answer, the reason for that, the Bible says, is because that underneath, underneath, deep down inside, everybody knows there's something wrong with me. There's an inadequacy and a sense of shame that we can't deal with. We can blame it on our parents, we can blame it on our upbringing, bad upbringing can aggravate it, but it doesn't cause it. You can say, I don't believe in God, I don't believe in guilt, I don't believe in hell, I don't believe in sin, and yet you spent all of your life dealing with a voice that comes to you and calls you a fool, calls you a coward, makes you feel ashamed of yourself. And the Bible says why you're putting on your makeup, and the Bible says why you're working out at the gym to get a six-pack, and the Bible's telling you why. The Bible says this is a fig leaf. Beauty has a power. Because it's the power, beauty's power is the power of our shame and inadequacy. And then secondly, the Bible back in Genesis 3 says we were built to be, to live forever. And we want to live forever. And we hate the idea of death. That's the reason why the animals, you know, they're afraid of pain, but they don't seem to be afraid of death, but we are. The Bible says it's because we know we were built to live forever instinctively. And therefore, the power of beauty is the power of our fear of death. We want beauty because we're afraid to die. We want beauty because we know deep down inside we feel like this is a way of covering over the fact that inside we feel like crap. And we don't want people to see what we're like. Now, the Bible says that's the only way of explaining the power of beauty. Now, what do you do about it? Well, there's one thing is you can say, I'm never going to let that happen to me again. I'm really going to be careful. I'm going to make sure that nobody, you know, pulls the wool over my eyes. I'm going to remember not to judge a book by its cover. And, you know, you can read the place in the Old Testament, 1 Samuel 15, story of David and Goliath. And in that story, it's about a little guy who turns out to be the champ. It's about a Columbo. It's about somebody who on the outside says this could never be our champion, but on the inside is. When Samuel comes to look for the anointed king, he looks at all the sons of Jesse, and he says, this must be it. And he's looking at the tallest and the biggest one, the guy with the most, you know, the build and everything. And God comes to Samuel, the prophet, and says, man looks on the outward appearance, but I look on the heart. And that's the whole story of David and Goliath. You can't judge a book by its cover. Columbo, don't be deceived by looks. Look for the inner thing. Look for the character. Forget about the service. And you can say, I'm going to try. I'm going to be wiser after this. That was a good lecture. That was a great time. I'm going to be more careful about that. I'm not going to be obsessed with beauty. I'm not going to be as controlled by beauty. And I don't think you're going to make it. I don't think trying harder is going to be better. I suggest that you read that story of David and Goliath, not just as an Aesop's fable with a moral that you're going to try hard to apply, but I'd like you to consider it, that maybe David is a picture of a greater David. Maybe David is a picture of a greater kind of Columbo. May I say with all due respect, there was somebody else who on the outside had no beauty, on the outside, it was incredibly ordinary. And as a result, the world rejected him too. But underneath, he was the king of glory. The Christian gospel, which says that the great God left his glory behind, the son of God left his glory behind and became ordinary, if you let that get into the center of your being, that is going to finally destroy the power of beauty, but not just because Jesus was being tricky. Why did Jesus lose his beauty? Why did the great beautiful God lose his beauty? No other religion has any kind of story like this. Why? And I'll tell you the answer. The answer is, he didn't do it just to be tricky. He didn't just to say, aha, like Columbo, I caught you. You thought I was stupid. You thought I was a fool, but I'm really smart. Jesus Christ did not lose his beauty to say, aha, I'm really the Messiah. You didn't know. You didn't follow me. Now you're lost. He didn't do that. I'll tell you what he did. He didn't lose his beauty to be tricky. He lost his beauty to save us. That's the gospel. See, God made us beautiful and we lost it. We know we lost our inner beauty. That's the reason why we're working so hard on our outer beauty. We know we're not loved because there's something wrong with us. We know we're not going to last because we're now mortal. And that's why beauty. But here's the great thing. Jesus Christ lost his beauty by dying on the cross. He became ordinary. He became weak. And he lost his beauty so that we could be beautiful in the sight of God when we believe in him. And here's what will happen. If you believe that Jesus Christ has existed, of your failures and your inner ugliness, God loves you, do you realize not until you know he loves you will you ever get over the need for beauty in yourself and the people around you? And not until you know that you're going to live forever with him. Will you get over the fear of aging? See, this is, as far as I know, the gospel story is the best way to explain the power of beauty and the best way to meet it. Now what we're going to do is I'm going to close in prayer. We're not going to do any questions up here because the time, the music was great. It went kind of long. I kind of went kind of long. And so we don't have much time for that. What we're going to do is this. I'm going to close in prayer. And when I come up at the end, I'm going to say those of you who would like to go to your classes can. And those of you who would like to stay for question and answer, what you ought to do is after a five-minute break, just come down. I'll get the mic out and I'll bring the questions that you wrote and I'll start to answer them. But there'll also be an opportunity to take questions from the floor. Let me close in prayer. I thank you, Father, that you have, that you're obviously a beautiful God, but your son lost his beauty so that we could get ours back. I thank you, Lord, that if we understand that and we come to have your son in the center of our lives, I thank you that then the power of beauty, the beauty myth should be broken. For those of us who are believers, Lord, we want to admit that that is not really, hasn't happened. A lot of us who are women are bound by the beauty myth. A lot of us who are men are bound by the beauty myth. A lot of us who are aging are bound by it. We pray that you would help us to see the implications of what we believe the truth of the gospel is. I pray, Lord, if there's anyone here who isn't sure about the truth of Christianity, that tonight might be the first step on a journey that will bring them to explore and to recognize the power of it. And Father, I thank you for giving us these great musicians tonight. I thank you that we could look at this subject and see your wisdom through art, through the word, through your truth, through the gospel. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen. Thank you very, very much for coming, and please stay if you can. Amen.
