TITLE: Tolkien, Tea and Tim (Part 2)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Tolkien, Tea, and Tim
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/tolkien-tea-and-tim-part-2/

============================================================

You know, I'm not sure that you can have, you know, email isn't the same. Because it has to be short. They really are pretty short ideas. I mean, the kind of time that these friends have with each other. We're not ready yet, are we? Oh, okay. By the way, do you know what my wife, I don't know if you know this story, you're not going to ask it, but my wife, Kathy, really became a Christian to the Narnia Chronicles. She and I are 57 years old, so we were born 1950. And so she started writing C.S. Lewis around 1961, 62. You know, she was 11 or 12. If you know her, she was precocious. She was basically, as she says, she really reached her current level of intellectual and moral and emotional development when she was about 11, and she hasn't really grown. She says she's way ahead of everybody else, but, you know, there she is. So she started writing Lewis, and Lewis wrote back four times, more than four probably, but we only saved four. But the most interesting thing was, and he was really wonderful, actually. In fact, they're very moving letters. They're moving because he took her seriously, that's all. They're short, and they're brief, and they're very sweet. But what she wanted to do more than anything else was visit him. So her neighbors were British, and they were going back to see their parents, and she was going to go as a nanny. So in spring of 1964, when she was still 13, she went with Nick and Eileen Pierce back to Britain, and her parents, they drove her up to Oxford, and they drove right to the kilns, and they drove up to the door. But Lewis had died, you know, in November of 63, and Kathy wouldn't have known about it. And so she went up to the door and opened the door, and there was Warnie Lewis, that's Lewis' brother who lived with him, came to the door, and she said she was looking for, you know, C.S. Lewis. And he said, oh, my brother died in November. Oh, I'm so sorry. We're so sorry. Well, could I show you around the house? And so she didn't bring her camera or anything. And so he showed her around the house and talked with her a little bit, and she went outside and picked some flowers and put them in her Narnia book and brought them home. Kind of interesting. And you look back on the thing, and I said, gee, do you realize what you were doing? Did you realize what happened? Anyway, but nobody had ever heard of Lewis back then. And, you know, it was her little, you know, she was just her favorite author, kind of a boutique kind of guy, you know, that's only a few of us don't know who he is. Oh, well. Okay, another question. Where? Hmm? You had mentioned something early on about Gollum almost coming back. Yeah. Could you talk a little bit about that and the significance? Yeah. Tolkien says that when he would reread the story, and since he had written it over 20 years, he said, well, it was so weird in the 1950s as to read the story, much of which he had written 20 years before, was like reading somebody else's book. You know, it was so old. So a lot of it would surprise him. You know, he'd forgotten. But he says the place that most moves him to tears, and it's not happy tears, is where on the stairs of Kirith Ungol, just before Gollum leads them into Shelob's lair, when they're both asleep, when both Gollum and, pardon me, when both Sam and Frodo are asleep, Gollum comes back. And the narrator describes Gollum when he sees Frodo sleeping in sort of in Sam's arms, and he sees Frodo's goodness in his face. And it says, suddenly, do you remember this place? Because suddenly Gollum, instead of looking like a frog spider kind of thing, began to look like a very, very old hobbit, and the green light in his eyes went out. And he began to look incredibly old. And he began to reach out to touch Frodo's knee. Almost it was a caress, if you remember that. And then suddenly Sam wakes up, sees Gollum pawing at his master, and suddenly says, what are you doing, sneaking about, you old villain? He just gets really angry at him. And then I think the text says, Gollum got back on his haunches, the green light came back into his eyes, the moment was gone, you know, beyond recall. And whenever Tolkien reads that, he says, that is the most moving spot in the book. He just weeps. Because he realizes there was a second there where Gollum was starting to soften because Frodo had been so good to him over and over and over and over. And that little chink that was left in his brain where light was still coming in was kind of reviving just a little bit. And at that moment, Sam gets... on, remember, he says, well, what were you doing? Frodo says, sneaking. You know, Sam says, I'm going to sneak. In other words, he was just so, you know, angry by the false accusation that it never comes back in that moment and is never able to come back. Tolkien and Lewis were more than I am. They were Pelagians. In other words, their understanding of human nature is a little bit less, a little bit, I mean, within the Christian theology, there are people who are a little bit more optimistic about the ability of human nature and a little bit less. And they were a little stronger on the free will thing than I am. But I'm still moved too by it. In other words, the idea was that Gollum was at the precipice there and he could have been perhaps brought over, but he was, you know, just, he was lost. That's the thing that, and so Gollum, you know, really has some life left in him. And, you know, basically Frodo's been, and as you know, Frodo's trying to reclaim him because he identifies with him. And that's the reason why Frodo is so patient with him. Because he knows, there but for the grace of whoever go I. Okay? I've heard rumor that you speak one of his Tolkien's elven languages. No, I just know a couple of the poems. I know a couple of the poems. I know a couple of the poems in Elvish, that's all. Okay. Well, that was... I mean, I know how to recite some of it. That's it. And we had mentioned, you had mentioned earlier that, you know, Tolkien hated allegory and he, there's even that in the first part of the book, he's just like, this is not allegory, it's not the bomb, this, that, and the other. Do you think, what do you think as far as why in Lewis's work, it was so evident the allegory was there when he even says later in his own criticism that he began with the images. And only later when he pinned it together with narrative, was it endowed with his own beliefs? Was it because of the swiftness with which he wrote? Yeah. Yes, I agree. Yes, that's right. Lewis has a book on how to write literature. And he says, you don't start with the concepts and then say, oh, I'll use a lion to get it across. You start with the images and the narratives that move you. And then you just... What Lewis has got the very... He just doesn't do it as well, or you might say as richly as Tolkien. Partly because maybe he's not as skillful in fiction. I mean, my goodness, Tolkien, I mean, Lewis as an essayist is unbelievable. And his prose is unbelievable. Unbelievable. As a writer of fiction, you know, he's just... He was so brilliant that, of course, his fiction is going to be great at some points, but he's not as good as Tolkien. And he also was much more impatient. He was a very facile, you know, kind of person. But Lewis will say the very same thing. You don't say, oh, here are my Christian concepts, and I want to, you know, get them across, so I'll come up with a lion and this and that. No. He says what you do is you put the gospel deep into your heart, and then you write the stories that move you. And they will reflect Christian stuff, and very often not in one-to-one relationships in richer ways, and they will actually, you know, connect with people better than if they're just sort of, you know, moral fables that are clearly, you know, gussied up with a couple of symbols. So basically what he would say is you... Alan Jacobs wrote an autobiography of Lewis called The Narnian recently, and he quotes that section where Lewis says the same thing that Tolkien would say. Tolkien says the same thing somewhere. And he says, you just saturate your mind with Christian, you know, Christian truth, and your heart with Christian truth, and your imagination with Christian truth, and then you just write the stories that really turn you on. And what will happen is you'll find that those stories will have been affected by the soil in which they grew. And you'll see all kinds of Christian stuff in it, but it won't necessarily be easy, direct, one-on-one stuff. And those are the best stories anyway, because everybody else is doing the same thing. Everybody else, when you're writing stories, they're coming out of a worldview, and they're reflecting the worldview, but very often, hopefully not in a preachy way. Not in a...this is what you...not a lot of stuff is preachy. Lewis seems preachy compared to Tolkien, because he's just...I think Lewis wasn't as good at it, but he uses the very same philosophy, yes. Okay? I've always...I've always been impacted by all the Christian undertones that have been in The Lord of the Rings, and I always sort of felt like perhaps there was one... perhaps. And I was wondering if you felt that there was some Christian undertones behind his story. Yeah, the Tom Bombadil character, which Peter Jackson very wisely left totally out. Totally out. No way is that going to come across. It would have been so silly. Tolkien was asked about Tom Bombadil regularly. And if you read his letters, which are pretty interesting, over the years you'll see that he actually gave somewhat different answers. But because basically he does what I just said Lewis said, and that is you don't start out saying, well, what does Tom Bombadil represent? You, you, a character appeals to you, a character presents itself to your imagination and you develop and you, and you bring him out. And if he, if he, if he tickles your fancy or if he moves you or if he, you know, strikes you in some way, you put him in. And there it is. And then afterwards you can ask the question. Of all the different answers that people, that he gave, the one that most hits me is this. He says every single real world has got, you know, he says real worlds have a lot of laws that are consistent. You know, people can't jump off buildings and fly in our world, you know. They can maybe in some other world. And so most, most worlds have got to be consistent. But one thing that's true of all real worlds is there's some things that are absolutely inexplicable and they don't seem to fit. And Tom Bombadil just doesn't fit. Nobody really understands who he is or what he's from. I mean, in fact, do you read this stuff? It doesn't really, what is he? You know, people have been trying to say, you know, there were elves. There were what they call, I hope I don't bore you, but if you, there is Valar. There's these angelic beings that came into the world to create the world. And you had higher level ones, they're called the Valar. And then lower level ones are called the Maiar or Amaya. Maiar is plural. And Sauron was Amaya. Gandalf was Amaya. Okay. They came from outside the world in and that's, and then they take embodied, formed in various ways. So some people are saying, well, it must have been Tom Bombadil, but that doesn't really fit. No, you know, the other Maya don't know who he is. Is he an elf? No, he was there before. He says he was there before the first acorn. Remember that? And so every, so people kept writing Tolkien and said, how does he fit? And the answer is he fits because there's some things in every real world that just don't seem to fit. All right. That's it. It's the best I can do. I, I like him more and more. The more I read the book, I have to admit the first few times I went through the book, I said, what is this? What is this? Okay. Yes. You've mentioned in several sermons, the part of the book, when Sam wakes up and talks about the passing shadow, the evil being a passing shadow. Oh yeah. Yeah. That's one of my favorites. And I was wondering, um, just tying in with the faith themes, what your opinion of the role of Sam is, because I think in the book, in the movie, he's almost maybe just as pivotal as Frodo. And there's no doubt Frodo wouldn't have made it without him. So tying back into faith and grace and salvation, I was wondering how you think Sam's character plays into that. Um, actually Tolkien, again, if you read his letters, when people asked him questions, the letters, because he wrote them to individuals over a long period of time, sometimes the things he said when they're all, you know, gathered into one book, the letters of J.R. Tolkien, sometimes the things he said over the years aren't completely consistent with each other because he didn't write them that way. But, but at one, in one of his letters, he says, Sam Gamgee is the hero of the book, not Frodo, because after all, Frodo, Aragorn and, and, uh, you know, Gandalf are all Jesus figures in a kind of overt way. And they all bring salvation in their own kind of ways. But Sam, if you're just, if you're looking for a narrative and a plot and a protagonist and antagonist, he's the ultimate protagonist. He really is the hero. Um, because his love, he is a rustic, he is a, he is a blue collar guy. Um, he has, and his love of the elves turns him into a great heart. In a certain sense, Frodo is already, you know, a kind of, uh, you know, he's different. You know, he's kind of got an elvish air about him and he's, and he's like Bilbo. But Sam Gamgee is really every guy, every man, every woman. He's just, he's anybody. And, uh, he's really the hero, I would say, because he, he's, uh, a faithful friend. I guess I didn't mention this. Lewis and Tolkien, even in spite of the fact that the friendship went down, um, uh, better book about friendship than Lord of the Rings. In fact, if you look at it, Lord of the Rings is all about certain friendship tandems. You've got Merry and Pippin, you've got Legolas and Gimli, you've got Frodo and Sam, you know. You even have Aragorn and Aemur and that kind of thing. There's all these remarkable friendships and the friendship of Sam to Frodo, you might say, in some way saves the world. But anyway, Tolkien actually sees Sam as the central figure, not Frodo. Because if you say, is Frodo more a central figure than Gandalf or than Aragorn? Basically, the person that pulls it all off is Sam. And as you all know, if you go back to the appendices, Sam goes overseas. Last of the ring bearers, you know. Anyway, Sean Astin didn't do a bad job. I mean, it was one of those things where it would have been an utter crime. He wasn't too bad at it. But, you know, I don't, I think Sam, you know, Sean Astin is actually older than Elijah Wood. And it's kind of hard not to see that. You know, Sam, Sean Astin is like in his mid-30s. I mean, when they made it, it was in his mid-30s and Elijah was like 19. And actually in the book, Frodo is in his 50s and Sam is a young man. And that doesn't come across in the movie very well. So, but even there, Sam is weak. You know, he's little. He's not a great warrior. He's just trying to do his job. So, but he's not, in some ways he's not a Christ figure. And therefore, I believe he's the person you're supposed to probably identify with. He's your best example. Frodo's not really your example. Aragorn, Gandalf, Elrond, Galadriel. Don't try. Don't try. You know, you'll be a, you know, it doesn't matter how long you stay in front of the mirror, you'll never be Galadriel. But I, in some ways, I think Frodo, Sam is the person being held up to you by, by Tolkien saying, you can be like him. You can. There's no reason why you can't be. So do it. Somebody else? While we're waiting for the next one, I want to ask you about Aragorn. Oh, now, you know what? You're not looking very hard. Raise your hands if you have a question. What about Aragorn, though? No, I'll answer your question. I'm wondering what observations or meaning you can take away from his somewhat resistance to eventual path of embracement of his role as the king. Oh, you mean in the movie? See, here's the thing. The movie, is made by modern people. Yeah, in spite of the fact that Peter Jackson embraced Lord of the Rings, he is essentially a secular modern person. And therefore, you've got to have angst. You know, you have to have people wrestling with their identity. That's just stupid, of course. Because that's, you know, that assumes a secular approach to things. I mean, in traditional societies, you get your identity by submitting to your duty or your role. And in modern society, you get your identity by figuring out who you are, by looking inside yourself. And so it was a shame in a way, because you even see it in the first movie. Of the three movies, it's the best. But even in the first movie, the idea of Aragorn not wanting to be king and struggling with it, that's just not in the book at all. What he's afraid of is he won't have the courage, you know, to do what he has to do. But in the book, I mean, in the movie, it's actually an identity thing. I don't want to be king. You never see Aragorn saying that. What he's afraid of is that he just won't be strong enough, you know, to trod the path, that he'll, you know, something like that. So that was one of the biggest disappointments. Besides that, we're actually told, and I told you that Tolkien has written tons of sidebar stuff that he never expected to put into the books in order to get everything straight. But Aragorn was 6'6". And Vigo is no 6'6", I'll tell you. And Galadriel is 6'4". Now you know. Yeah. That's a lot of woman. Anybody else? A quick one for you. Do you know chronologically where the Iluvatar story got written? Really chronologically, not according to where it falls in the books. But when did he actually write that? I mean, about God creating the world? Oh, long, long ago. 30s, way before The Hobbit, before everything. He wrote a series of, he wrote something called The Book of Lost Tales when he was recuperating from... ... ... that was like 1916, 1917. And those were based on, he was very taken by the Kalevala and he was taken by some of the old Norse myths and he wanted to write an Anglo-Saxon-English mythology cycle and he did. However, after writing those things, you have the Fall of Gondolin in there and you have the Baron Luthien thing and all that stuff. But then what he had to do was he had to write something called The Tale of Years in which he wrote a kind of connected narrative from the creation of the world to the end in order to probably fit these things up in. And I think he did that in the 20s and early 30s. So all that stuff was there before even The Hobbit was written in 1937. So the whole idea of that third theme being wrapped around Melkor's theme that really does... Oh yeah. Oh, that's there. Way back. Okay, last chance. Anybody else? Okay. I didn't get number six and seven that you mentioned in the beginning about sort of the Christian influences that you took away from it. I sort of had five and what were the last two? Okay. Thank you. Well, I actually kind of mentioned one and that is the power of stories, which I actually answered in your first question. And, you know, he really monkeyed with those Anglo-Saxon myths by putting in hope. You know, for example, you know, when the Rohirrim, Rohan is definitely straight out Anglo-Saxon types. And so when they kill the orcs, you know, at the battle, when they find the orcs and they kill the orcs on the eaves of Fangorn, we're told that they buried their...they built a mound and they put their fallen comrades under the mound and they put their spears on the mound and they rode around and sang songs of tribute and then they left. And Tom Shippey said, yeah, it's a little bit of a change because what the Anglo-Saxons would have done is they would have, you know, put their fallen comrades on the mound and then they would have killed three or four slaves and a couple of women and thrown them, maybe their wives, and thrown them on the mound and then burned them and that would have been their tribute. So Tolkien kind of left that out because the Rohirrim are kind of Christianized Anglo-Saxons. They have the sense of doom and the nobility and the bravery and the sense of...but it's toned way down. And I think that's the...I still think that's really, really important, that story...and actually that's what my sermon was about yesterday, that basically it's not enough just to tell yourself the law. Here's what it means to be a Christian. You do this, this, this, and this, and this. Basically by understanding the story, it changes the heart. Stories shape you now. The other thing I was going to say, which I didn't, is Tolkien believed in the power of language more than I believe in it, I think, but at least he's influenced me. I worry about what language is doing in the internet age. I worry about how ineloquent we're getting and how less literate we are. Tolkien believed that words really shape you. It's not like I have a feeling and I have a worldview and I express it in words. He thinks the words actually create feelings and create a worldview. Now this is actually pretty, I think, powerful, actually. He says, for example, many people have complained about Tolkien and to Tolkien that a lot of his language in the book is archaic. So you know the Rohirrim and the Dunedain and the elves always speak in kind of archaic language. So in fact, Judas Shulovitz was making fun of it in the New York Times Magazine a couple years ago where he says, when Legolas says, there lies the fair woods of Lothlorien. You know, why didn't he say, hey, there's Lothlorien, beautiful. There lies the, and she says, the only answer is, even so, let us go to it. You know, that, and she was making fun of the archaic language. Now, Tolkien thought it was extremely important to use archaic language. First of all, because he was a philologist and a world's expert, he knew how word order and things changed from the, he knew 15th century, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, early 20th. You know, like he understood how word order had changed. He said, for example, I could have said, they chose helmets. Or I could say, helms too, they chose. And he says, it gets a whole different worldview across. things. He says you do not understand how important language is to the way it shapes your worldview. I don't know quite what the implications of this are, but in one letter he really hit me with this. He wrote a letter to somebody who was complaining. He wrote a letter to a writer, a reader, who complained about the archaic language. And he says, why in the world couldn't you just update it a little bit? And Tolkien first quoted the place where Gandalf tells the old Theoden to stay home while they go out to battle. You know that place where Theoden sort of healed, right? Tolkien sort of, you know, in the movie it's sort of like an exorcism. But in the book, you know, he heals Theoden. And then Theoden says, you know, thank you you've healed me. And then Gandalf says, now we're going to go out to battle. And you, Theoden King, stay here and we'll be home soon. And remember, this is where Theoden King says, no, I'm going to go with you. But here's how he says it. And this is, Tolkien is quoting this in a letter. Nay, Gandalf, said the king, you do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war to fall in the front of battle if need be. Thus shall I sleep better. Okay? Remember that? See? So Gandalf says, we're going to go off to fight. And Theoden says, nay, Gandalf, you do not know your own skill in healing. It shall not be so. I myself will go to war to fall in the front of battle if need be. Thus shall I sleep better. Now, Tolkien goes on and says to the reader, he says, now how would this sound in modern English? Well, it could go like this. The first part could go like this. Not at all, my dear Gandalf. You don't know your own skill as a doctor. I shall go to war in person, even if I die as one of the first casualties. Now, listen, Tolkien says, maybe. You know, you can laugh at that saying, well, that's not nearly as, that doesn't have as much gravitas. But he says, I'm getting at more than just that. He says, but then what? How would a modern person, talking like that, express Theoden's heroic sentiment, thus shall I sleep better? Okay? See, Theoden had said, I will ride out to fall in battle if need be, thus shall I sleep better. And so Tolkien says, okay, let's put this in modern idiom. I might go out to war in person, even if I die as one of the first casualties. And Tolkien says, but what then? How would a modern person, talking like that, express Theoden's heroic sentiment, thus shall I sleep better? People who think like Theoden just do not talk in modern idiom. They can't. You might add, quote, I will sleep sounder in my grave, if you like, but there would be an insincerity of thought, a disunion of word and meaning. For a king who spoke in a modern style would never think in such terms, like some non-Christians making a reference to some Christian belief, which did not in fact move him at all. In other words, he says there's no way to say, thus shall I sleep better, except to say, thus shall I sleep better. No way. That's getting across a heroic sentiment that's impossible because modern idiom doesn't get that across. Because our modern way of speaking in English actually reflects a relativistic worldview. I don't know quite what that means, but I think it's true. And so there's another place where Tolkien says, the development of a form of language familiar in meaning, yet freed of trivial associations, the so-called high diction style, say of Beowulf, is filled with the memory of good and evil, is an achievement, and its possessors are richer than those who have no such tradition. So he loves, you know, he felt like to say they chose helmets and helms too they chose are really two different statements. You might say, no, no, each of them are saying they went over and they got a helmet and they put it on. But he says, you don't really seem to understand. I didn't mention that because I'm not sure, to me, it shows that worldview really affects everything. And also it shows that when you think about how can you apply your faith to, say, art or music or literature or anything else, the relationship is more organic than we have a tendency to think. See, most of us have a tendency to say, oh, a Christian worldview, that means you believe one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight things. And I have a Christian worldview and if you only believe four of them, you don't have a Christian worldview. And a Christian worldview are stories that get across these eight things. And you see, it's much more organic than that. And that's the reason why basically great Christian ideas, great Christian art, great Christian, I don't know, cultural products come. friendship, fellowship, years and years of talking to other friends, and then you do the things that move you. So, okay, it's eight o'clock. I'm going to, this may not have seemed like this kind of holy time, but I'm going to close in prayer anyway, okay? Our Father, I really thank you that you have taught us, I think, through these brothers, C.S. Lewis and J.R. Tolkien, and I pray that in a place like New York City, we might build on the lessons we learned from them. I'm not sure that there's a better place to do that. Because Christians who are really, in an organic way, letting their faith shape everything they do could really have an impact on the culture by just being here and living here. And an urban environment is a place where friendships really can work. And I pray, Lord, that you would teach us how to apply these lessons so that we can honor and glorify you. It's in Jesus' name we pray. Amen. Okay, anything? Oh. Thank you very much.
