TITLE: Unbelief
SCRIPTURE: Acts 4:1-20
TOPICS: Salvation Understanding the Gospel Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: The Book of Acts
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/unbelief/

============================================================

The passage on which our teaching is based is written in your bulletin, and I'm going to read it. Let me tell you what it's about. The book of Acts is the only eyewitness original source document for what actually happened in the early days of the church. You know, in the scholarly world, if somebody wants to say this is what Socrates was or this is what this was, you always have to go to original sources. They don't want you to quote people who quote other people. They don't want you to quote secondary sources. They want you to go to the primary sources. People love to say this is what Christianity is about. This is what I think the essence of Christianity is. But the only way to find out what Christianity is is to go to the source. And the earliest days of Christianity are, they are recorded for us here in the book of Acts. And we've seen the first sermon. We've seen the first worship service. We've seen many firsts. This is the first persecution. The first place the world comes in hostility and opposition to the church and the message of the gospel. Now, the priests and the captain of the temple guard and the Sadducees came up to Peter and John while they were speaking to the people. They were greatly disturbed because the apostles were teaching the people and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead. They seized Peter and John and because it was evening, they put them in jail until the next day. But many who heard the message believed. And the number of men grew to about 5,000. The next day, the rulers, elders, and teachers of the law met in Jerusalem. Annas, the high priest, was there and so were Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and the other men of the high priest's family. They had Peter and John brought before them and began to question them. By what power or what name did you do this? Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers and elders of the people, if we are being called to account today for the act of kindness shown to a cripple and asked how he was healed, then know this. You and all the people of Israel, it is by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, but whom God raised from the dead, that this man stands before you healed. He is the stone you builders rejected, which has become the capstone. Salvation is found in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given to men by which we must be saved. And when they'd seen the courage of Peter and John and realized that they were unschooled, ordinary men, they were astonished and they took note that these men had been with Jesus. But since they could see the man who had been healed standing there with them, there was nothing they could say. So they ordered them to withdraw from the Sanhedrin and then conferred together. What are we going to do with these men, they asked. Everybody living in Jerusalem knows they've done an outstanding miracle and we cannot deny it. But to stop this thing from spreading any further among the people, we must warn these men to speak no longer to anyone in this name. Then they called them in again and commanded them not to speak or teach at all in the name of Jesus. But Peter and John replied, Judge for yourselves whether it is right in God's sight to obey you rather than God, for we cannot help speaking about what we have seen and heard. And this is God's word. What you see here in this persecution illustrates what Jesus Christ says in John 15. He says to his disciples, If you belong to the world, it would love you as its own, but I have chosen you out of the world and that is why the world hates you. Remember, servants are not greater than their master. Since they hated me, they will hate you also. But this is to fulfill what is written, they hated me without reason. Now this is a very frightening and yet important passage that illustrates what Jesus just said because what we're reading here and what we learn here is that unbelief, unbelief, opposition, a lack of belief, opposition to the gospel message is not a simple thing. It's a complex thing. It's not a simple lack of something. It's the presence of something else. It's not just a lack of persuasion. It's a spirit of deep hostility and confusion, deep and pervasive. Unbelief. Let's see what this is made of and then I'll show you why it's so important to understand it. We're shown here the depth of unbelief and the structure or nature of unbelief. And then after we've looked at the depth and the structure I'd like to apply this and say, well, what difference does that make to us? How does that influence the way in which we live? What difference does it make? First of all, let me show you what this passage shows you about what this is making in mind I'll see you next time. what it purports usually to be. It usually purports to be intellectual, but it's not. Well, how do we see that? First of all, notice that the people who oppose Christianity have absolutely nothing intellectually in common at all, except that they hate it. So, for example, look here. Verse 1, the priest and the captain of the temple guard and the Sadducees came up to Peter and John while they were speaking to the people. Then look down here at verse 5. The next day, the rulers, the elders, and teachers of the law met in Jerusalem. Who are all these people? Well, it'd be tempting to go into the backgrounds, but I'll just say this. The Sadducees were religious liberals. The Sadducees were people who believed that morality was necessary for civic order, but they did not believe in any other part of the Bible or religion. They did not believe in the supernatural. They didn't believe in miracles. They didn't believe in resurrection. They didn't believe in afterlife. They didn't believe in the spiritual world at all. They're what we today would call secular people, moral rationalists, religious liberals, you might call them. But on the other hand, you have the teachers of the law. And who were the teachers of the law? They were the Pharisees. And the Pharisees were the fundamentalists. The Pharisees were hyper-religious. The Pharisees believed in miracles. They believed in the resurrection. They believed in everything. And then, of course, you have the rulers, and you have the captain of the temple guard. You have the military. You have the politicians. So what have we got here? These are people who had nothing in common. They hated each other. They had no intellectual common ground at all. But they were absolutely united by their hostility to the gospel. Now, what I mean here is this. It is typical for people who don't believe the gospel to say this. They say, well, the reason I don't believe is a simple matter. We have modern knowledge now. Educated people now know. There's things in the Bible we can't accept now. We now know this. We now know that. And that's the reason. It's an intellectual problem. No, it's not. And here's why. People always say, we now know. But that's what they... Every hundred years, people say that. And the thing that you now know that clearly disproves Christianity will be totally disproven and discredited a hundred years from now. For example, a hundred and twenty years ago, the leading secular critics of Christianity said this. A hundred and fifty years ago, even a hundred years ago, they said, we don't need God to create a great society. Here's what they would say. They say, we have science. We have empirical tools. And we're studying cultures. We're studying societies. We're studying human beings. We have the sciences of anthropology and of sociology and of psychology. And we are going to figure out what makes people tick. And we are going to be able to find the scientific principles on which we can build the perfect society. It won't be a society of religion. All the societies will look alike because we'll get rid of poverty. We'll get rid of crime. We'll get rid of mental illness. We'll get rid of these things because of their science. Now, some of you are saying, you're kidding. They said that? Yes, they said that. And that's the basis on which they said, yes, we don't need Christianity. Now we know. The leading secular thinkers of today utterly hate that. They say, to talk like that, that science is going to show us how to create the perfect culture and get rid of all these. First of all, that's culturally imperialistic. It's imperialistic to say science can do that. And it's naive to say that it can do that. It's completely repudiated. And yet, the critics are just as hostile. In other words, the critics of this century and the critics of last century have no common ground, but they hate Christianity. What does that show? You can't say, the reason that I'm not a Christian is because of this modern knowledge I've got now. This modern knowledge is what every century people said was the basis on which they got rid of Christianity. That can't be it because it's always changing. That can't be it. To say, I'm educated. What do you mean you're educated? Paul was educated. Peter wasn't. They both became Christians. Look at Pascal. Look at Bach. Look at Augustine. You know, great thinkers. They were Christians. You can't say, well, intelligent people. No, you can't. You can't say, we now know. Something is going on deeper here. This is not an intellectual thing. It's not based on modern knowledge. It's not based on the intellectual. It's not based on the rational at all. And actually, that really comes out, and if you take a look at verse 2, where it says, they were greatly disturbed because the apostles were teaching the people. They were greatly disturbed. There's no detachment here. deeply grieved and troubled offended angered stirred up inside and you know whenever you um the only way to understand pascal's wager is in light of this for i'd heard of pascal's wager recently i've gone back and been reading him again and pascal's wager many people think is an argument for god it's not at all if you understand it you have to see it in light of this here's pascal's wager pascal's wager says here's a christian christians cannot empirically scientifically prove but they still believe that there's a god and judgment coming and then he says here's the non-christians they can't empirically prove but they believe that there is no god or there's no judgment you see that pascal says they can't scientifically prove there's no judgment and christians can't scientifically prove there is but he says here's the question who stands to lose more if they're wrong and he says all right if christians are wrong they lose finitely they lose of course they lose there's lots of things as christians that we're not doing that would probably be fun if there's no god if there's no judgment day there's things that would be fun okay now so we don't do those things on the other hand we have meaning we have purpose we've got a sense of of spiritual support you know we have a sense of love so uh you know pascal says if christians are wrong they lose finitely but if the non-christians are wrong they lose infinitely now is that a proof that it's irrational to disbelieve no what it is proof that it's irrational to be cavalier about christianity to be indifferent you see pascal was a brilliant man he was the one of the greatest mathematicians and scientists and philosophers he had more iq points than everybody in this room probably put together but his friends when he would sit down and talk to about christianity they would not say well you know what i stand to lose a lot here i've really better look at this i better think about this i ought to deliberate i ought to no what do they say they say christianity they were disturbed they were disgusted they were ridiculous i'm a modern person this is the sixth you know 17th century i'm a modern person and he says wait a minute it's not irrational to disbelief but it's irrational to be indifferent cavalier he says there's something driving my friends to repudiate the gospel and it is not reason it's irrational to have this kind of attitude something else is going on here they're disturbed you see greatly disturbed by christianity so unbelief is not an absence of something it's the presence of something else it's not just a lack of persuasion something inside driving us to be hateful toward the gospel all right so what is the structure that's the depth what's the structure then of unbelief what is it really made of well i think it's a fascinating and just a fascinating case study let me show it to you the general principle and then show you how it is illustrated here notice though first of all it says they were greatly disturbed why because the apostles were teaching the people why were they greatly disturbed because the apostles were disturbed was were teaching the people down in verse seven they get them in there and what do they say they say by what power or by what name did this you now that's what in the greek the greek that acts is written in originally it is very important to see that the final word the emphasis is you who do you think you are by what name or by authority on what basis do you do such thing and here it is here's the key down in verse 13 when they saw the courage the assurance the confidence when they saw the assurance and confidence of peter and john and realized that they were unschooled ordinary men they were astonished all right here's what's going on and you know peter responds and says the stone you builders rejected has become the capstone or the cornerstone uh recently i revisited a book by stephen covey the seven habits of uh highly effective people and this this in the second habit he uses a very great word he says that every human being has got a bottom line which becomes the gestalt for their entire life now that's a great word he says he says for if any of you were here last Sunday night, when we were doing our open forum, but I'd like to show you how Stephen Covey, what he's saying here, really sheds a great deal of light on what's going on and on belief. He says, every human being has a cornerstone. We're all builders, see? The stone you builders rejected. Everybody's got a cornerstone for their life. Everybody's got a life system that they've built. And that cornerstone, Stephen Covey calls it your center. There's a bottom line. There's something that you make your ultimate value. And he says, in the book, he says, it becomes the gestalt. It becomes the basis for your security, he says, for your wisdom, for your power, and for making decisions. And actually, there's more. And you see how that would work. Look, he says, for example, your cornerstone, or what he would call a center, your cornerstone, the thing on which your life is built, could be your education. You're an educated person. Or it could be your morality. Or it could be your family. Or it could be a political cause. Or it could be your career. And there's any number of them. But you see why it would be the gestalt for everything. For example, he says, it's your security. It's your confidence. So if, for example, your cornerstone is a career, or on the other hand, it's your sophisticated education, or it's your family, it becomes, that's your confidence. That's the thing that makes you able to feel good about yourself and to look the world in the eye. But it also becomes your wisdom. Now, what does wisdom mean? Wisdom means this is the way you understand all of life. This is the way you just decide who's the good people and who's the bad people. This is how you decide what's going wrong with the world. You look at the world, friends, and you see all kinds of things wrong. And most of us have got a theory. We know what's wrong with the world. Yes, we do. And it's usually because the world doesn't have what we've got. Paul talks about this when he says that the cross is an offense both to Jew and to Greek. Now, when Paul was moving around the Mediterranean, in every little town, there was a Jewish community and a Greek community. And here's who they were. They were two different gestalts, two different life systems. The Jews in most of those communities were hardworking, working class people, merchant people, and they also were very moral people. And their cornerstone was their morality and their hard work. Now, you understand that kind of person, don't you? They're not sophisticated. They haven't got a lot of education. But this is the way they feel good about themselves. Their confidence, you see, comes from saying, I'm a decent chap. You know, I'm the kind of person that, you know, I'm a straight arrow. I do my duty. I do my best. I'm a moral person. I have hard work. I don't have a lot of ears. I don't put on ears. Right? And then the Greeks, though, the Greeks in every little town were the sophisticated people, you know. They were the people that ate in the outdoor cafes, I suppose, even back then. And they sat around, and they talked about these things, and they talked about philosophy because they were the educated people, and they were the sophisticated people. And that's how they felt confident. That's how, where they got their courage, that they had their credentials. They had their degrees. You see, they had written their books. They knew, they had written their poetry. And the gestalt, the Jewish people said, this is what's wrong with the world. People aren't decent like me. And you know what the Greeks said, this is what's wrong with the world. People aren't sophisticated like me. They're all boars, you know. They're all fools. Whereas, you see, the Jewish people would sit around and say, well, here's what's wrong with the world. Everybody, Stephen Covey says, whatever you've decided is the cornerstone of your life becomes your confidence, becomes your wisdom, becomes your gestalt. Here's why the gospel shakes these people. Here's why the gospel does not just offend them intellectually. They don't come and say, they're not talking so much about the resurrection. You know why? The Sadducees and the Pharisees would have an argument if they got talked about the resurrection. That's not the real problem. The real problem is not intellectual. Their life system has been shaken. The gospel comes and it points to your cornerstone and it says, this is inadequate. And here's why. Unschooled, unlearned men. See, Peter and John were blue-collar, uneducated fishermen. And they've been part of the old system, the old pecking order. The old pecking order was, if you're down there, fine, you're a decent person and so forth, but we're the leaders. We've gone to the right schools. They look at Peter and John and they knew that perhaps they'd known them. Peter and John probably shuffled around like people in that old life system. They said, well, you know, we're just simple people. We're just fishermen. We don't do much. We can't say much. And now they're, remember Peter denying his master? But now look at him, bold, preaching without credentials, teaching. come from? The old life system that Peter and John had built their life on had been smashed. But here's what the gospel says. The gospel says all people are sinners. See, it comes to the Jew and it comes to the Greek. It comes to everybody. It comes to any life system. It comes to the Jew and says you know what? You're real moral. But do you realize that before God you're no better off than the worst criminal? You're all sinners. But if you believe in Jesus who has done it for you, who is your savior, then you can be all kings and priests no matter what you've done, no matter who you've been. That offended them. And then the gospel comes to the Greeks. You know, the Greeks and their gestals all has to do with sophistication and education. Not morality. They say, oh, morality. That's for the bourgeois, you know. But the important thing is the sophistication, the education. Enlightened views, you know. Progressive views. And the gospel comes to them and says, I'm sorry. Before God you're no better than the most ignorant peasant. The most backwards conservative. Doesn't matter that you're an enlightened liberal. Doesn't matter. You're no better off. We're all sinners and yet through Jesus Christ because he's done it for us. Because he lived the life we should have lived and died the death we should have died. There's a way for you to be kings and priests. That offended them. Because whenever the gospel comes to you, it doesn't just say, well, you know, you have to believe in the existence of God and you say, oh, yeah, it's interesting. Well, I wonder. Let me look at the proofs. Or you have to believe in miracles. Well, I wonder if miracles are possible. That's not what it does primarily. It comes after your cornerstone. It comes after your basis and it shakes you up. And everybody except a Christian has a cornerstone which is too weak for the freight and the weight of the whole building that's built upon it. And here's why. If you have built on your career, if you have built on your family, if you have built on your education, if you have built on your artistic ability, if you have built on whatever, you're unstable. And you're sensitive. And you can tell that somehow it's inadequate. It's unstable because it's subject to your performance. It's subject to circumstances. You're always a little nervous. If you feel like my mountain is sure, why? Because what is your cornerstone? What is your gestalt? It's all built around I'm a family man, let's say. But how do you know that your children won't turn out to be a juvenile delinquent? Or you know that you are a sophisticated person and you have written the very best essay in the area of cultural anthropology and you just got an award but how do you know that somebody might come along and change the regnant view in your field and everybody starts to laugh at your views. You're always afraid. Because if you built on anything but Jesus, you're not sure. But here's what kills people about Christians. And here's what makes people hate Christians. Christians are sure. it's their courage when they saw the courage of Peter and John. A Christian is somebody who says, I know that God loves me. I know that I'm saved. I know that I know God. Now the Bible's filled with that but that is something that utterly confounds and utterly bothers and irritates anybody else. Because everybody else is sure that every cornerstone has to be based on my performance. and therefore nobody can be sure. Christians are people who've been so radically humbled that they're sure. But from the outside anybody who's sure looks like they're radically arrogant. Christians are people who say, I've been so radically humbled. Nathan Coles, the little Connecticut farmer in 1741 who heard George Whichfield preach and he wrote down the story of his conversion and you can still read it in compendiums of the history of the Great Awakening and he said, my hearing George Woodfield preach gave me a heart wound and I saw by God's grace that my old foundations were torn up and I realized my righteousness could not save me. That's what it means to be a Christian. The thing that comes at you is your old foundation. It's all torn up and you say, wait a minute, I've been, the reason I'm always shaking, the reason I'm always upset is because I think that maybe this is the way in which I can reach God, heaven, however you conceive it and that's why I'm always very nervous. Along comes the gospel and the gospel says you can be sure if you humble yourself completely but from the outside people see the certainty of Christians as being arrogance. From the inside you know it's incredible humility. Now this is one of the ways in which you can tell whether you really understand the gospel. Cain Cain killed Abel, so marvel not that the world hates you. 1 John 3, verse 13 says, Cain killed Abel, so marvel not. Here's Cain. Cain comes, and he offers an offering, and he's pointing to himself. He's saying, this is the thing that I've done as a tiller of the field. Oh, Lord, I'm productive. Abel comes, and he slays an animal and says, Lord, I just remember what you told mom and dad, Adam and Eve, that someday a descendant would come and be wounded so that I could be forgiven, and I trust in that descendant, that wounded one who will be wounded like the sacrifice. In other words, Abel looks to the grace of God. Cain looks to his works, his good works, his effort, his performance. And as a result, Abel knew God accepted him. That's what Hebrews 11 tells us. But Cain wasn't sure, and Cain hated Abel, but Abel loved Cain. That's how you can tell the difference. That's how you can tell whether your cornerstone is Jesus Christ or whether it's just religion, whether your cornerstone is Jesus Christ or something else. Cain's hate people who say, I'm sure. Abel's love the people who aren't sure. Abel's heart went out to Cain. Cain hated Abel. Do you get offended when somebody says, I'm sure? I know. You're Cain. Now, that's the reason why these people were so upset. Because these men contradicted their entire life system. Utterly destroyed it. Utterly tore it down. How could you be so confident? Where did you get that confidence? How can you be sure? I hate that. And that's the reason why they hate Christians. When he says, salvation is found in no other name. There is no other name by which we must be saved. Many people look at that and they say, that's the one thing about Christianity I don't like. I could handle everything else except that. If you could just say that all good people can reach God, then I could understand Christianity. But do you realize, if Peter and John had been preaching that, if they said Jesus is one way to God, but any good person can reach God, they wouldn't have had that courage. You know why? When you say, let's just change that one little thing, what you mean is, let's change the whole thing. The reason that they were able to get up there, unschooled and ordinary, was because they knew that it wasn't any, their good deeds that saved them. There is nothing else that saves but Jesus being a good person. When somebody says, all good people can get to God on their own. What you really mean is, good works is enough. And I'll tell you this, Peter and John, if they believed that, that any good person could get to God, they would never have had that courage. They would have slunk away because they knew they weren't good. And I would slunk away too. I wouldn't be here. I would not be here. You say, well, you're a good person. I know who I am. You don't tell me who I am. I would not be here. If I believed that there was any other way, you see, if you say any good person can make it, no, the Bible says Jesus Christ has done it for you. It's either that or else just being a good person is enough. If being a good person is enough, I can't be here. Peter can't be here. John can't be here. There'd be no confidence. I have none. They'd have none. And if you know your own heart, you'd have none either. That's the structure of unbelief. Now, what does it mean? What difference does it make? This. If you see that unbelief is not just simply a lack of persuasion, but what it really is, is a deep abiding hatred of the idea that you can be saved by grace, deep abiding hatred of the idea that your performance cannot make you right. If you understand that, Christian friends, let me say this to you. Do you know why you're miserable today? Do you know why you're unhappy in any way? Some of you are angry, some of you are distressed, some of you are anxious. I'm sure you are. I know human beings. You say, I believe in the gospel. No, you don't. Your main reason for being unhappy today is the same as the world's main reason for being unhappy today. Inside your heart, there's unbelief. You say, well, I believe the gospel. No, you don't. Or you wouldn't be in the condition you're in. In 2 Peter 1, Peter says, you should be growing in holiness and godliness and self-control and love. And then he says, and if you're you were cleansed from your sins. Therefore, I will never cease to remind you of these things. Now, you know what that means? Youth groups used to, I used to hate youth groups. Kids raised in church homes, you go to a youth group and you say, I'm going to teach you about this today. And you know what they do? They go like this and they say, but we already know that. We know that. Hey, I've been going to this church for long. Of course I know that. And what you have, you know what Peter says? I will never stop reminding you of these things. What does Peter know? He says, if you really believed, there's a part of your life, there's a part of your heart that refuses to believe. It's still in you. It's still there. Don't you know, if you're not, if you're not singing with joy in your heart, if you're not forgiving everybody and anybody, if you're not dealing with all your fears as if they're not even there, if you are not incredibly happy, excited, even under trials and tribulations, you are forgetting that you were cleansed from your sins. You're forgetting what he's done for you. You're forgetting what he's promised to you. In other words, it's unbelief. It's still there. It's not just out there. It's not just that the world's unhappy because of unbelief. You are. And that's the reason why it is the mark of the most mature Christian to go back again and again and again to the same things and say, the reason I'm unhappy is not that I need new knowledge. I need to make sure this knowledge is continually new to me. You've got to see that. But lastly, the first thing, if you really understand unbelief, you will see that that's your main problem, matter who you are, Christian friends. Main problem. But secondly, you're also going to have to realize that you, it says in the Bible that if you're really a Christian, you will be persecuted. You will. Second Timothy 3.12, all who live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. John 15, I read it to you. He says, if they hated you, they'll hate me. People do not hate you for being good. You know where Jesus says in Mark chapter 10, I will pit father against son, mother against daughter. I divide families. Good, if you live a good life, that doesn't divide a family. In fact, if you live a bad life, that doesn't divide a family. You know, their hearts go out to their prodigal sons. My son's still my son. It's only being a Christian that divides families. People will not be mad at you for being good. They'll be mad at you if you say why you're being good. They'll say, if you say, I'm sure that I know God because I've been saved by grace. Somebody somewhere will hate you. If nobody gets after you, if nobody's persecuting you, if nobody's angry at you, you're being a coward. You're not letting people know you're a Christian. Now look, it doesn't say, there's a beatitude about this. It doesn't say, blessed are those who are persecuted for obnoxiousness's sake. And a lot of people get, they bring persecution on, not for being a Christian, but for being an inconsistent Christian. Not for being a Christian, not for being like Christ, but for not being like Christ. Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again, and was the most gentle, bruised reed he will not break, a smoking flax he will not quench. You know, he was so gentle. If you're not gentle, if you're not kind, if you're not consistent, and you are persecuted, then you're not being persecuted for righteousness's sake. The beatitude doesn't rest upon you. The blessing doesn't rest upon you. Here's what we're saying. If you simply live like Christ lived, loving and yet truthful, you'll be persecuted. If you're never persecuted, you're being a coward. But when the people do it, if you know your own heart is still filled with unbelief, you'll know that this unbelief is not just an intellectual thing. When you see people who disagree with you, and who persecute you, you know what you're going to do? If you say, you idiots, why don't you believe? No, no. You're like a recovered alcoholic talking to a non-recovered alcoholic. On the one hand, you know that they can do something about this. On the other hand, you realize that they're trapped. You realize unbelief is not just a matter of not thinking. They're scared. They're afraid. They're offended. And you know how you're going to be patient with them and loving with them, and they're not going to pay them back? You're going to remember Jesus being persecuted, being stabbed, being hurt, saying, Father, forgive them. Why? They don't know what they're doing. Father, forgive them. They're unbelief. They're trapped by it. They're prisoners. Father, forgive them. They are blind. Father, they don't really understand. Now, who's he saying that for? Who's he praying for there? You. Because we're the ones who do it. Every day, every day, every day, every day, every day, every day, every Father, they don't really understand. Now, who's he saying that for? Who's he praying for there? You. Because we're the ones who do it. Every Christian knows that we're the ones who cause this crucifixion. He is praying for you. And if you know that, and you recognize that, then you will be able to take persecution in a way that most brings honor to God. But you'll be able to rejoice that you had the honor of suffering for his name. And when, you know what? When the people saw the Christians dying in the arenas, stabbed, gored, mauled by lions, and they saw them singing, and they saw them like Stephen saying, Father, forgive them. They don't know what they're doing. Nothing had a bigger impact on people than that. And the way you handle persecution, oh, Christian friends, and the way you handle the world's hatred, will have everything to do with the kind of impact you have on the lives of the people around you. They don't get you. They don't understand you. The light shineth in the darkness. The darkness comprehendeth it not. But just remember what Jesus did. When you couldn't comprehend him, he said, Father, forgive them. And when you have that kind of love in your heart and the knowledge of that kind of grace, you'll say what Peter says in verse 20. He says, literally, we don't have the power not to speak. See that in verse 20? He says, we cannot not speak. Literally, we don't have the power to stop it. I have a feeling in my heart, because I know that Jesus died for me and forgave me, and I'm saved surely by grace. It now pushes me out to tell people lovingly about him, and that when I get persecuted, it's just I'm so happy to finally be able to walk in the shoes of my Savior, who also was. And all I know is that by my dying, there will be resurrection. By my dying, people will be saved. Let's pray. Our Father, this is a very difficult passage. This is a way for us to see if we're Christians or if we're not Christians, what is our biggest problem. Help us to see as Christians that unbelief is our problem. That will humble us when we see it in others. But help us as people who are struggling to be Christians that our problems are not just intellectual. We ask, therefore, that you would enable us all to have both the courage and the love to follow in the footsteps of our Master who said, Father, forgive them. And you did. You forgave us. You came to us. Now help us to have the same attitude and let us see the same effects in the people around us that we forgive, as your Son did, in whose name we pray. Amen.
