TITLE: Uriah’s Wife
SCRIPTURE: Matthew 1:1-6, 12-17
TOPICS: Christmas and Advent Jesus' Birth
SERIES: The Mothers of Jesus
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/uriahs-wife/

============================================================

Let's read the passage on which the teaching is based. It's on page 8 of your bulletin. Matthew 1, we'll read the beginning of the genealogy, which is verses 1 to 6, the end, which is verses 12 to 17. A record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. Abraham was the father of Isaac, Isaac the father of Jacob, Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, Judah the father of Perez and Zerah, whose mother was Tamar, Perez the father of Hezron, Hezron the father of Ram, Ram the father of Amminadab, Amminadab the father of Nashon, Nashon the father of Salmon, Salmon the father of Boaz, whose mother was Rahab, Boaz the father of Obed, whose mother was Ruth, Obed the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of King David. David was the father of Solomon, whose mother had been Uriah's wife. After the exile to Babylon, Jeconiah was the father of Shealtiel, Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel the father of Abayad, Abayad the father of Eliakim, Eliakim the father of Azor, Azor the father of Zadok, Zadok the father of Achim, Achim the father of Eliud, Eliud the father of Eleazar, Eleazar the father of Mathan, Mathan the father of Jacob, and Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ. Thus, there were fourteen generations in all from Abram to David, fourteen from David to the exile to Babylon, and fourteen from the exile to the Christ. This is God's Word. Now, Matthew 2 is the account of Christmas. It's the account of Christ's birth. Matthew 1 is the genealogy, and it's been affectionately called over the years, the begats, because in the Old King James Bible, the Old King James translation, it's the word begat that happens over and over and over again. So-and-so begat, so-and-so begat, so-and-so, so-and-so begat, so-and-so. Now, when most readers are reading the Gospel of Matthew, you get about three verses in, and then your eyes glaze over, and you just skip. Let's get on to something interesting. But I'm going to teach you a lesson, because Matthew wouldn't be wasting his breath. Matthew would not be given as chapter one unless he was giving us clues to the meaning of chapter two and what comes afterwards. In other words, in the genealogy of Jesus are clues to the meaning of Christmas. And there's three and a fourth. The genealogy is going to tell us that at Christmas, truth became fact, promise became reality, grace became shocking. And if you grab those three, you can get the peace that Jesus Christ came to give us. Truth became fact, promise became reality, grace became shocking. If you really take hold of those and embrace them, you get the peace that Jesus Christ came to give us. That's all here. Let me show you. First, truth became fact. A record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ. A record. Now, you see, Matthew doesn't begin the account of Jesus' life once upon a time. He doesn't start the account of Jesus' life long, long ago in a galaxy far, far away. Because those are ways to signal that this is just a story. But the word, the record of the genealogy, roots this in history. This is the way you begin a historical account, an account of what happened, an account of the facts. Therefore, what we see is that though this is a historical record, it's a record of the Christ. You see the last words? The Christ, which is the archetypal Messiah of the world. So we see here truth became fact. Now, somebody's saying you're just being tautological. You know, if something's true, isn't it a fact? What are you talking about? Let me explain why I'm putting it that way. Let me clarify. On the one hand, look at the old legends that have come down to us. Look at the epics. Look at the quests. Look at the old stories, the ancient legends that have come down to us. And, you know, by the way, almost every day in the New York Times right now, there's debate, discussion, reflection on the meaning of these old stories. Not new things. You know, not Ulysses by James Joyce. But Robin Hood and Hercules and Oedipus and, you know, and Faust and Arthur and the debate that comes down partly because of Harry Potter and Lord of the Rings is why is it that the modern literati say what we all should be doing? Rings. The old movies, the old stories, the old quests, the old epics. Why? Why can't we get rid of them? Why do we keep going back to Hercules and Odysseus and King Arthur? Are these accounts factual? No. Well, why do we keep going back to them? Because even though they're not factual, they bring us truth. So, for example, the great old story of the great legend of Beauty and the Beast. Why do we go back to that? It didn't happen. It's because we're so moved by the idea that no matter how deeply our sins bind us, no matter how deeply our mistakes disfigure us, it's possible for there to be a self-sacrificing love that can break our chains and free us. And see, that story tells us that, and we say, that's true, that's right. Or all the old epic quests and things like that, we don't think they're factual, but they tell us that no matter how overwhelming the evil forces look, good will triumph. And we say, yes, that's right, that's true. Now, there's a lot of people that hate this, especially in New York, there's a lot of people who immediately get queasy with the word truth. truth. But, you know, as soon as you say, do you believe that justice, you should fight for justice no matter what the cost, that justice is more powerful than injustice? Yes, that's the same thing. Everybody likes the word justice in New York, they don't like the word truth. It's the same thing. And we go to those stories because they resonate deep in our hearts with what we believe are the truth. But let's look for a minute at fact. Let's look at the factual realm. Let's look at the realm of history, of real life. And we suddenly see real life isn't like the stories at all. For example, the fact is, and I don't want to, some of you are very young and college students, and I don't want to disillusion you, but the fact is, if you are a totally honorable, totally honest person, you're going to have all kinds of problems in your career. On the other hand, if you're a very, very dishonest person and you're always lying, you're going to have problems in your career. You know why? Because real life, factuality, real life pummels us away from either being really bad or really good until we become the kind of people that nobody in their right mind would ever write a story about. Drab, mediocre, bland. That's what real life does. Real life, I don't know how many, well, maybe everybody. Young people say, I'm not going to live for money. I'm not going to live for comfort. I'm going to change the world. I'm going to live for love. I'm going to live for truth. I'm going to live for justice. In 20 years, check back with me. Real life pummels us inexorably away from becoming the kind of persons that anybody would ever want to write a story about. I told you this about this. Anthony Lane, two weeks ago in The New Yorker, wrote a review article of Lord of the Rings, the move, not the movie, the book. And then he's reflecting on, you know, why it's so popular. And he gives it credit, but here's what he says at the end. It's interesting. He says, it is a book that bristles with bravado. And yet to give into it, to cave into it, as most of us do on our first reading, betrays a reluctance to face the finer shades of life that verges on the cowardly. Now, listen to that. I mean, I understand what he's saying. He says, when you read these old, when you read a heroic epic, like Lord of the Rings, he says it's just filled with bravado, right? Good will triumph over evil. Love will conquer all. There is such a thing as justice and injustice. It's not relative. There is truth. He says you cave into it. You can't help it. But he says it betrays a reluctance to see the finer shades of life that borders on the cowardly. You know what he means? He means just this. He says, I know when you get near the stories, they resonate and you say, love will conquer all. Good will always triumph over evil. But he says, history is not like that. Real life's not like that. Factuality is not like that. And it's cowardly, he says, not to face it. And it would be true, by the way, if there wasn't Christmas. Because see, along comes the Christmas story. And you know, at first, it looks pretty much like a lot of the other ancient stories. Very much like it. See, first of all, you have a world of jeopardy. And then onto the scene comes a figure with supernatural power, miraculous power, who can face down evil spirits and raise the dead. people's stories and he liberates and it's just like the old ancient legends. There's supernatural power and there's miracles and all that. And then near the end of the story, suddenly there's a betrayal and there's a disaster and he's dead and all hope is gone. But no, wait, he's risen. And you say, wow, this is great. It's just like all those other stories. At the end of the story, I'm inspired and I walk away saying for about 30 minutes, yes, good will triumph over evil. And then I get out into the real world and I realize it's just not how things work. Because in the real world, the good die young, nice guys finish last, nature is red in tooth and claw, and everything is pummeling me into this place of mediocrity and blandness where I have a life that nobody would ever write a story about. And that's just the way it is. But no, because Matthew doesn't begin the account of the life of Jesus once upon a time. He says, the record. And here's what he's saying. And here's what, this is what the doctrine of Christmas is. That Jesus' story is not one more story pointing to these underlying truths, but Jesus Christ is the truth to which all the stories throughout history point. In other words, the story of Jesus is not one more story that when you're all done, you say, oh, I guess I know somehow good will triumph over evil, and you go away. It feels true, even though it's not factual. Jesus Christ is the truth, and it has become, on Christmas Day, a fact. Jesus Christ is the ideal. Jesus Christ is the thing that we're all resonating to, but he's broken into history. He's broken into facthood. Christ the Savior is born. The ideal has become real, and it's going to change the real into its likeness. The truth has become a fact, and it's out to change reality, historical, factual reality forever. And when Christians, listen, I want you to know, Christians read these old stories in a way that nobody else can, or at least if you understand the implications. Because you see, everybody else, you know, you're reading to your kids, and your kid looks up and says, Daddy, I wish there was a prince that would come and wake us up out of our sleep. I wish there was a Superman. I wish there was this or that person who would come and destroy the bewitchment and free us. I wish there was somebody like that. And of course, if you don't understand Christmas, if you think Christmas is one more story like all the rest, you just pat the kid in the head and says, yeah, it would be nice. But if you understand Christmas, you look at the kid, at least in your heart, because you don't want to confuse them and say it out loud. But there is a prince. There is a Superman. The one to whom all of these incredible heroes point. The one, the beauty, who gives her life and sacrifices everything to turn a beast into something glorious. All of these figures are real. They're better than the ones in the story, because they all find the reality in Jesus Christ, and he has become real. He's become a fact. Truth has become a fact. Secondly, we'll get back to the implications of that in a minute. Do you see that? The first thing that Christmas is telling us about and the genealogies is telling us about is Christ the Savior is born. What does that mean? Truth became a fact. It became real. It's not just one more sweet story that inspires us for 30 minutes. It's truth that's become a fact, and that changes history, and that will change your life once you figure that out. Number two, promise becomes reality. The second thing that the genealogy gets across is promise becomes reality. Look at the first verse. It says, a record of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, son of David, son of Abraham. Now, if you've been coming to Redeemer for a little while, you know we've been going through the book of Genesis in pieces over the last couple of years, and you might remember this, that God takes Abraham aside, and he makes a promise to him. And he says, through you, all the nations of the earth will be blessed. Through one of your descendants, I will save the world. Through you, all the nations of the world will be blessed. And when Mary was told that she would give birth to the Messiah, when she gets the Annunciation, and she sings her song, the Magnificat, and we're going to look, we're actually going to look at that next week, if you get, if you're in town and you come back to the service, come to the service next week. One of the things she says is, he has remembered his servant Abraham. He has fulfilled his promise to his servant Abraham, even as he said. But it took centuries. God keeps his promises. God keeps his promises. You see, the second thing, now listen, listen. There is irony there, but it's an irony that will fill you with hope. The second message of Christmas is that God always fulfills his promises, but never at the time and never in the way you expect. Israelites had all expected a Messiah, but a lot of them had given up because it had been 400 years since there was even a prophet in Israel, let alone a Messiah. And lots of others, in fact, most all the others that were still expecting did not expect their king to be born in a feed trough. That's just not what you do with kings. And so the message of Christmas is that even though God seemed to be absolutely away without leave, he seemed to be completely gone, he was working. And even though, in a sense, God is saying, even though I do not come through with my promises at the time you expect or in the way you expect, I always come through. Always. You can trust me. You don't have to take matters into your own hands. You don't have to try to be your own God in your own circumstances. Trust me. As the old hymn goes, for his mercies, they endure. Ever faithful. Ever sure. So, for example, God comes to Abraham and says, Abraham, I'm going to give you a son through Sarah. But, you know what? God doesn't seem to be coming through. He doesn't seem to be coming through. So, what does Abraham do? He says, I guess I'll just have to take matters in my own hands. He sleeps with Hagar. Disaster. God says to Jacob, he promises Jacob, Jacob, you're going to be the leader of the clan, not Esau. The elder will serve the younger. But, God doesn't seem to be coming through. He doesn't seem to be coming through. Finally, Jacob says, well, I'm just going to have to take things in my own hands, you see. He's not fulfilling his promises. So, he deceives his father Isaac, and he dresses up, he tries to deceive him to get the firstborn blessing. Disaster. And, we're all doing that if we don't believe Christmas. God's promises to you to take care of you, to love you, to work all things out for your good in your life, it never seems to happen in the time you want, it never seems to happen in the way you want, but God says, my promises, I always come through, and you must trust me and not try to step into the role of God. Well, you say, how do you do that? Well, let me give you two examples. You're a parent, and you've got children, and you're afraid about how they're going, and you're afraid that they're going in the wrong direction, so what do you do? You don't confine yourself to just loving them and praying for them and speaking to them the truth at occasional intervals in inappropriate ways. Oh, no. You say, I'm going to be the Holy Spirit in their lives, and you put on your Holy Spirit coat, and so you coerce them, and you nag them, and you emotionally manipulate them. It's very easy. You scream, and you yell, and you get angry, and you weep, and that way they have to do what you want them to do. You see, you emotionally manipulate them. It'll be a disaster. You can't be the Holy Spirit. You're underqualified for the job. Oh, some of you say, well, I can't relate to that. I'm a young single person. All right? You're falling in love with a he, and the he or the she that you're falling in love with, you think maybe this is the one, but there's a problem because the one doesn't know he or she is the one. The one isn't sure at all about this, and so what are you going to do? Well, I guess I'm just going to have to take my life into my own hands. I'm going to have to be the Holy Spirit, so what do you do? You lie. You deceive. You manipulate. You scream, and you yell, and you cry, and you get angry, and of course, you emotionally manipulate them so they wouldn't dare break up with you. What are you doing? God is saying, would you believe in Christmas? Would you believe that though my promises never come true in the time you want and the way you expect, they always come true? My promises always become reality so you can relax. You can stop trying to take matters into your own hands. And thirdly, not only did the genealogy tell us truth became fact, and promise became reality. Thirdly, it tells us, Christmas means his grace became shocking. Now, what do we mean by that? Well, we've been saying for the last couple of weeks that a genealogy in those days was like a resume, right? Your genealogy was who you were. It's how you showed people who you were. Now, resumes, you don't want anybody, you don't want anything on the resume that's a blot or a blemish, right? So, if you flunked out of University of X I'm going to go over it. Y and you got your BA at the University of Y, you may not say anything about University of X on your resume. You sort of drop that out, delete, hit delete, and it's not there. In the same way, the old genealogies, people did not want anybody in your genealogy that you weren't absolutely proud of. You know, we know that Herod the Great, the villain of the Christmas narratives, that he, we don't even know really who he's descended from because he doctored his genealogies all the time. He dropped people he thought were kind of scandals and he didn't want to be associated with and he put in a few people that he really wasn't descended from that he thought would make him look pretty good. You know, you understand. That's how we work with resumes today anyway. In light of that, there's three things about the genealogy of Jesus that is absolutely stunning. First, there are women in this genealogy and you probably don't need to be a historian to know it's probably common sense when I tell you you immediately recognize this. The ancient genealogies did not have women hardly ever in them. Why? Women didn't in those days have much status and yet here in the genealogy of Jesus Christ proudly displayed are five women. Secondly, though, not only are there women in the genealogy, but there are Gentiles, there are there are people of despised races. Moabites and Canaanites, you have Hagar, pardon me, you have Tamar, you have Rahab, you have Ruth. So you don't only have gender outsiders, you have racial outsiders in the proudly displayed in the genealogy of Jesus. But I think even more amazing than that, you don't just have gender outsiders and racial outsiders, you have moral outsiders. Rahab was a prostitute in Jericho. Hmm, well, maybe Matthew didn't know that the readers would know that. Tamar, Tamar got her children through an act of incest with Judah. We looked at that two weeks ago. And take a look at how Matthew doesn't just lay out the ancestor. He doesn't just mention Perez, who's Jesus' ancestor. He mentions Perez and Zerah and Tamar and Judah. What is he doing? He's deliberately reminding you of the whole story. And then you have David, who fathered Solomon, but through Bathsheba, Solomon's mother, that union, that baby was born out of an adulterous affair. And by the way, one of the things that I find fascinating about this is it's not saying that Jesus Christ was simply descended from Tamar and Bathsheba. It was descended from people who did these sinful things. But Jesus Christ was actually joined and descended from these people at the point of their sin. He was descended from the generation of Jacob, not through all sorts of other, not through Joseph, his noble son, prince of Egypt. He was descended through a child of incest. He was not descended from the generation of David through all kinds of other connections he could have been, noble connections, but through a child who was, who came out of adultery. And see, what's so fascinating, and this is maybe the most shocking thing of all, this is very shocking. Every one of these people I'm mentioning, according to the law of God in the Old Testament, the law of God, they were excluded from the presence of the Lord. Incest, adultery, prostitution, moabites. I can take you back to Deuteronomy 23, to Deuteronomy 22, to Leviticus 18. I can take you back to the law of God, and these people were excluded from the presence of God. They were excluded from the people of God. They were excluded from the assembly of God's people. They were excluded by the law of God, from the presence of God, and yet Jesus Christ takes the people who were excluded by the law of God and brings them right into his family and includes them. How? And the answer is in this incredibly subversive little phrase, your wise wife. Do you notice that Bathsheba, the name of Solomon, is never used? She's only called Uriah's wife. Now, immediately, some of us have a tendency to kind of read the Bible through our, you know, our sensibilities of the present time, and I can understand, though it's wrong and a mistake, to say, boy, that's insulting. You know, plenty of women say, I don't want to just be somebody's wife, but you're mistaking the meaning. Matthew is not slamming Bathsheba. He's slamming David, and he's showing us something astounding. Don't you see what he's doing? It's a boobie. person of the day, and they're reading Jesus' genealogy, and they're shocked, shocked by some of the people who are in there. A prostitute, Tamar, why even bring that story up? We're even embarrassed about the fact that it's in Genesis 38. It's shocking. Why even bring that story up? Why are these awful people? Who is this Jesus with these kinds of people in his genealogy? I don't want him in my party. But then suddenly they get to David. Oh, David. Boy, I'd like to have him in my genealogy. Wouldn't you like to have him in your genealogy? He's everything you want. Hero. Remember the Goliath incident? Hero. Warrior. Outlaw. Robin Hood type. Read the story. We're going to get to David sometime. Everything. King. The greatest king of all. Boy, I want to have him in my resume. And Matthew, by putting in Uriah's wife, suddenly booby traps him. And what is that doing? Uriah's wife is evoking the whole incident. What is that incident? Do you know what happened? Uriah was one of David's best friends who, when he was a fugitive from Saul and he was running for his life in the wilderness, a group of men got around him and voluntarily became outlaws, voluntarily put their life on the line just to save David and to protect David out in the wilderness. It was incredibly dangerous. Uriah was one of them. He was one of David's best friends. He gave his life for David. And then when David becomes king, and they all get married, David begins to fall in love with Uriah's wife. He has an affair with her. He arranges to have Uriah killed, and he marries her. And what is Matthew doing? He's saying, here is the best guy in the genealogy. Here is David the king, and he has done something worse than all those women that you're snubbing. None of them did anything like that. What is Matthew getting at? He's saying grace. He is saying that the very best person here, David, left to his own, on his own merits, on his own record, on his own moral accomplishments, not even David deserves to be in his family of God. Nobody deserves to be in the family of God. Nobody. Not just Rahab, not just Ruth, not just Tamar, but even David. On the basis of merit, no one can come into the family of God. And yet, on the basis of the grace of God, look. Look who's in the family of Jesus. Look who's sitting at the table as equals. Prostitute, racially marginalized woman, and a king. And they're just equal. They're just sitting around the table together. They're all the same. Why? Because Jesus Christ came to earth. That's what Christmas is about, to bring us salvation. The gospel is not that we give God a good record, then he blesses us. The gospel is that Jesus Christ comes to earth, and he lives the life we should have lived, and he dies a death we should have died. He becomes our substitute. He lives on our behalf, and therefore we can receive our relationship with God by absolute grace. And what does that mean? It means it doesn't matter who you are. It doesn't matter what you've done. It doesn't matter whether you're a hit man for the mob. It doesn't matter whether you've been living inside the gates of hell for five years. You are somebody, by God's grace, that Jesus can be proud of. He can show you off. He wants to show you off. He wants you in your genealogy, in his genealogy. He wants you in his family. He gives you the status of someone in his family. Hebrews 2 says he is not ashamed to call us brethren, family. Do you ever toss at night because somebody snubbed you? Do you ever feel like people aren't appreciating you? Do you feel like nobody's giving you any respect or honor? What is that to this? Do you see what's available? And so do you see how shocking the grace of God is? It's so shocking that it doesn't matter out there. Out there in the world, pedigree matters, money matters, status matters. But in here, in the family of God, you leave that out. That's not something that is going to rule us. And don't you see how pervasive the grace of God is? It's so pervasive that even the baguettes are dripping with it. Even the baguettes are covered with it. The grace of God. What is Matthew telling us here? That the gospel of grace alone brings down the barrier between male and female. It brings down the barrier between racial insider and outsider. It brings down the barrier between even the moral and the immoral, the righteous and the sinners. In God's sight, there is no difference. It doesn't really matter whether you're a prostitute or whether you're the pope. You need grace. By the way, he'd be the first to agree with me here. You need grace no matter how great you think you are. You've got grace no matter how bad you've been. has become fact, promises become reality, and grace has become shocking. What does that bring us if we grab hold of this? Well, there's a fourth thing, and it's the very end. Look at the very end. Isn't that odd that Matthew decides to count up the genealogies? Isn't that weird? By the way, he says there's 14 from Abraham to David and 14 from David to the exile and 14 from the exile to Jesus. Fourteen, fourteen, fourteen. There's six sevens of generations. Now, if you're a modern Western reader, you look at that, and you say, and? But let me connect the dots for you. Jesus is the seventh seven. The seventh day was the day of rest because God rested on the seventh day. The seventh year was not just the Sabbath year. Every seven years, you're supposed to let the land lie fallow and let it restore its nutrients. But every seventh Sabbath, every seventh seven, Leviticus 25 said it was to be a jubilee year. And a jubilee year was a year in which every debt was forgiven, every slave freed, everyone who had lost land got their land back. It's an astounding and actually kind of puzzling observance. Leviticus 25 talks about the fact that not on the seventh year, but on the seventh seven, every forty-nine, fifty years, you were to celebrate a jubilee which was to think about and reflect on the ultimate rest that God is going to bring us someday. Not the rest of resting one day a week from your labor, but the ultimate rest, the ultimate peace, the ultimate shalom, the ultimate well-being, the ultimate inner fulfillment that God is going to bring us someday. Well, you know what Matthew's saying is? It's going to come through Jesus. Jesus is the jubilee. Jesus is the one to whom it's pointing. Jesus is the one who brings us that ultimate, ultimate rest. And now you say, well, that's really very esoteric, I don't know, and wonderful, but I don't know how to practically get a hold of it. Yeah, by looking at our last three points, at first three points. Do you want this rest? Here, remember that grace has become shocking. Christmas means salvation is by grace, and if you really believe that, if you grasp it to the degree you grasp it, you'll get rest from always needing to prove yourself. You'll get psychological rest from always needing to prove yourself and to live up. Do you understand that? Secondly, look at the point promise became reality. Some of you need not just rest from performance, but you need rest from trying to control your circumstances of life. Some of you are just so scared. My family's falling apart. My money's falling apart. My health is falling apart. And though I'm not saying there aren't real problems there, don't try to put on your Holy Spirit hat. What a burden. Don't try to be God in your life or in the life of other people. What a burden. His mercies endure. Ever faithful, ever sure. Trust Him and rest from needing to control everything. But most of all, remember that truth became fact, and you'll get the rest that I need, and hopefully you need too. Do you want rest from the weariness of the world? You see, you go to a movie, you watch a play, you read a book, and for 30 minutes you feel like, yes, good will triumph over evil. But then you're going to get out into the world, and you're going to see the fact that life stinks, that good people do die young, that really great people really get screwed. How are you going to deal with cancer? How are you going to deal with aging? How are you going to deal with death? How are you going to deal with the inveterate injustice of the world? How are you going to deal with the fact that life just stinks? Unless you see that Christmas is not just another sweet story, but it's truth become fact. And if Christmas is truth become fact, if Christmas really happened, then you know that the future is God's. And it doesn't matter about death. It doesn't matter about cancer. It doesn't matter about all the injustice. He's going to put it all right. He's coming. Someday we will fly like Peter Pan. Someday we will meet the love, capital L, that will turn our beastliness into beauty and glory. Someday we will meet the captain who will put everything right, will put down all evil. Someday it absolutely will happen. And that's the only way you're going to get rest from the weirdness of the world, is if you believe that Christmas happened. two people this morning came up to me after one at, you know, a different... in the morning. A couple people came up and said, you know, I'm not a Christian. I don't even think I believe in God, but I'll tell you something. I felt so good at the end of the sermon, and I couldn't help but say, you know what, think how much better you'd feel if you believed it. And I said, this is going to wear off. I said, look, look, look at us. Look at me. Look at me. It's possible to believe that Christmas just really happened. It's possible for a person with more than a third grade education to believe it, so why not make the effort? Read the books. Talk about it. Explore. Don't just do what so many New Yorkers do, which is they show up at some kind of, you know, every year, some kind of Christmassy thing. They just, they hear the story, and it makes them feel good for a while. Then they go see Harry Potter. It makes them feel good for a while. They go to Lord of the Rings. It makes them feel good for a while. Think of how good you'd feel if you knew that Christ the Savior was really born. Let's pray. Father, I ask that you would help us get the peace that can only come if we grasp what happened in that manger. God became flesh. God's promises became real. Your truth became a fact. Your grace became shocking and transforming. We're only going to get that peace if we remember what Christmas is all about. So help us with your Holy Spirit to grasp this season better than maybe we ever have in our life, what Christmas is all about, and get the peace that only Jesus Christ can give us. We ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
