TITLE: Weight of Glory
SCRIPTURE: John 12:23-35
TOPICS: Glorification Worship
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/weight-of-glory/

============================================================

And let me say, just before I begin to read, we put an offering time at the end of the sermon because the main purpose of the offering time during our worship is not to get people's money, especially if you're a guest or a visitor, please don't even feel like you need to get under no pressure to give. The purpose of the offering is to respond to what God is saying. If the only, I think we said this last week, if the only person you hear speaking God's word to you for the next half hour is me, it's your fault. Because Jesus is here to break open your heart with his truth. He's got certain things he wants to say to you, and he's got things that he wants to give you, and he's got things that he wants to receive from you. So after the sermon, there'll be a time of reflection, a time for you to say to the Lord personally, here's what you've been after, and I'm going to give it to you. During that time, we ask people if you've got prayer requests, or are you making some sort of spiritual decision, jot it down on the card that's in, there's a big tall card that's in the bulletin, and you can put it in the offering plate when it passes around. But listen to what he has to say as we read, and as we break open and expound his message, his word. Verse 20, now there were some Greeks, there were some Greeks among those who went up to worship at the feast. They came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee, with a request. Sir, they said, we would see Jesus. Philip went to tell Andrew. Andrew and Philip in turn told Jesus. And Jesus replied, the hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified. I tell you the truth, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds. The man who loves his life will lose it, while the man who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. Whoever serves me must follow me, and where I am, my servant also will be. My Father will honor the one who serves me. Now my heart is troubled. And what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour? No, it was for this very reason I came to this hour. Father, glorify your name. Then a voice came from heaven. I have glorified it, and will glorify it again. The crowd that was there and heard it said it had thundered. Others said an angel had spoken to him. Let's end our reading right there. This ends the reading of God's holy word. Very, very interesting. This is all about glory. Glory. What do you think of when you think of glory? Some people think of the Son. Why do we talk about the glory of the Son? We talk about the Son as being glorious because of its dazzling beauty, but we also talk about the Son as glorious because that dazzling beauty is somehow very substantial. It's powerful. It beats down on you. It's unmanageable. It's dangerous. And we all know that as glorious as the Son is, because it's glorious, you've got to watch out. The Son can get you. The Son can hurt you. The Son can destroy you. That's beautiful. Beautiful. What is glory then, really? Sometimes when we talk about glory, we think of the field of competition. We talk about the athletic field or the battlefield. One of our favorite movies of the last few years was the movie that many of you know of. It's just called Glory. What was it about? It was about a black regiment in the Civil War. But if any of you have seen the movie, you know how it ends? Everybody is killed and defeated. Glory. What is glory, really? And Jesus sits here and someone says, there are Greeks that want to come and meet you. There are Greeks seeking you. And at that moment, Jesus is reminded of why he really came. See, these are the first people in the gospel other than Israelites who have sought him. And he is immediately brought to mind of the fact that he did not come into the world simply for the nation of Israel, but to draw all nations, all lands to himself. And so he immediately begins to talk about an hour of his glorification. And he says, now there will be, now comes the hour in which I will be glorified. And so how does he feel about that hour? How does he feel about that hour? He's scared of it. He lives in dread of it. He says, now is my soul troubled. Father, what should I do? Save me from this hour? Now, what is glory, really? Why is he scared of it? If a group of people got together and said to you, hey, a bunch of your friends are getting together and we're going to, they're going to take you out to eat at a restaurant and it's going to be a special night. your glory and honor. You wouldn't be sure why exactly, you wouldn't be sure what exactly that was, but you certainly know it was positive, right? You wouldn't say, now is my soul troubled. Save me from this hour. Or maybe we don't understand glory very well. What is glory? This text is about glory because, you see, Jesus says, it's time for me to be glorified and I'm scared to death. What shall I say? Father, glorify your name. And the Father says, I've been doing that for a long time. It's all about glory. And before we move into it and see, what does the Bible say about the glory? We have to, I'd just like to say, the reason we need to talk about it is because every single person in this room is after glory. In fact, some of you are being burned out in your search for glory. We are all seeking it. We are all starved for it. And even though we'll talk about the definition of glory in a minute, let me just put it this way. Everybody in this room desperately, desperately needs to know that they matter to someone. You need to know that. You need to know that you matter to someone. And some of you think, well, the way I'm going to get this is through relationships. Some of you think the way I'm going to get this is through achievement of various kinds. But we all desperately, desperately need to know that we're there. That we have to know we're there. We have to know that we matter. Some of us feel inconsequential. We feel like ghosts already. We feel the lack of our own glory. And we're desperate. And we look at people that seem to have made it. People that seem to be successful. Either, again, in love and relationship or in achievement. And we look at them and we say, I wish I was like them. You envy them. Why? Because people notice them. They are people of consequence. They are people of substance. They matter. And yet, get inside of them. Or if you're one of them, look inside yourself. And you know that you're always consumed with doubts. Even the most famous people, when you finally read their biographies, they're just consumed with doubts. What I do, does it really matter? Am I doing anything of significance? Will anybody remember me? Everybody in this room wants glory. Everybody in this room is after glory. And the Bible tells you what it is. This is your life. Here's what the Bible tells us. Three things in this passage. It tells us that God is glorious. Secondly, that God, therefore, must be given ascribed glory. He must be glorified. He's got glory. He has to be given glory. And thirdly, that if we give God glory, we'll finally experience it at last ourselves. Pretty simple. And yet, this is the history. This is a summary of what you need to know. This is the summary of the problem of the human race. It's all here. God has the glory. We need to give him all of our glory. And if we give him all of our glory, we'll finally experience it ourselves. Look at these three points. First of all, God alone has glory. God is glorious. Jesus says, Father, glorify thy name. And this is one of the three times in the gospel that the Father booms his voice out of heaven. And he says, I have glorified it, and I will glorify it. And the teaching is simple, but it's profound. God is glorious, and he has no higher purpose, no more consuming purpose, than to show you and me his glory and get us to experience it. That's what God's all about. Now, right away, we have to start to ask ourselves questions. All right, what is glory in general, and what is the glory of God? As many of you know, because I can't even show you how to worship here, I have to continually refer to it, that the word glory in the Bible, its original reference is a physical reference to physical heaviness or weight. That's what the word means. So, for example, the oceans and the mountains are literally glorious. And if you don't know what that means, just think about it for a moment. When you stand before huge mountains, when you stand before a great ocean, and I don't mean if you're just there for some other reason, but if you really sit and take it in, if you try to grasp the glory of what's in front of you, you begin to feel weightless. You begin to feel, you feel, I don't matter. Or that means, I don't have any matter compared to this. But in the Bible, the word glory doesn't just refer to physical weight. It talks about people, and it talks about things, it talks about things that are glorious. And it's not talking about physical weight, no. It's talking about import. Something is glorious because it has import, it has impact, because it makes a difference, it's affecting, it counts. So, for example, you don't know what to do, you have a decision to make. Three different people call it, advice, but when the third person calls you, you say, if she says that, well then I'll do it. What's happened? Why? What's so different about her? You ascribe glory to her opinion. Her opinion, her expertise, or for whatever reason, you are giving weight to it. It has more impact. It has more glory than your own ideas, your own thinking. You give her the glory, and that's the reason why you're off like a shot as soon as she calls. And therefore, you see, maybe one of the best English words that is a synonym for the Hebrew word for glory, one of the best English words is the word matter. Because you see, the English word matter originally has a physical referent, doesn't it? Matter is something that's there, it's there-ness, as opposed to immaterial. But you see, the word matter means something physical, but it also means something personal and spiritual. Have you ever been in a conversation with people to whom you'd like to matter, and you say something, and they give you a cursory, that's very interesting, and then they move right on as if you'd never said it. And what are you experiencing? You're experiencing weightlessness, inconsequentiality, insignificance. Don't you know that you live in an absolute dread of that? You know, the Christian doctrine of hell, for people who really understand what the Bible teaches about the Christian doctrine of hell instantly know it makes sense. Because the Christian doctrine of hell is where you're cast out, where Jesus Christ doesn't say, I don't like you. He says, I never knew you. I don't know you. The Christian doctrine of hell is the ultimate horror, the ultimate punishment for a human being is to be finally and utterly ignored. You see? To be ephemeral, to be peripheral, to be like a wave on the sand, you move out and it's as if you weren't there. There's no greater horror than that. The astronauts will tell you what you're experiencing in that situation where people just ignore what you say. You're experiencing weightlessness. And they want you to know that it's a tremendously disorienting feeling. That's the physical. Let's see, the word glory has both references. The word matter has both references. And this is what it means. What is the glory? It's importance. It's impact. It's counting. It's being substantial. It's lasting. What is the glory of God then? The Bible says, in so many ways, we can't count that God is a God of glory. To God alone be glory. To talk about the glory of God, to try to refer and convey the glory of God in words is a pretty hopeless thing. Because you see, when you try to pour the glory of God into words, it's a little bit like trying to pour Lake Michigan into a thimble. Most of it spills out. To try to convey the glory of God in words is a little bit like, words can't carry the weight of the glory of God any more than your car could carry you, any more than you could put the Chrysler building in your car and take it home. It wouldn't get very far. When the Bible talks about the glory of God, it doesn't just simply mean that God is holy, that he's loving, that he's wise, and that he's strong. But that in his holiness, love, and his wisdom and strength, he is beyond comparison. It means that in every one of those attributes, separately, and in all those attributes together, he is without comparison. Or let's put it this way. God isn't just beautiful. He is glorious in his beauty. And that means his beauty is so much greater than any other beauty, so as by comparison, all other beauties are hideousness. That there is no beauty but God's beauty. That all other beauty is derived from God's beauty. Just talk about the glory of God means that next to his wisdom, all other wisdom is idiocy. Next to his goodness, all other kinds of goodness is filthy rags, is wickedness. Next to his purity, all other purities are squalor. Next to his grandeur, all other grandeur is excrement. Next to his power, next to his power, you see, all the stars in the universe exploding matters no more than a dew drop falling off of a leaf. Glory, the glory of God. In comparison, everything else is nothing. Imagine you have a scale, if you could imagine a scale, and you had two trays to the scale. On the one side you put two dimes, on the other side you put an 18-wheeler tractor-trailer. What happens when you compare those two things on the scale? The one tray of the scale flies to the ground, the other trail soars to the ceiling. Would it make any difference to the scale whether there was no dimes there at all? Of course not, because the glory of the 18-wheeler truck is so much greater than the dimes that the condition of the dimes' existence is negligible in comparison to the conditions of the dimes' non-existence, His beauty. There's no wisdom but His wisdom. There's no purity but His purity. There's no power but His power. In the Old Testament, whenever the glory of God appeared physically, which it could do, it was called the Shekinah, the cloud. Whenever it appeared, nobody could stand on their feet. They couldn't stand on their feet and look at the glory of God in the face. When the glory of God came down in the temple, it says the priests could not stand, but they had to just lay down. God is a glorious God. He has all glory. Now, the second thing that the Bible teaches us, He's got the glory. He's got the significance. He's got what lasts. He's got the impact. He and He alone has it. Everything else is inconsequential. Everything else is weightless. Okay, secondly, the Bible tells us, therefore, that we have got to ascribe all glory to Him. He must be glorified. He has to be glorified. That means He has to be treated as glorious. Why? Because He is glorious. And how do you do that? The Bible says you must glorify Him. Now, there's probably a number of ways, but we are dealing with this text, and right here we see Jesus actually glorifying God and showing us how to do it. We've got a model, and maybe the best model of all, and I propose to you that He's doing it in two ways. He is glorifying God through adoration and through obedience, and they are disciplines. Would you look with me for a moment? Look, first of all, adoration is the way you glorify God by doing it directly, by directly addressing and telling God about His glory and discussing His glory with Him. What does He say to the Father? He says, Father, glorify Thy name. He's coming right out, and He's telling Him about it. Now, let me give you an anatomy of adoration, because it's absolutely critical. I tell you, my dear friends, that this is the essence not just of what it means to be a Christian, but of what it means to be a human. You find this, and you find your humanity. You know, even people, listen, mental health experts who don't know anything about Christianity, don't care much about Christianity, will tell you, that one of the signs of mental health is the ability to praise, the ability to find praiseworthy things. A person who goes into every situation, goes into any condition, goes into any concert, goes into any job, goes into any relationship, and can find nothing to praise, nothing but things to complain about. We know what's wrong with them. Their humanity is drying up, if the shoe fits. To be able to praise and to be able to adore is the essence of what it means to be human. And the Bible says you must adore God, you must praise Him, if you're ever going to get out of the doldrums where you are. If you're ever going to start to open your heart up and begin to become a human being again, you've got to learn to adore Him. If you can adore Him, you can become a praising person, a person of praise, a person of affirmation. Now, you know, some people get very upset at this point because they say, you know, I hear God constantly saying, praise me, I need to be praised, you must glorify me. I'll tell you something, if you've ever found a human being like that, they're obnoxious. Some people say, it sounds to me like God wants a perpetual testimonial dinner in which people are just heaping upon Himself, people heaping upon Him, you know, accolades and compliments. Who would want to be with a person like that? Why is God so stuck up? The answer is God demands that you praise Him because you need it. And you need it because it's right. Imagine for a minute how you glorify anything. Let's not think about God for a moment. Imagine how you glorify anything. The anatomy of glorifying anything, of giving something its due, is, I'd say, there's three parts to it. You wake up to the reality of its glory. You grasp the magnitude of the reality. It affects you. And then you walk in accord with the reality. You begin to act in accord with the reality. Do you hear that? You wake up to it. You grasp it. You take it in. You let it affect you. And then you begin to behave in accord with it. So, for example, here you are walking along a path in the fog. You're walking along a path. And you're just walking casually. You're walking lightly like you would any time. And all of a sudden, the fog blows away. And you suddenly see that on the right side of the path, there is a sheer 5,000-foot cliff. What happens to you? It suddenly grips your heart. What? The magnitude of the danger of the situation. You've been treating this path lightly. This path should not be treated so casually. You need to watch every time you put your foot down. You need to hug this side. You need to suddenly begin to give the path its due. Begin to realize. thing. Or imagine that you've had for a number of years an old vase that you put on your kitchen table and you stick flowers in it and you eat your breakfast there and so forth and you eat your lunch there. And some expert comes to eat lunch with you someday and says, do you know what this is? Do you realize what you've got here? I know a couple of museums that would pay you a million dollars for this thing. And what happens? All of a sudden you see the fog is blown away and you grasp the reality, the magnitude of what this thing is and you don't have it on your kitchen table anymore. You begin to act in accordance with it. You begin to give it its due. You've been taking that which is weighty lightly and you begin now to treat it with its due. Now see, the vase demands that you glorify it. The path demands that you glorify it. The situation demands that you give it its due, that you act in accordance with the magnitude of the reality. Does that mean the vase is arrogant and stuck up? Of course, it's silly because you don't talk about it that way. You know that if you don't glorify, if you don't give weight, if you don't treat important things as if they are as important as they really are, you miss out. You lose. What does it mean then to glorify God? What does it mean to adore and praise Him? I'll tell you, I don't know how many times I've seen this happen over the years. I've talked to people after church services or during the week and I hear this, let me just give you a paradigm. It goes like this. Let's say a man comes to me and says, something happened to me on Sunday. You know, all my life I've sort of generally believed that God was a God of love and all my life I've always said I believed that God forgave me on the cross. But on Sunday, I suddenly realized it was true. Oh my. And I suddenly realized that I have never really been living as if I believe it because I hate my mother, because I'm working myself into the ground. If I really believed I was loved and forgiven, why would I be acting this way? And on that day, he said, on Sunday, I suddenly realized God does love me. He really does. And I am forgiven. I really am. And on the cross, he really did do everything necessary. What's happened to that man? It's a glory issue, my dear friends. The fog. See, let's take the, again, the anatomy. First of all, the fog went away. He began to wake up. And waking up is a discipline. Adoration is a discipline. It means focusing on a truth. It means recollecting the truth. It means reasoning it out. It means rubbing your eyes and looking at it and looking at it. And then, secondly, you grasp it. You don't just assent to it, but rather you begin to enjoy the truth. You begin to savor it. You begin to turn it over on the palate of your heart, on the palate of your soul. You stuck the sweetness out of it. That's adoration. And then what happens? What happens is you begin to say, I've never taken this thing seriously. And see, this is the consummation of adoration. And that is, you have to express it. There's vows that you make. There's resolutions. There's outbursts. There's changes. You turn corners. You give things up. You quit things. You start things. You say, I've never taken this seriously. Seriously. I've never treated this with the weight that it was due. I've never seen the glory of this. And your life has changed. Dear friends, I appeal to you. Don't you want this? Don't you need this? Don't you understand? Why are you afraid? You're afraid today. If you're afraid today, if you belong to Him, and you know all these wonderful things that are true about you, but they're intellectual things you need to adore. You need to bring your heart back into its true orbit. The reason that you're afraid is because you're treating certain things which are light as weighty, and you are making light of that which is weighty. You see that? You're treating the light things as weighty, and you're treating the weighty things as light. Why are you angry? Why are you discouraged? Why are you guilty? All the same. You're alienated from the real center. You're alienated from the real important thing. Dare I say it? If God is real, well, let me give you the next step, and then I'll tell you that. You see, the first thing you have to do is adore. That's a discipline. Don't you know that if you have just a spark of love for God, and you go before Him with a discipline of praise, and you contemplate, and you recollect, and you do the discipline of praise, you let the truth dawn on you, and when the Spirit of God comes and blows away the fog, and when you get a glimpse of the glory of God, the Spirit... What's going on from the Spirit? Thank you. blow that little spark of love into a conflagration, and all the hidden powers of your being will be, your heart and mind and soul will open up full throttle, and you'll become a person who knows how to enjoy, finally, and knows how to praise, not just God, but everything. Adoration, adoration, praise. Father, your name is glorious. You bow. You worship. That's why that man that I gave you an example of, but he's a paradigm for all sorts of people in this very room. Why was he able to forgive? Why was he able to stop working so hard? Why was he able to change? It was a glory issue. But it's not just the discipline of adoration and praise. The second discipline is the discipline of obedience. See what Jesus is doing? He's obeying. Listen, obedience is a glory issue. Stop thinking of it as a kind of moral issue. In a way, it's a glory issue. It's very simple, alright? Let me give you a perfect case. If you tell the truth about your age, she won't go out with you, probably. Or he won't give you the job. You know the Bible says don't lie. So what do you do? You lie anyway. What have you done? What have you done? What you've done is you've treated God as light. And you've treated your image, your ego, your job, your money as something heavy. You see what you've done? It's a glory issue. It's not simply a matter of, you know, doing what's right. It's a matter of who have you glorified by the glorious God himself. I tell you, you can't get away with that. You are dancing on the precipice. If he's real, whose love really counts? Whose opinion really matters? Her, him, or the God himself? Friends, if there is a God, disobedience is a glory issue. It's a refusal to give God his due. It's a serious thing. It's a walking on the precipice. If there is no God, then don't we have to worry about it? You know, there's no right and wrong. There's no meaning to anything. The whole universe, including you, will burn up soon. And no one will remember anything. It'll be as if it never happened. But if there is a God, and there is a meaning in life, and there is a right and wrong, you dare not treat him so lightly. Look at how Jesus does it. How does he obey? He doesn't want to go to the cross. That's what he's upset about. The hour of his glorification is the cross. He's afraid of going to the cross. He says, should I say, Lord, get me out of here? He says, no. And how does he obey? How does he obey? Does he just grin and bear it? Does he just, you know, does he just summons up his courage? Is that why he does it? Is it a duty thing? Was he raised in parochial school so he just doesn't feel right if he doesn't do it? Why does he do it? Because he knows the glory of the Father. He says, Father, glorify your name. I see your glory, and I obey you as a response to your glory. The pain is like compared to your honor and your glory. Now, lastly, and here's where I have to summarize. We have said that God is glorious, and that secondly, that we're supposed to glorify him. Then thirdly, and this is the gold, my dear friends, this is the gold. The Bible teaches us that if we give God all of our glory, if we, instead of giving ourselves importance and our needs importance and our desires importance, instead if we give his desires and his will importance, if we give him all the glory, we'll finally get the glory that we've always wanted. If we stop seeking our own glory and seek his glory only, we'll finally get the glory. The Bible teaches us if we glorify him, we'll experience glory. And you can see it right here where Jesus says, Father, glorify thy name. What happens when he does that? God expresses his glory. It thunders. We hear the voice. When we give God all glory, we begin to experience all glory. Hear me. In John chapter 14, 21, it says, if you obey me, Jesus says, my Father and I will come to you and make ourselves real to you. That's spiritual reality. In Ephesians 1, Paul says, I pray that the eyes of your heart would be enlightened, that you might know the glorious inheritance that you have in Christ. Now, look, Christians know their inheritance. They know they're going to heaven. They know that there's no condemnation for sin. They know that they're adopted into the family and that the Father loves them, that the King of heaven now is committed to your best and will protect you and will guide you. They know that, but Paul says, that's not good enough just to know it. I pray that the eyes of your heart will sense the glory of it. been laid off her job. She was pretty upset about her financial position. And one day as she came to church, the glory of her inheritance, the glory of what she had in Christ dawned on her. And afterwards she said to me, I suddenly realized I got such peace because I suddenly realized this layoff can't touch my real wealth. Oh, somebody says, I wish I had that kind of poise. I wish I had that kind of balance. I wish I had that kind of groundedness. It's not a temperamental issue, don't you understand? It's a glory issue. By giving God the glory, she experienced glory. She saw the glory of who she was in him. I tell you, the Bible says the difference between a Christian and a moralist. A Christian is somebody, the Bible says, who has seen the light of the glory of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ. A moralist is somebody who kind of goes to church and does his or her ethical best. A Christian is somebody who's actually been a partaker of glory. Jesus Christ says, Father, give them the glory that I have. The difference between a Christian and a moralist is that a Christian is somebody who actually senses and experiences the glory of God. You know why? Because they are attracted to the cross. Jesus says, when I'm lifted up, when people see that I am dying for them, they will be attracted. They won't be able to get enough. They will see the transcendent beauty of my sacrifice for them. A Christian is somebody for whom the fact that Jesus has died for them becomes the most important fact, the only fact that matters, the fact that matters more than anything else. I knew of a pastor that worked with a man who had been raised by his parents and was told all of his life, you're going to get into this career. That's what we're hoping for. That's what we know you are for. In all of his life, he prepared for that career. Because he cheated in graduate school, he lost his ability to go into that career. And within a couple of years, he was just going around in mental hospitals, completely, completely debilitated, completely broken, and absolutely haunted by his sense of failure and worthlessness. Until one day, somebody told him that there was a God who came to earth and he lavished, he poured out his infinitely valuable life, poured it out for him. He loved him that much. This young man got a hold of that. He was attracted to the glory of it, the transcendent beauty of the cross. And within a couple of weeks, he walked out of that place, never going back, confounding the experts. You know why? Why? Because he used to say in years after that, I realized if a God like that loved me like that, I knew who I was. Do you hear him? He's weighing. If a God like that, he's weighing, he's recollecting, he's adoring. See, he's thinking a God like that. Can you feel him weighing it? If a God like that loved me like that, I finally know who I am. A Christian is somebody who is not just a moralist. A Christian is somebody who has been attracted to the glory of what Jesus has done for him. Who weighs it. And because it becomes the most important fact, more important than anything else, more important than the fact of my failure, more important than the fact that I got kicked out of graduate school. The most important fact, the glorious one in my life. Has that been true of you? Have you met him that way? Have you seen and experienced the glory of God? Or are you just a religious person? Is God just an idea to you? That's my question. No matter who we are, right? This is what we need to say right now from our hearts. Father, glorify your name. Say it. Say it in your heart. Father, in your heart, to yourself, to him. Father, glorify your name. And just like Jesus, he will answer. Just like he did to Jesus, he'll answer you. Let's pray. Our Father, during this next few moments of, during the offering, we are going to talk to you and we're going to look at you and we're going to say, I have not been giving you your due. I have not been doing the disciplines of praise and the disciplines of obedience as I should. My fears, my anger, my discouragement, my guilt are the results of it. Father, glorify yourself in my life. I want to give you all the glory so that I can finally know the glory of your approval. Finally know the glory that I matter to you. That I matter now because of what Jesus did on the cross. I matter to the only one that matters. It's greater than I could have ever imagined. Our Father, I pray that everyone now will know the glory. approach you through Jesus. We ask this now in Jesus' name. Amen.
