TITLE: What Is (Christian) Cultural Renewal? (Part 1)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: 
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/what-is-christian-cultural-renewal-part/

============================================================

Cultural renewal is a subject that we talk about. It's in Redeemer's vision. Worldview is an idea, a concept that we throw around a lot. But this month and next month, I want to give you some more specific stuff than probably at least I've produced. And I therefore in most cases think that, at least here in Redeemer, probably more specific than you have received. Because we can't go about the whole idea of Christian cultural renewal without understanding what our worldview is. Now, if you take a look here right at the bottom part of the first page, let's first talk about the whole idea of Christian renewal, cultural renewal, which sounds like cultural influence. In fact, Catherine Leary was just, where are you, Catherine? She had a friend who was very worried about Christian cultural renewal, right? Because it sounds bad. It sounds like a takeover. It sounds sinister. And there's two reasons why talking about Christian cultural renewal should not be sinister. There's something to say to the critics, and there's something to say to the Christians. To the critics, you have to keep this in mind. It's naive for anyone, anyone who says, oh, this is a bad idea for Christians to think that they can somehow bring their Christian views out into the culture. You know, that's, they feel like there's some kind of takeover. Put down here, it's naive not to notice that everybody's got a worldview and that any group of people who want to influence the culture in any direction are seeking to get their worldview to be more influential. Therefore, in one sense, Christian cultural renewal isn't anything that everybody isn't doing. You know, it just, and let me give you an example that some people who've read this have already found helpful, and so let me spell it out. Now, here's a typical example. It's typical to hear people say, you should keep your religion to yourself, you should keep your religion private. You must not bring your Christian views out into your work, whether you're an artist, whether you're a journalist, whether you're a manager. In other words, you shouldn't be bringing that out. Religion's for the private world. You must be objective in the public world. And we don't want to see a Christian perspective in your work. Be neutral. Don't urge your views on others in any way. Now, question. That itself is a particular worldview. It's a late Enlightenment view of things. It is actually Immanuel Kant, very influential. Immanuel Kant came up, and a guy, if you read the footnote, which I hope you will at some point, but I won't go into it right now. Now, Leslie Newbigin points out that Kant's concept of a bifurcated reality is the essence of the modern world, because Immanuel Kant believed that all reality can be divided into what he called the noumenal and the phenomenal. The phenomenal world is the world of sense perception, and it's the world of things that can be perceived through the senses and, therefore, can be empirically verified, scientifically verified and proven. And the noumenal world are things like your understanding of morality and your understanding of God and even your understanding of your own psychology and identity. And he put all those things in the noumenal realm, which, these are things that can't be known scientifically. And Immanuel Kant, at least building on Kant's view, the Kantian view is that, you've got to turn over to the top of the next page. The Kantian view is that you must keep separate the public world of proven scientific facts from the private world of unprovable morality. That I have the right to push facts on people if I can prove them scientifically, but I do not have the right to urge facts on people if they're just my faith. Got it? So I can push people. I can say, for example, we ought to counsel people to do this because science has proven that if they do this, then they'll be happier. That's scientific. But I shouldn't say we must counsel people like this because to do this is morally wrong. I mustn't do that because who's to say what's right and wrong? So, in other words, the modern idea is Kantian, and that is that you can urge facts upon people. You can urge things on people if you can scientifically prove them, but if they're really a matter of faith, then you mustn't. Now, top of the page. Of course, this view of reality may be true. It may not be true. But certainly, it's a very specific philosophical worldview. Most cultures in history have not believed that you could separate convictions about God, human nature, moral truth, etc., from public life and work. So, in other words, the Kantian view may be right and may be wrong, but the point is it is a particular view. It's not the same as other views. Now, here's the question. When somebody says, forbid. Why should I keep my Augustinian view of the world out of my work when you not only won't keep your Kantian view out of your work, but you're insisting that I live by it? See, it's all right for you to say, I believe the Kantian view is true, but why in the world should you act as if, of course this is the way it is? I mean, the fact is it's a particular worldview, and you were foisting it on me right now, and there's no way, actually. By the way, Leslie Newbigin in his book, A Gospel in a Pluralistic Society, takes the first 65 pages and deconstructs the modern view that you have to separate the public world of fact, scientifically proved facts, from the private world of morality and religion. And he points out something rather simple, and by the way, increasingly this is being pointed out, and it's going to take 50 years before it becomes something that actually has a cultural effect. But here's what he simply says. The principle that you must not urge people to believe things unless you can scientifically prove them, that principle can't be scientifically proved, and therefore you shouldn't be urging it on anybody by its own standards, and yet people are urging it on everybody all the time. I mean, almost all of our jurisprudence is based on this idea. Right? You have to keep religion out. You can bring science in, but you have to keep religion out. That's Kantian. That's fine, but that's a philosophical view that is taken by faith. It can't be proven. Now, it's taking years for this to start to work itself through, but it is starting to work itself through. You can see things. But anyway, you see what I mean by worldview? When someone says you shouldn't do Christian cultural renewal, you shouldn't try to bring your worldview, a Christian worldview, into the things that you do in art and, you know, the media and management and that sort of thing. The real question is, if not my worldview, what worldview? And so, well, we don't bring any worldview, and they just aren't used to thinking like that. They absolutely are. Everybody is. That's what you say to the critics. Got it? Here's what you have to say to the Christians, though. In general, here's what we should mean at Redeemer. In general, Christians who promote Christian cultural renewal, traditionally have been people who see the limits of politics for influencing society. You see, when people hear the word Christian cultural renewal, you have to be careful about it. We have to be careful about using that word because the average, that phrase, because the average person thinks that means a political takeover. And unfortunately, I must say, I think I'll come right out and say this. Unfortunately, I see in the last five years, people on the right, people on the political right are starting to use, I think, the term cultural renewal or worldview to mean getting conservative or Christian people elected into legislation and passing certain kinds of legislation. Now, what I'm trying to say here is, here's my understanding, and you might as well know, I hope this is going to influence all of us at Redeemer. My view, cultural trends cannot be created through legislation, by and large. Law can strengthen and harness movements already going on in the corporate thinking of a culture, but it can hardly itself change them. Now, I'm not saying that that's completely... I mean, some people would argue that Roe v. Wade changed the culture because when it came through, like 47 of the 50 states had outlawed abortion, and so it changed the culture. But there's another sense in which it would never have happened unless the culture was changing. So, for example, in 1910, if every single municipality in this country had suddenly, for some strange reason, passed sexual harassment laws, they never would have worked. Never would have worked because the culture has to change to get to the place where they would have worked, you see. So, as far as I can tell, Christian cultural renewal does not mean get Christians into politics to, you know, enact a certain power, you know, certain kind of legislation. I don't think that that's what really what changes the culture. When we promote Christian cultural renewal, we're not at all going in the direction of a takeover. It's good and right for believers in Jesus, by the way, to enter every profession and enter every field, including government, and apply their Christianity to their work. So, I'm not saying you don't get into government. I'm simply saying it would be silly for us, I think, to think that that's how you change a culture. I would like us to recognize the severe limits of bringing about cultural change through politics. Christian cultural renewal goes deeper. Now, what do I mean? Well, here's, here's, let me show you the three normal ways that the average Christian in this country thinks that Christianity can have, you know, a leavening influence on the culture. The most common way that Christians think that we change societies is through evangelism. So, I put down here, change through individual evangelism. That's, the theory is, if you win enough individuals to Christ, the society changes. You can change the world one life at a time. That's how we change. are trying to change Hollywood through evangelism, and that's fine with me. I'm all for evangelism. But from what I can tell, their literature gives supporters or would-be supporters the impression that the way you change Hollywood is you convert everybody who's in power in Hollywood. But as I put down here, as we're going to see in a minute, it is extremely possible for you to have a personal, internal, spiritual Christian faith and have your faith sealed off from the way in which you actually live your life. So it's possible for a country to have, you know, have a vast majority of people Christians and yet the culture not be, the cultures start to become bitter and ironic and in a worst kind of way or despairing and despondent because Christians very often stay out of the places where culture is forged or Christians who are in the places where cultures are forged live their life in such a way that the way in which they work is sealed off from their faith. So just evangelism doesn't necessarily change culture, right? See? Another common approach to cultural change is change through political action. I just tried to explain some reasons why that doesn't really work. I'll tell you one of the main reasons is that when a Christian who has not learned to think, as we're trying to talk about here, worldviewishly, when a Christian gets elected to be a congressman or a senator or something like that, unless they've learned how to think worldviewishly, very often they don't know how to bring the gospel to bear on the way in which they're doing things. And so they end up just either towing a kind of liberal or conservative line. They don't know in a way how to think creatively as Christians. So the politics doesn't necessarily work. There's another, a third approach I'll just mention briefly, and that is the great person approach. There's a lot of folks that feel that basically what changes societies are these anointed individuals, Luther, St. Paul, you know, someone who comes along and the Lord just raises them up and they come up with books and ideas that radically change society. The thesis that I will give you more about next month is that basically cultures are changed through community, not through heroic individuals. They're changed through networks and communities of Christians or anybody who put their minds together and think about how can we have an influence on the culture. So it's not so much the powerful individual but the community, but we'll look at that next month. Now, there's one reason why Christians in general are marginal. That is, that Christianity does not really affect the way the culture works. It doesn't affect the art and so on. It doesn't affect the media. It doesn't affect movies. It doesn't affect things. And that is a term that I'm going to call dualism. Turn over to the top page three. Now, I'm going to, dualism isn't, when you use the word legalism, right away people know what it means. When you use the word dualism, they don't. And if anybody thinks that there's some other more easily recognizable and accessible word, you tell me. But I'm just going to go with this for now. What is dualism? Dualism is the lack of a comprehensive Christian worldview. Dualism separates the spiritual sacred from all the rest of life. Dualism says, you know, here's my faith, here's my relationship with Jesus, here's my sacred kind of world. And it's sealed off and it doesn't affect the way in which I spend my money, you know, do my work, you know, live my life out in the public world and out in my job. So dualism separates the sacred from the rest of life. It originally, by the way, had its roots in Hellenistic thought. Because Hellenistic thought viewed the material world as bad and the spiritual world as good. And that's one of the roots for the idea that your faith really is a private thing and it helps you personally and it doesn't really affect, you know, the way in which everything else is. I mean, in many very conservative churches, as Tom Jennings certainly knows, is if you're a musician, it's all right to play in church, but you wouldn't just do gigs in a club. Why would you do that? You know, you're a Christian. You want to use your gifts for Jesus. And that's dualism. And basically the roots of that come from a Hellenistic society, at least Hellenistic thought, that made the spiritual good and the material bad. As you notice, I put down here that Immanuel Kant's philosophy has only reinforced, it's very interesting, if you take Kant's philosophy, which is the physical world is a place of certainty and the spiritual world is a place of faith and uncertainty and the two are to be kept separate. You're supposed to keep your faith private. You're not supposed to be talking about it or bringing it out and working it out. roots in Hellenism. And you basically have Christians who understand Christianity as being my own personal private world and not in my own personal private life and not the way in which I do everything. Two examples here. Dualism works itself out. It has two effects. First of all, it means Christians do not work in the places and institutions where culture is forged. And secondly, it means Christians do not, in their work, integrate their faith in thorough, distinct, creative ways. The first one is something you've heard me talk about before, which is Christians, partly because of the dualism, Christians stay away from New York. They stay away from Los Angeles. They stay away from Washington, D.C. They stay away from places where culture tends to be forged. The first result of dualism is the widespread belief that the only way to truly serve God is by going into full-time Christian work. Teaching, evangelism, discipling, this has effectively removed Christians from places of cultural influence for generations. It sees the world, it sees the church and its activities as good and untainted. The secular world is bad. Now, I want you to know, I say here, but I'll just look you right in the eye. I can kind of understand that. In spite of the fact that if you join the staff of Redeemer, I want you to know you do not somehow escape your flesh. You don't escape pride. You don't escape sin. You don't escape idolatry. You don't escape anything. At least not once you're there for a while. But superficially, it sure looks better than the office you're working in. You know, there is a lot more camaraderie. There is a lot more love. There is a lot more, you know, common mind. I mean, and some of you are working in workplaces that are just so absolutely cruel or so absolutely superficial. So, you know, you say, I just want to go into full-time ministry at some point. Now, I would say, on the one hand, there's a lot, and I put it in here. I won't go into it. There's a lot of reasons why I would love to see, you know, talented, strong people going into full-time ministry. I would not believe that the church right now is getting exactly the cream of the crop, if I may be so bold. So I'm not against people going into full-time ministry. I am saying that you should go because you're called, not because you basically feel like my life doesn't count unless I go into full-time ministry, which is, and I would say the churches across the country and ministers maybe unconsciously or even semi-consciously have a vested interest in making you feel that way. They do. So that you know your life only counts if you're leading Bible studies. It only counts if you're giving your money to us. Only counts, you see what I mean? No, we are really doing God's work, and the rest of you, you know, make your money and give it to us who are really doing God's work. And that's one of the reasons, one of the main reasons, why Christians are pretty marginal. They don't see living and working in the world as really being part of what God wants them to do. The second, though, is Christians do not, in their work, integrate their faith. I'm going to read this in thorough, distinct, creative ways. Dualism means, the second result of dualism is that it seals off our personal beliefs and faith from the way we actually live and work in the world. Christianity is seen as a means of individual peace, forgiveness, strength, but not an interpretation of reality. That affects every single thing we do. Under its influence, Christians, pardon me, under its influence, Christians to look to, wait, what, now, there's a, there's a nice misprint, what did I say? Under its, yeah, oh. Under the influence of dualism, Christians look to their faith for personal salvation, but then the rest of their lives is shaped by popular culture, which brings in very different interpretation of the universe to bear on things, or the worldviews of dominant figures and groups in their particular field of vocation. Now, I'm going to, I'm going to give you some examples, not only this week, but next month, too. Not only tonight, but next month. But what it means is, here you have your, your belief in the gospel, but when, when you actually work in your field, you want to fit in. And so you end up following the worldviews of the dominant voices in your field, which basically suggest you do, you know, here's this style or this philosophy or this policy, and if you do a little worldview analysis, you realize that policy really comes from a very different worldview than Christianity. But do you do worldview analysis? No, generally we don't, because we think dualistically. Christianity is for my private world, not for the public world. And so we just don't think out the implications for our work of our faith and experience of the gospel. And that's dualism. Now, I would like, now this is important, I would love if Redeemer eventually became as known for shaking people out of dualism as it right now is known for shaking people out of legalism. you know on legalism, not that we can really avoid it completely, but I mean, we're known for that. But are we as known for being down on dualism? Maybe we never will be because the word dualism doesn't, you know, it's not instantly understandable. Nevertheless, at least in this room, at least with us, with the leaders, I want us to be just as strong on the one as the other. And the two are related. Legalism, not really believing the gospel or understanding the gospel, is deeply and intimately related to dualism in these ways. In fact, Martin Luther saw that, by the way. Look, this is important. A legalistic Christianity is much more prone to see the secular world as polluted something to flee from. See, when you don't grasp the gospel of grace, you always tend toward a pharisaical obsession with purity and with cleanness. You know, you can laugh at the Pharisees because of all their clean laws. You couldn't touch a dead body. And that's one of the reasons why the Levite and the priest, when they saw the guy, you know, lying in the blood in the Good Samaritan parable, remember the Levite and the priest went to this side and they left the man dying. You know if they had touched him and he died, or maybe he looked like he might be dead, or maybe he would die as they were working with him, they'd be unclean because of the clean laws. And, you know, we look at that and we can laugh at that. But basically, legalism always creates something like that. There's always a tendency to say you stay out of bars because bars are unclean. You go to church because church is clean, as if a geography could make that big a difference. So, since in legalism, you're really saved by the purity and rightness of your life, that always encourages people to stay very much within the church where we don't have to deal with unbelievers. Another thing, while the Bible does tell you a great deal about how the church should operate, tells you, you know, you have to have elders and you have to have the diaconate and you have to, you know, it tells you these things and who should be an elder. I mean, there's a lot of things the Bible tells you about church discipline. We can go right to the Bible and I can give you it. There it is, down in black and white. But as soon as you start to say, how do you run a business in a Christian way? There's, you have to work out of principles. You have to extrapolate from principles. You don't have it down in black and white. Well, that takes reflection. That takes creativity. But if you're a legalist, you want everything down in black and white. And the everything down in black and white world of legalists cannot cope with the kind of flexibility and uncertainty it takes to be worldviewish. They're extremely concerned about knowing exactly what the exact right biblical position is on everything. What is the biblical form of chiaroscuro? You know, I mean, what is the biblical way to do a painting? And they want to know. And when the answer is, well, there's principles, but there's not, you know, something exact that makes them quite unhappy. And that's why legalism tends to tell people, lay people, stay, stay sexually pure and honest out there in the business world. Give all your money to ministers in the church. We really do the Lord's work. And that's all they want to know. Here's a great little quote that really nails things, um, uh, from a Michael Horton book. Martin Luther knew that understanding the acceptance of the sinner before a holy God, the idea of the gospel that a sinner is totally accepted before a holy God. He knew that that would lead to revolutions released from inward focus. See, he gets rid of the introspection release from inward focus. The believer would be free to embrace the world instead of separating from it with a misunderstanding that he was thereby separating from sinfulness. See that? Very interesting. Luther understood that legalism leads to dualism and they go together. So I would hope the redeemer would be as down on one as the other, turn on over. So that's enough for that. Now we need to at least get into the concept of a worldview and give you at least one of a couple of examples before we knock off. And, you know, I'm probably going to be about 10 minutes shorter than I would have liked to have been, but that was my fault. Sorry to do that to you. Um, okay. What's the worldview? Go to the middle of the page. Um, we kind of already said so. So let me just read you the, um, um, the top, the first, uh, the first bullet point under the concept of a Christian worldview. The Bible does not reveal a God whose salvation only gives individuals inner spiritual peace and a ticket to the next life. Christian doctrines of creation, kingdom, incarnation, resurrection, and worship show us God's interest and concern for all aspects of the world of time and space. Christianity then is not simply a set of beliefs to be held in order to save one individual soul. It's an interpretation of and a distinct way of understanding everything in the universe. Now let's go down and see how that works. Go to the bottom of page four. Let's do at least one or two here. We can. Let's do at least one or two. Let's do at least one or two. Let's do at least one or two. Let's do at least one or two. Let's do at least one or two. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let's do at least one. Let a distinct way of understanding everything in the universe. Now, let's go down and see how that works. Go to the bottom of page four. Let's do at least one or two here if we can. Let's look at the doctrine of creation and the implications of the doctrine of creation for a Christian worldview. First, the doctrine of creation tells you, and this is important. I just had a conversation with somebody who's in banking. And I'll tell you, I'll put this in a nutshell in a second. The doctrine of creation tells us that the material world is important. It's important. Genesis 1 and 2 show us that God creates the material world deliberately. Do you know that in, do I say this here? No, yeah, I do. Let's keep going. Psalm 145 tells us he has a delight in and love for everything he's made. Go to Psalm 145 sometime. He loves everything he's made. He feeds everything he's made. He delights in everything he's made. And all things he has made in creation, even inanimate objects, by simply being what he made them are praising and glorifying him. You know the famous beginning of Psalm 19? The heavens are telling the glory of God. The stars are declaring the glory of God. The sea is declaring the glory of God. Well, think about this. What does that mean? Is that just poetry? It's not really just poetry. Why is the sea declaring the glory of God? Because of what it is. Why are the trees declaring the glory of God? Because of what they are. The stars, because of what they are. What does that mean? Therefore, by letting the creation be what it is, it's glorifying God in itself. It's not a means to end. It's an end in itself. So, now this view stands against the traditional Eastern monistic view that the material universe is unreal. That's what Eastern religion says. The material world is unreal. Okay? On the other hand, it stands against the other ancient myths, and if you've ever done any of the study of this, you'll know that almost every ancient myth of creation, creation happens somehow by accident. Either one God kills another God, and out of the second God, you know, body comes creation, or, you know, this view stands against the other ancient myths of creation as either eternally existent, an accidental result of a battle, the death of a monster, or something like that. Only, as far as I know, only the Bible, and I don't know about the Koran, but that's built an awful lot on the Bible, only the Bible gives you a God who creates the material universe deliberately just because it's a good thing. And then turn over to the top to page 5. Secondly, the doctrine of creation tells us it's a good thing. Genesis 1 and 2 are constantly saying, it's good, it's good, it's good. There was not a thing wrong with it. Biblically considered, by the way, Shakespeare is wrong when he says to err is human because Jesus is human, and he didn't err. He's more human than you and me. That may be so now that to err is human, but it was not originally so. God made everything good. There is nothing wrong with any part of the material creation intrinsically. Matter, human nature, nothing is flawed or weak by design. That's extremely important to believe. Do you believe that? If that seems a little far-fetched, it's partly because you're under the influence of dualism and maybe you kind of didn't know it. Go to the bullet point that says implications. Now, here's a fundamental principle. You must not despise ordinary life. The arc of an eagle, the sound of an ocean wave, the growth of a tree, and a piece of great music, all of these things are beautiful and good in themselves. To create a piece of music, you don't have to say, well, as a Christian, I want to glorify God with the music and make it great. Well, shouldn't it, you know, shouldn't it have Christian words to it? No. If the eagle is glorifying God, if the stars are glorifying God, simply because they're taking the material universe, you know, and using the material universe and exalting the material universe, and so can your music be. Look at my little footnote. Some people might think you're mixing in apples and oranges to put music in with an eagle's flight. You can say, well, I understand how the eagle flying glorifies God because that's natural. You see, that's nature. We say an eagle is part of nature, but music is man-made. That's just not true. An eagle is skillfully using the physical, the physics, the aerodynamics of the material world, and a good musician is doing the very same thing, using aerodynamics, using sound. It's very important to understand God delights in seeing the trees grow. God delights the material universe just for what it is. It's extremely important. And, now this is a very important quote, believe it or not, because God does not simply spend his time saving souls. You can look through all the psalms. He renews the material world by his Holy Spirit. See Psalm 104, verse 30. God sends out the spirit, and he renews the face of the earth. It's God's spirit behind the snow. according to Psalm 104 and quite a few other Psalms. A major part of God's work is his delight in continuing to care for, sustain, cultivate, and grow the creation. Now, if God spends his time farming, if God spends his time doing artistry, if God spends his time doing music, which is what do you think the ocean is, if God delights in these things, how in the world could it be wrong for us to do the same thing? Why would that be any less the work of God? The view that, for example, an artist or a banker is simply doing secular work, not really the Lord's work, does not fit in with this view of creation. God sends a minister out to preach the gospel to people. God wants a teacher to go out and give accumulated wisdom. God wants a farmer to go out and cultivate the riches of the resources. What's the difference? I'll put it another way. If God came down, snapped his finger, and said, I'm wiping all sin out of the human race. Now, one of the things you got to, when you and I think of the future perfect, and everything is going to be beautiful, sometimes we forget that we will not be omnipotent. God is omnipotent. He's omniscient. He's omnipresent, and you will never be, okay? I just want you to know there won't be that prayer. You will never be omnipresent. However, if God would come down and wipe out all of sin, there'd be a couple of us that would be out of a job. For example, if you're a counselor, you'd be out of a job. Find something else to do, okay? Probably, if you're a minister, you'd be out of an awful lot of your job, if not everything. You wouldn't have to tell people, exhort people, believe the truth, they'd believe it. But if you're a banker, you'd still need bankers. You'd still need musicians. Why would you need bankers? Because you pull your resources to do something new. You build something new. You're not omnipotent. You don't just snap your finger. You'd still need bankers. You'd still need musicians. You'd still need dancers. You'd still need all those things, and the Bible indicates all those things will happen. So some of us would be out of work, but I'll tell you, it's not the people that we tend to think of the most spiritual. I mean, the least spiritual. The people who'd be out of work would be the people who do the spiritual work. It's everybody else who's going to have a great time. I mean, so if God does all these things, how can we say that one of these things is the Lord's work and one is not? If the Holy Spirit renews the face of the earth and converts people, how can we say otherwise? Here's a great quote from Mark Noel. Who formed the world of nature, which provides the raw material for physical sciences? Who formed the universe of human interactions, which is the raw material of politics, economic, sociology, and history? Who is the source of all harmony form and narrative pattern, which is the raw material for art? Who is the source of the human mind, which is the raw material for philosophy and psychology? And who, moment by moment, maintains the connection between our minds and the world beyond our minds? God did. God does. Now notice, you see, when a musician takes sound and wind, and depending on the instrument, you know, and basically makes use of the material world to create something beautiful that just sort of lifts you, that's what a psychologist is doing with the raw material of the human mind. That's what an economist or a sociologist is doing with the raw material of human interactions. It's all the same thing. And by making this world a great place to live, which is what God had made it for to start with. I mean, salvation is a very important work, but it's all remedy. Salvation, think about this, salvation is medicine. Redemption is medicine. Creation is food. You can't live on medicine. See, when I try to save somebody's soul, as great as that is, that's medicine. But when one of you writes a symphony or plays a symphony, that's food. Because God made us for music. God made us for economics, for sociology. God made us for politics. God made us for art. God made us for these things. And he made us, you see, if it hadn't been for sin, we would have just gone on and enjoyed his glory. I mean, we were made to be part of the dance that the Trinity has. We all love one another. We're going to get to that next month. You know, the Father, Son, and the Holy Spirit delight in one another and rejoice in one another and enjoy one another's glory. And why would we be created? To be part of that. And to be part of that is this. That's the reason why the stars tell of the glory of God. You know, if we didn't have sin, we would really rejoice just looking at the stars. As it is, we kind of do. So, you know, it's not more spiritual to be on Redeemer's staff than it is to run a business or to be a banker, you know, or to be a dancer. Not at all. Is that a... Do you believe that? Is that the sort of thing that even I have been as clear on in the past? clearly telling their people? No. So, we can be part of the change. Now, just to let you look ahead. No, no more. I'm not going to go any further. I would really like you to read the rest of this, and I will give you another ten pages for next month. That's all I can tell you. The second thing we have to see is, besides the creation, everything is good. The fall means... This is the key thing in the next part. The fall means that while everything is good, it also means, because of sin, that as long as we do not believe with all of our heart that Jesus is our Savior, we turn something else into a Savior. And you have been used to hearing me explain what's wrong with you psychologically and what's wrong with you individually and what's wrong with you personally in terms of idolatry. Right? Right. But what I want to show you, and this is key, is idolatry is also the key to do sociological and cultural analysis. So that in every field that you work, there is an idol and a demon. That is to say, every political philosophy, every... well, we're going to look at this next time. But the first thing you have to understand about Christian cultural renewal and worldview is that one kind of work is not more spiritual than another kind of work. But the second layer of this is to understand there's idolatry going on in every single field. And our job, in order to really work for God's glory, is to locate those idols and make sure that they do not affect the way in which we work. Right now, almost all of us are. So we're going to get on to that next week. Let me close this right now for a moment in prayer. Thank you, Father, for the breadth of the vision of the Christian worldview. I know, as I look at this, that I have a vested interest. We have a vested interest in churches to give people the impression that their lives really, really only count when they're helping people become converted. Now, Lord, there are a lot of people at Redeemer that you are calling to be shepherds, pastors, pastors, ministers, evangelists, counselors, hundreds and hundreds, and that's great. And all of those of us, like myself, who know that that's the thing we're called to do, we want to answer that call. We want to do it well. But, Father, there's an awful lot of people here who are not being called to that. They're being called to serve you, quote, unquote, out in the world. And we ask that you would teach us how to be a church that equips them and supports them and loves them and encourages them fully. And we pray that you would help us to see how to do that as a community. And we pray over this in Jesus' name. Amen.
