TITLE: What It Means To Be a Disciple
SCRIPTURE: John 1:35-51
TOPICS: Discipleship and Spiritual Growth Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 1
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/what-it-means-to-be-a-disciple/

============================================================

Let me read from the Gospel according to John, the first chapter, and we'll read verses 35 to 51. The next day John was there again with two of his disciples. When he saw Jesus passing by, he said, Look, the Lamb of God. When the two disciples heard him say this, they followed Jesus. Turning around, Jesus saw them following and asked, What do you want? They said, Rabbi, which means teacher, where are you staying? Come, he replied, and you will see. So they went and saw where he was staying and spent that day with him. It was about the tenth hour. Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two who heard what John had said and who had followed Jesus. The first thing Andrew did was to find his brother Simon and tell him, We have found the Messiah, that is, the Christ. And he brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him and said, You are Simon, son of John. You will be called Cephas, which when translated is Peter. The next day Jesus decided to leave for Galilee. And finding Philip, he said to him, Follow me. Philip, like Andrew and Peter, was from the town of Bethsaida. Philip found Nathanael and told him, We have found the one Moses wrote about in the law, and about whom the prophets also wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. Nazareth? Can anything good come from there? Nathanael said, Come and see, said Philip. When Jesus saw Nathanael approaching, he said of him, Here is a true Israelite, in whom there is nothing false. How do you know me? Nathanael asked. And Jesus answered, I saw you while you were still under the fig tree before Philip called you. Then Nathanael declared, Rabbi, you are the son of God. You are the king of Israel. Jesus said, You believe because I told you I saw you under the fig tree. You shall see greater things than that. He then added, I tell you the truth. You will see heaven opened and the angels of God descending and ascending upon the son of man. This is God's word. A few months ago, I guess it was 18, 19, or 20 months ago, remember the big flap about The Last Temptation of Christ, that movie? And I cut only one column out and saved it. The columnist was great. He said, quote, I found a me generation portrait of a savior you can relate to. Jesus, the great neurotic. Righteousness, this film ultimately says, lies merely in an experience of inner struggles, not in the joyous accomplishment of God's will. Very, very telling. The columnist goes on and points this out and was very helpful to me. He said, up until 30 or 40 years ago, the main question in every human life, everybody who was struggling to be a real human being had to ask this question. You had to ask this question to yourself. Will I have what it takes to do right? Will I take my safety and my happiness and submit that to something higher? Will I have what it takes to take my safety and happiness and to put it underneath, to put it beneath the honor of my country or the well-being of my family and of my people? Or will I put it beneath any principles of truth or justice that need to be elevated? Will I be willing to die for these things? Will I be willing to suffer for these things? That's courage. That's integrity. And that's what it means to be fully human. Hmm. The columnist goes on and says, that's changed. For us today, for the first time in history, the challenge to be human is utterly different. The challenge to be human goes like this. To be human means to find what your real feelings are, to find out what your desires are, and to go and fulfill them. Real courage today means the courage to be yourself, to know who you are, and to ditch and to lay aside any claim or any expectation of any of the church, of society, of family, of anybody. Lay aside those expectations so that I can fulfill myself. That's courage. That's what it means to be truly human. And, you know, the columnist goes along and says, so you have depicted a modern Jesus. Somebody who's always struggling with the question, who am I? Nobody ever worried about that until the last 30 or 40 years. Who am I? The real issue was, well, I have what it takes. See, and he goes on and says this, isn't it modern to think that the greatest struggle that you've had his sexual desire for Mary? That is a flea bite compared to the real, the ultimate temptation everybody faces. Will I live for myself, my own fulfillment, my own happiness, or will I serve a higher cause? Am I just going to be another self-absorbed person, self-centered person, who in the end becomes nothing but something shallow and frothy, or will I meet the test? That was a fascinating column for me to read. I began to realize that nobody, nobody until the last 30 or 40 years could have possibly taken a look at a struggling Jesus who's always saying, well, who am I really? And thought that was anything other than totally despicable. And yet today we say, that's humanity. That's what it means to be authentically human. Let's admit something to ourselves. We have no concept of discipleship left, because the word disciple is the same as the word discipline. And discipline means to subjugate our present desires for the sake of future, higher, nobler goals, goods, and causes. A Christian disciple is somebody who has said all other pursuits are secondary, to serve and to learn of and to know Jesus Christ, my master, is primary. Jesus puts it in a very, very blunt way, and I already mentioned it this morning at the top of the service. Jesus says, he who seeks to find himself will lose himself. He who loses himself for my sake will find himself. What he means is anybody who struggles, who am I, and puts that as your highest priority will never find out who you are. If you think it's more important for you to find out who you are and fulfill your desires than to obey a higher cause, then you will never find out who you are and you will never have your desires fulfilled. That's the catch 22. What does it mean to be a disciple? The answer to that question is the answer to your life. Let's look at the text. We'll see here that Jesus is telling us this about what it means to be a disciple. He calls us, he calls us to follow, and he calls us to adventure. Let's organize everything we can look at in the text under those three headings. He calls us, he calls us to follow, and he calls us to adventure. First, he calls us. He comes to Philip and he says, follow me. He already knew Philip. These disciples, these two disciples, one of them is Andrew and the other one probably is John. He never names himself when he's describing himself in this book. The other one probably is John. These guys had already heard about Jesus. John had been teaching him. Twice he has said to them, that's the Lamb of God. That's the one who will take away the sins of the world. So these two knew about Jesus and already believed in Jesus and knew who he was, but it's not until this point that Jesus turns around and says, come. Come with me. Now this is normal. People start by kind of hanging around Jesus. People start by coming close to him, and Jesus is so quick to take people like that and to immediately challenge them and call them to discipleship. In fact, if you look carefully, you'll see that Jesus seems to be absolutely petrified, lest people will hang around him for the wrong cause. For example, take a look at the fact that in Luke chapter 9, somebody comes to Jesus and says, I'm for you, Jesus, and he looks at him and he says, foxes have holes, birds have nests, but the Son of Man does not have a place to lay his head. Do you know what you're getting into? No, that's not the best way to recruit a disciple, is it? You know? Huh? That's not the best way to do it. Why such a cold response? Jesus almost seems scared to have people hang around, gather around, flock around. He says, I don't want people who believe in me. I want followers. I don't want people who like me. I want disciples. And listen, for the next 15 minutes, I want you to consider this. As we talk and as we go on, will you keep this question in your mind? Is it possible that you are somebody who hangs around Jesus, who has gathered around Jesus, who likes Jesus? It could be that you're a fan of Jesus. It could be that you're an interested observer in Jesus, but you have never responded to the call. Jesus says, I don't want believers. I want disciples. Is it possible you've never really responded to that call? See, there's lots of reasons why people hang around Jesus without becoming his disciple. One reason is some people like crowds. And there's always a crowd. day in which personalities are great. You know, we don't care about experience, real life. We don't care about ideas. We care about personalities. That's the reason why Life magazine and Look magazine died, and we had People magazine that shows up, you see. And what we care about are personalities, not ideas. And so whenever you find a bunch of strong personalities flocking, a crowd around Jesus, you come because there's a crowd. Maybe that's why you come. Some people come because of the miracles. That's something Jesus is always pushing people on. You know that he can do things. You know that he can work miracles. And some of you may be following after him like Andrew and John. You know, not really coming up too close, but just kind of checking him out. And maybe because there's something you want done in your life. That's it. It could be there's some goal that you've had for years, and now as you're getting older, you start to see it slipping away. It looks less and less likely. And you're coming in with a kind of bargaining mentality. So maybe God, maybe if I do this and this, maybe he'll come in and heal me. Maybe he'll change me. Maybe he'll make up the problem and deal with the problem in my life. I want a miracle in my life. Jesus has never been easy on people who've hung around waiting for miracles. Some people like to hang around Jesus because they like to be right. They want to get enough of his teaching so they can turn around and look down their nose at people who have the wrong views. They like to feel superior. They like to say wisdom perishes with us. They like to say, we really know. We know. Okay? And you don't. Some people hang around Jesus so they can do that. Get enough about what he's saying, enough so they can say we know. We're in the inner ring. And a lot of people hang around Jesus because you're guilty. You hang around because there's things in your life you feel guilty for. A lot of people have told you you shouldn't feel guilty for them. A lot of people that you paid $80 an hour told you you shouldn't feel guilty for them, and you still do. And so you hang around and you study and you do Christian service and you come to worship with a desperate need to feel that you're all right. And Jesus says, this isn't good enough. Just hanging around for a miracle, hanging around for a blessing. I don't want people who believe in me. I don't want people who like me. I don't want fans. I want disciples. I don't want curiosity seekers. I want followers. And so he refused to let us just hang around. He says, if you're going to be with me, you've got to be called. I call you. And what does he call you to? He calls you, first of all, to follow. Now, the word follow happens a lot, and it's a great word. It's a simple word. And let me suggest this. First of all, when he calls us to follow, he means make me your highest priority. Make me primary. Make me number one. You see, to follow somebody means you have to leave somewhere. Isn't that right? To follow somebody means you can't stay where you were. You can't stay in the spot that you were. And what Jesus means when he says, follow me, is he says, your other primary relationships will change. Your job will change. Your thinking will change. Follow me. I have to have primacy. There's a, I forget how long ago it was, but there was a commercial some years ago, a TV commercial, that was for Beige. And they were trying to get, they tried to show you a Beige stockbroker so that you who were watching the commercial would want to invest your money through a Beige stockbroker. So what they do is they show this man waking up at 5.30 and leaping out of bed, eyes completely open. Rushing down, exploding down the stairway. Gulping a cup of coffee. Grabbing the phone on the way out the door and saying, what did we open in London at today? And, you know, what the message is? Very simple. The message is, the day can't begin too soon for a man consumed by a single aim, you know, to get you rich. You know, here's a man who is willing to punish his body. Here's a man willing to do anything because he's got one aim in life. Now, you know, what is it, there are, yeah, the only difference is between him and you is you don't have a stair, right? What is it, what is it that gets, it's not a caricature. What is it that gets you to do that at least for a while? Well, a person like that has heard a call, and the call has given that person a center of gravity. And the center of gravity means everything in your life is being pulled toward that center. It gives you a very clear and simple test, touchstone, and plumb line with which you can make all decisions in your life. If you know how to schedule things, you know what. gives you meaning, it gives you a reference point, and for a while, until you die, until you burn up, until you break down, for a while, you have got meaning in life, and you've got a priority, and everything in life falls into place. You know, you don't have a lot of hard decisions to make. Well, now people are starting to say, yeah, how long do you keep that up? And now, especially in the top of the 1990s, there's a real backlash about that, isn't there? And there's people saying that sort of thing is dangerous, that kind of attitude toward anything is really, it burns you out, and therefore, you can't have that kind of reference point. You can't have that kind of drive. You can't have a single aim. So people are saying, now, you know, we're going to get back to California mellow. Mellow out. Nothing is worth dying for. Nothing is worth killing yourself for. Nothing is worth that. But you know, you can't live like that either. Astronauts have been in space in zero gravity, and they know what it's like to live without a center of gravity. You see, when you're in zero gravity, that means there's no direction that everything in your life is being pulled. And without a center of gravity, without any direction in life, you realize how difficult things are. Things that are pretty normal, usually. Easy to do, get very odd, because you see, here, when you pour a glass of water, you know exactly where the stream will go. Up there, you never know where the stream's going to go when you start to pour. I've also been told that another very disconcerting thing is that down here on Earth, what happens is when you take a screw and you put a screwdriver and you start to turn the screw, what happens is the screw turns. But in zero gravity, you turn. You start to turn a screwdriver and you start to turn. There's no center of gravity. This is also absolutely true in the spiritual realm. If you do not have, if you do not have that center of gravity, if you do not have that one thing, if you're not a man or woman of one thing, so that everything orients toward that everything, you are spiritually, morally weightless. You are disoriented. You don't know which end is up or down. You are experiencing vertigo. The opposite of gravity is flippancy. You become a frothy person. You become a shallow person. You're like a balloon, a helium balloon that can be blown anywhere. You have no way of deciding which of the conflicting emotions in your heart you should follow and which ones you should ignore. You don't know which end is up. And here's what's so weird. Don't you see? There are people, by the way, who try to live without a center of gravity. They're the cynics. And they come to you and say, nothing is worth dying for. There is no center of gravity. There is no higher cause. Just enjoy yourself. And those people are liberating to be with for a while, but then they get boring unless you stay with them, in which case you get as shallow as they are. You need one thing. You need that center of gravity. You've got to have that one thing in your life where your life is meaningless, but the one thing that we've had exhaust us and burn us out. And therefore, it must be that there is a one thing, that there's a center of gravity that we haven't found yet that will give our lives meaning because we've got to have it, but at the same time will not exhaust us, but instead will transform and develop us. And the answer, Jesus says, here it is. Come and see. I'm it. The Alpha and the Omega, the one thing. But besides just that, being a disciple means to give him top priority, but it also means to give him absolute obedience. The word disciple that's used again and again in the Bible is actually a word that means student. Full-time student, but not a full-time student the way we are full-time students. No. Why do you think these guys ask Jesus immediately about where he lives? They call him rabbi, which shows that they want to be disciples. They're willing to listen. They want to see where he lives. Here's the reason why. Some of you might say, I'm a full-time student. What's that mean? 16 credit hours. 8.30 in the morning to 4 o'clock. That's a pretty heavy load. This is a different kind of full-time student. This full-time student lives with the master. This person comes and leaves everything else and lives with the teacher, and the relationship between the teacher and the student is not merely an intellectual one, but it's one of absolute obedience. The master, the rabbi, restructures the student's entire life. This is something that modern people are really scared of. We hate the idea of absolute authority. We hate the idea of obedience. And whenever you've gotten anywhere near a Christian church, you may have heard this kind of attitude, you must obey. But unless you see that the obedience that... with him as a disciple, you won't understand what Christian obedience is at all. Let me explain that. Think of it this way. Here is an impersonal object. Yes, it's the Word of God, but it's also a book. Just a book. It's printed. The Word of God is printed on this book. Because it's an object, I can do pretty much what I want with it. It makes no claims on me. I use it for myself. I want to read, I read it. If I put it down, I don't want to read it, I put it down. It can't say, read me. It doesn't do that. You see, if you have a car, if you have a fork, you use it. It makes no demands on you. But now if you get to, how do you relate to a person? A person is a higher order of being than a fork. And if you want to relate to a person, you have got to start to find out what that person's needs and wishes and goals are, and you have got to begin to, there has to be a give and take. You have got to surrender your will to a great degree to relate to a person. You've got to be willing, in many cases, to put your goals underneath the goals of the person you're trying to relate to, or your relationship with that person isn't personal. And if you don't do that, if you don't surrender your will, that person will feel used and will pull out. There's a reason why some people probably in this room have a lot of trouble keeping personal relationships going. Because you refuse to say, I will serve and submit. You can't relate to a person without, to a degree, serving and submitting to that person. Or they feel used. They're not forks. They're not books. But now we get to God, a higher level of being all together. And how do you relate to God? The only way to relate to a beginningless, all-powerful, all-wise, almighty person is to surrender your will utterly. Don't you see? Because the more personal a relationship gets and the more intimate it gets, the more you have to surrender yourself and serve. And when you get to this relationship, the most intimate of all, you have to surrender your will completely, let me put it in as stark a term as I know how, the Bible tells us that Jesus Christ holds the universe together with a word of his power. Somebody's told me if you could, if the entire distance between the earth and the sun, which is 93 million miles, could be put into the thickness of a piece of paper. So the distance between the earth and the sun was just the thickness of a piece of paper. Then the distance of the nearest star would be a stack of paper 70 miles high, pardon me, 70 feet high. And the Milky Way, the diameter of the Milky Way would be a stack of paper 310 miles high. And the Milky Way is just a speck of lint in the vast expanse of the universe. And all of that is what Jesus Christ holds together with a word of his power, his pinky. How do you relate to somebody like that? Do you ask that kind of person into your life to be your assistant? Do you ask that kind of person into your life to be your secretary, even your executive secretary? Is it possible? How do you relate to him? Do you say, now listen, Lord, I don't want to deal with you every day. I don't want to revolve all my life around you. But when I need you, I want you to be there. When I have a problem, I want you to answer my prayers. In other words, don't call us. We'll call you. Is it possible that you could relate to somebody like that, like this? Personally? And act toward him like that? Is that logical? And do you ask him into your life, basically, to make applications to you? For example, here's Jesus Christ. You say, well, Jesus, I notice here that you say that human beings were not built to have sex outside of marriage. So sexual intercourse outside of marriage, you say, is wrong. Well, I'll take this under advisement. I don't know whether right now this is a practical thing for me. I mean, I'm very unhappy, I'm very lonely, and I have a relationship here, and there's almost no way I can keep this relationship. It's the best thing I've seen in a long time. I don't know whether obeying you is practical. And therefore, I really appreciate your application to me, your application for you to, you want to, you know, be my Lord, and you want me to obey you. Well, I'll think about this. And I'll, you know, but my time's just about up here. And my secretary will call you if I want to see you again. You can't relate to a person like that, let alone a personal God like this. You can't ask him into your life to be as this. This isn't the only way you can possibly relate to him at all. If you're... him at all, is if you go to him and say, I will obey you completely. You are not a disciple until you're willing to say, I submit all of my mind, all of my heart, all of my behavior completely to everything he tells me to do, everything in his word, regardless of the consequences, regardless of whether it looks practical to me or not, I will revolve my entire life around him. I must, anything else will cut me off from him utterly. You can't know him personally unless you're a disciple. And you're kidding yourself if you think you can. He's just a, he's a God who just hangs around and comes when you ring for him, is a God of your imagination. There can't be a God like that. Anybody can create the universe doesn't operate like that. My word, you don't even have people in your life anymore who you treated like that. They've gotten out. You must obey him. And if you don't, you'll miss out. And here's why. The incredible thing, whenever Jesus calls us to obedience, we get so darn scared. And yet he promises us that if you're willing to come in, there is an adventure. There is a, there's a greatness. There is a joy. There's a fulfillment that you can't imagine. And that's why he has to say not just come, but what does he say? He says, come and what? Come and see. He's always saying, come and see. There's a lot of people here, probably, who when you heard what I said, and I was just trying to outline God, Jesus' call for obedience, total obedience, absolute obedience, you immediately start to get scared. You're oppressed by it. And you say, what if he asks me to do something that I don't want to do? Of course he's going to ask you to do something you don't want to do. You know, the only relationship we have left in the modern world that's like the old rabbi and the old student is a relationship of an athlete to a coach. So you see, can you imagine somebody getting ready to sign, you know, this coach has come down from this great big university to sign this kid into a basketball scholarship. Just as about, he's about to sign, he looks up at the coach and says, coach, I really want to come into your program, but I don't want you to ask me to do anything that'll be hard. I don't want you to tell me things to do that I don't want to do. You know, I'm afraid you're going to ask me to do things that'll make me uncomfortable. And the coach looks at him and says, okay, don't you want to be a great basketball player? Don't you want to be an all pro? Of course I'm going to train you into the ground. Of course I'm going to ask you to do things every day you're not going to want to do. You're going to curse me under your breath. You're going to say, I can't do one more wind sprint. I can't do one more lap, but I'm a coach. If you give yourself to me, I will make you everything you want to be. As Jesus said, if you are truly my disciples, you will obey my truth and the truth will set you free. Nobody who's ever achieved greatness in any field has done so without first having to submit him or herself to an unbelievably painful, long, painstaking regimen of exercises, of all kinds of things that you had to undergo. And it wasn't until that happened, it wasn't until you obeyed, obeyed your master, that all the explosive potential in your heart, all your talent, came out. What? It's the same thing. Spiritually, it would be much more so spiritually. How can you expect to be any good at any profession, any good at any particular kind of skill? And you, you know, you figure you're going to spend years of your life spending hours every day submitting yourself to very uncomfortable regimens just so you can get yourself to the place where you're able to be free to practice this with all the skill and all the talent you know you have, and you expect the Christian life to be different. Are you kidding? You are built for absolute obedience to your creator. And just like a poor little fish laying out on the ground, you know, gasping for air, looks practically dead. Many times we've had fish that we were fishing and we left them out for a while. We finally said, you know, we need to throw that thing back. It's too small. And it looks dead. It looks dead. You throw it back in and immediately the water revives it. You were sure it was dead. And immediately it flicks its tail and it's off. Because when it gets back into the medium it was built for, there's an unbelievable revival and transformation, an inner renewal. Just imagine the joy that that fish feels, as much joy as a fish is capable of feeling when it gets back into that water. Right now, if you are not his disciple, you don't know this, but you're out on the pavement gasping for breath. If you've never said, I am flat out for you, Lord, no more conditions. If you go to the God of the universe and say, I'll obey if, then you are saying, my goals are not negotiable, but yours are. You're not a disciple. And once you become a disciple, it's like being thrown back in the water, even though in a sense you've never experienced it yet. must have done something under that fig tree that was pretty important, because when Jesus said, I saw you under the fig tree, Nathaniel said, he just gasped. How did anybody know what happened under the fig tree? We don't know either. But we know it was something pretty interesting. And he says, Rabbi, you're the Son of God. You're the Messiah. And Jesus says, oh, you think that's something because I read your mind because I knew that kind of knowledge about you? If you follow me, you have no idea what's going to happen. And he says, I tell you, you will see heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of man. And he's referring to Jacob's ladder. Way back in the Old Testament, Jacob had a dream, and he saw a ladder up and down between heaven and earth. The angels of God were ascending and descending on it, which showed that it went right into the belly of heaven, right into the core of being, right into God's presence. But of course, after the dream was over, the ladder went, and who would ever see it again? And Jesus Christ says, if you come and follow me, I want you to know something. I am the link between heaven and earth. You will see heaven open and the angels of God descending and descending on the Son of man. I'm the axis mundi. I'm the center of the world. Through me, you can come right into the presence of God, and the glorious presence of God can come flooding right into you. And there are realms of fulfillment and realms of joy and realms of realization that you cannot imagine. Give yourself to me. Come and see. Some of you are people who are hanging around out of guilt, out of curiosity, out of a hope for God to do a miracle in your life. Just, you're hanging around. And maybe some of you are in a mood at this point to bargain and say, well, I'd give this to God if he'd give this to me. What is this? What is this? That's paganism. You know, that's saying, well, I guess I better give a sacrifice to appease the deity so it'll send some rain so my wheat will grow. You can't treat the God of the universe like this. He is a person. He loves you, and he's a king who loves you. The only way to deal with the creator who created you to whom you owe everything is to give yourself to him. None of this bargaining stuff. He says, you will not ever, ever, ever consider yourself the poor, the poor, getting the poor end of the deal. If you give yourself completely to me and give yourself, give to me everything that you are, I'll give you everything I am. Now, what kind of deal is that? And there's some people here who have, they say, well, I've made myself a disciple. I've given myself to the Lord, but I haven't seen much growth lately, and here's the reason why. Because there's a battle going on for the center of your heart between the world and Jesus. Jesus says, follow me. That's a forceful command, but the world is forcing its way into your life every day. The newspaper is thrust on you. The phone calls, thrust on you. The job, thrust on you. The bills have to be paid. They're thrust on you. And next thing you know, there's no time for anything else. There's a battle going on for the center of your life, and you have to decide, friends. Those of you who say, I'm a disciple, you have to decide whether your life is going to be lived for you by these other things, or whether you're going to live your own life and give it to Jesus. A disciple insists on things. There's study I've got to do. There's ministry and service to people I've got to do. There's time I've got to spend pouring myself out and my heart out to him. I will insist on these things. The great people in the history of the world, the great Christians, they insisted on those things, and they experienced mighty experiences of God, and they saw the world change through them. And why you say, ah, I wish I had the same kind of joy and the same kind of power they had. You haven't sought it. It comes because they're disciples, and they just insisted on things today and tomorrow and the next day. Psalm 1 says the mark of a godly man is not that he preaches on the street corners day and night, that he prays day and night, that he worships day and night. What does it say? That he fellowships day and night. It says he delights in the law of God, and on it he meditates day and night. He loves to have God tell him what to do. Do you like that, or does it sound horrible to you? The answer to that question will tell you the state of your soul. Do you see it as a loving command, or does it seem horrible to you? Jesus says, my burden is easy, my yoke is light, and he says, any other yoke, any other burden, any... Come and see. Our Father, we thank you that you're a God who promises if we give ourselves utterly to you, you will give yourself completely to us. Father, there has never been such a lopsided deal in the history of the universe offered, and yet you offer it to us. And even as we come to the table, you say, do it. Take my offer. Lord, as we come to the table, help us to renew for the nth time or make for the first time our covenant and commitment with you to be your disciples. You've said, come, and so we come. And see, show us yourself. We pray all this in Jesus' name. Amen.
