TITLE: What Is Freedom (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Purpose and Calling
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/what-is-freedom-an-open-forum/

============================================================

Now, you know, Tom Jennings is a PhD. He's a jazz musician. He's a PhD in music. So why isn't he talking about this? Actually, it's because I'm a layperson and, as I'll tell you in a minute, a failed jazz musician. I've got a perspective I'd like to share with you tonight. I'd like to share a personal perspective with you on jazz. And it's, even if you don't like it, even if you don't agree with it, which is very possible, very possible, as I've been looking at it, that I'm not sure I agree with it. But what I think will happen is, even as you listen to it, even if you dislike it, I think it will help you come to clarify your own perspective, your own take on jazz, and therefore our purpose will be fulfilled, and that is to appreciate jazz better because we've spent the time here tonight. Music, even though everybody disagrees about it, music does say something to us. Music has a particular meaning. It conveys meaning to us. Now, nobody can agree on how it does that, and there's plenty of people in the academic world that are going to debate that, but most people recognize that music says something to us. Music actually conveys meaning. I was reading earlier this year an interesting article in the New York Times. It was about the work of a physicist, a very leading physicist, who's named Dr. Steven Weinberg, and he's an absolutely hard-edged naturalist, philosophically. In other words, he says, the more the universe becomes comprehensible to us, the more it is evident that it is pointless. And what he means by that is this. He says, the more we come to understand the universe scientifically, the more pointless everything becomes. We begin to realize, this is his take on it, that love is nothing but a chemical reaction in my brain, that the perception of what I think of as beauty is really just the way I'm hardwired through natural selection. In other words, he says, the more we come to understand the universe, the more we realize that everything is pointless. And then he admits, right in the middle of the interview, he admits that music, however, affects him in a way that his reason cannot justify. He says, I love grand opera, I can't bear to hear La Boheme without dissolving. And what he means is, he says, though with my mind I believe that there's no significance, one thing is not more significant than another, there's no purpose, there's no design, there's no beauty, there's really nothing like that. When I hear music, music tells me something. It tells me there is all those things. It tells me these things are there. Music is telling me that, and I can't help but listen to it. I mean, there's a man who says, obviously, he proves pretty much to us, the music is saying something to us. But does jazz say something to us in particular? That's what I want to talk about for about ten minutes here. For example, does jazz say something to us that, say, a Strauss waltz doesn't? And I think it does, and I think jazz speaks to us about freedom. It conveys the sense of freedom. The musicians seem to be doing what they want to do, with very little in the way of constraint. It really gets across the idea of freedom. And I do think it does speak to us about freedom, but I think it speaks very wisely to us, actually. I think I'd like to just share with you two things. What jazz tells us about freedom, and why jazz tells us about freedom. What it tells us, and why it tells us. What it tells us. When you first take a look at the jazz musicians, it looks like they've got, you know, they're just doing what they want. It looks easy, actually. Now, when I said I was a failed jazz musician, I really have, I really am. I'm a brass player, I have been, I was a trumpet player. And even when I was at the top of my form, around the age of about 21, and even when I could play Bach, Brandenburg Concertos, you know, that funny little, you know, the trumpet, those high notes, sounds like a little toy trumpet, but actually it's a big trumpet that you have to play like that. Even when I was at the very high of my skills, I couldn't do jazz. And I found out why. Jazz was way too hard. Jazz was a lot, at least for me, I think it's fair to say, harder. What does that tell us? Why is something that looks unbelievably free, that really conveys, in a sense, more of a sense of soaring and freedom than even other forms of music, and yet, in many ways, is incredibly hard, takes a tremendous amount of skill, and therefore a tremendous amount of discipline. What does that tell us? It tells us a lot. What it really tells us is this. The freedom and the creativity that happens up there, you are hearing things created right in front of you tonight, is all because the jazz musicians have bowed and agreed to a structure. They've agreed, for example, to a rhythmic structure. They have to agree, is this going to be three-four a time, or four-four a time, or what? They've agreed to a harmonic structure. They've agreed to a certain sequence of chords. They've agreed, in many cases, they agree to even a melodic structure, at least a certain motif. There's a motif that they make use of. Everybody wants the telecommunal way from the other one to go!! We saw some objects, as you're keeping the centre set of directions so that they can find audio. to a certain sequence of chords. They've agreed, in many cases, they agree to even a melodic structure, at least a certain motif. There's a motif that they make use of. And it wouldn't be, they wouldn't be able to do all that incredible creativity unless they were, together, bowing to the authority of the composer or bowing to the authority of the person who created the score that gave them the rhythmic, the harmonic, the melodic structure. And it's only because they're doing that, only because they're bowing to a good score. What I mean by a good score, a score that honors their instruments, for example. A bass, a piano, they're not capable of an infinite number of textures, an infinite number of pitches. So it has to be a good score. And they have to both, or all the musicians, have to honor it and bow to it. And it's by submitting to authority that the freedom comes. It's by submitting to that that the freedom of jazz and the freedom of creativity is released. Now, the reason I think that's worth talking about today is jazz disproves, the voice of jazz really disproves the modern naivete about freedom. In the last hundred years, there's been a very naive approach to freedom, that Western culture, at least, has bought into. And that is that freedom, we define freedom as freedom from all authority. Freedom from any constraint. Freedom from any kind of structure. But jazz sort of disproves that. It shows the naivete of it. It shows the simplest, it's simplistic. Now, if actually, if you take a look out in the rest of the world, jazz is only one witness to this idea of freedom. For example, physically. If I don't exercise, I start to get exhausted, I start to get, I start to lose my physical freedom. Why? Because I have refused to constrain myself to exercise. If I refuse to put myself under the constraints that my body needs, especially as I get older, to exercise, I lose my physical freedom. Isn't that weird? In other words, physical freedom doesn't come from a lack of constraints. It actually comes from the right constraints. It comes from the right kind of structure. It comes from the structure that fits me. If I over-exercise, if I under-exercise, I blow up my body. Or you can see it relationally. You know, there was nothing more liberating for me than to get married. Yet it was just almost the first week after I got married, I suddenly realized, I've always got to tell her where I'm going. I can't just decide where to go on my own. I've got to tell somebody. In fact, I've kind of got to clear it with her. And what happens is, on the other hand, if I refuse to forgive my friends or my spouse, if I refuse to practice all sorts of sort of relational constraints, next thing you know, I'm lonely. I'm not experiencing relational freedom unless I'm willing to submit myself to certain constraints. In other words, what jazz proves, actually what life is proving, is that freedom is not a freedom from all authority or from all constraints. Freedom is submission to the right constraints, the right authority, the structure that fits me, the structure that fits who I am, the structure that releases my capacities, the structure that fits my design. Freedom is doing what you're built to do. Just like a sailboat is not free when it's in a field, it's built for the water, it's only free, it's only experiencing freedom when it's in the water. And that's what jazz tells me about freedom. But why, lastly, why does jazz tell me about freedom? Not just what, but why? Now, what I'm about to tell you is kind of over the top. When I first read about this four years ago, I said, oh, but you know what? The more I've been reflecting on it, the more it makes sense to me. And at least, as I said in the very beginning, I'm going to tell it to you if you don't like it, it'll at least help clarify what your own take on this is. Why does jazz speak so well about freedom? Why does it tell us so much about it? And the answer is because of something that jazz, unlike any other music, well, not unlike any other music, but jazz, more than any other music, has at its heart and that is improvisation. And where did that come from? Now, I have become convinced by people who've said that jazz basically was born in African-American music, in African-American experience. And there's a couple of African-American writers and thinkers that have said some things that have sort of blown my mind about jazz and I'll just tell you what they are. Sorry, I've shown you how old I am when I use the term blown my mind. However, James Cone, who teaches at Union Seminary, here in New York, African-American theologian. He's written a book called The Spirituals and the Blues. And in it, the first thing he says is you have to understand that African-Americans in their experience of slavery came to understand there's really two kinds of faith. This is the first step in understanding this. And this is what he says. He says, when black people got here, white people put in their hands the Bible. But then they began because of their experience of oppression and slavery to see things in the Bible that many of their masters were blind to. One of them was the Red Sea. you're not judging. God is a God who intervenes into history to liberate people. And this is what Cohn says. He says, black people trusted that their liberation depended upon God's action. Now, from this perspective, there's nothing immature or demeaning about black people who have the humility and the faith of children when they approach the throne of the Almighty. It is only the proud and the mighty that think they are the soul masters of their destiny and of everybody else's. This is the faith of white masters and over the past. It helps them from understanding why others don't want to be ruled by them. Now, here's what Cohn is saying. Cohn is saying there's really two kinds of faith. There's a kind of faith that says God's up in heaven and he just gives us the laws. And our job is just simply to obey them. And then if we obey them, then we're the good people. And because we're the good people, we have the right to rule over others. We have the right to push other people down because we're good. We've achieved. And he says, then there's the kind of faith that doesn't look to a God up there and look to my own good works and performance to save me, but a God who comes down, a God who intervenes, a God of grace, a God who comes down and opens the Red Sea, a God who comes down, the Son of God who comes down from heaven and becomes human, a poor human being. There's a faith that says there's a God who adapts, who comes down to me, who comes down into our experience. And if you believe in that kind of God, if you believe in that kind of God, a God of grace, what that does is it creates a different kind of person, not a kind of person that feels the right to assert him or herself and rule over other people, but a kind of person who helps others, a kind of person who adapts to others, a kind of person who serves others gladly. Now, what's intriguing about that is this. Stanley Crouch, who's also an African-American jazz critic, says it's very important to understand that improvisation is a spiritual thing. He says this, and I find this amazing too. He says, jazz is a collective form that uses improvisation. You sound best in improvisation when you help the other person sound good. Improvisation is a combination of personal expression, yet subordination to the need of the group. In jazz, there's a guy playing, and then another guy comes in at a certain angle. The first guy has to figure out how it fits in with what he's been doing. If you do that, if you adapt to him, you end up sounding better. Your individuality is a kind of democratic sensitivity, Crouch says. The more sensitive you are to the other people in the band, the more your identity achieves itself. One of the things that jazz represents is a way of countering that adolescent obligation to be rude to other people in order to assert your identity. Do you see what he's saying? He's saying there's something goes on in jazz. There's something goes on in jazz. Someone else comes in, instead of saying, oh no, I'm playing this note. No, this guy comes in and he says this angle, and I make sure that he fits in with what I'm doing. As a result, my own identity is enhanced by trying to help that other person come in and try to interdepend together in the music. Carl Ellis, last person I'll quote here. Carl Ellis, who is an African-American writer as well, says, you know what that is? You know where that comes from? You know what's behind improvisation? He says, if you believe in a God who says, come up to me, adapt to me, be perfect, be good, it creates a proud person who says, yes, I'm saved by my good works. But if you believe in a God who, though he was in heaven and though he was God, became human and comes down to us, what is that? Carl Ellis says, that's improvisation. That's adaptation. That's coming down inside. And that is actually triumphing through surrender. That is achieving through service. And Carl Ellis says, improvisation fits with people who believe in a God of grace. Improvisation fits with people who say they've been saved by grace, not by their own performance. Improvisation comes from people who see because we have a God who has come into the world and saved us, it creates a mindset of not rigidity, but adaptation, not self-assertion, but interdependence, not oppression, but liberation. Can you think of what happened in the manger as jazz? If so, you understand jazz. And actually, if so, you understand God better. Think about it. Tom, I'm done. What are you supposed to do? All right. Here's what we're going to do now for about just 10 minutes or so. We're going to ask my. if they would all take the stage. And we are going to take your questions. You may ask questions of any of the artists. And what I'd ask that you do is... Oh, it's very hard to see you. So, what I'd ask is that you raise your hand. And if I can see your hand, I will call on you. And maybe you could just stand where you are, which might help. And say your question fairly loudly. But I'll repeat it so that everyone can hear it over the microphone. And then I will pass the question along to the appropriate person to answer. We'll do this for about 10 minutes, 15 minutes. Depending on how good the questions are. And then after that, what we'll do is we'll dismiss you. But all the artists have agreed to stick around afterwards. So, if you have more questions you'd like to ask them or if you'd just like to meet any of them, they'll be right down here in front and you can just come down and speak with them. So, who has a question? Thank you very much. Good night. Okay, there's one in the back. I think we all heard it. But let me repeat it just quickly. The question is, in music forms that are more experimental and seem to have less structure to them, how can we see God in those forms? And how can we understand that in light of Tim's talk? Maybe one of the musicians might want to chime in on that. Or maybe Tim would have something to say. Well, for God, it's obviously no problem since he spoke the universe into existence out of nothing when there was other void. So, he didn't need chords. I think it's totally conceivable that that music can be spiritual, too. It depends on the person creating the music. Anyone else like to chime in on that? I see what you're talking about as an example of, for me, chaos. It represents chaos and just lack of unity. And it just really shines a light on the opposite of that. So, it has a place. And for me, I look at that and I'm reminded of beauty, which has order and simplicity. That's the way I see it. Yeah, I almost said something in the middle of the talk, then I realized I needed to keep it short. A lot of the people, I found a lot of folks that, for example, I've talked with Tom about this. There's forms of jazz that ostensibly have no structure to it. You know, totally free jazz. I've usually found that if I listen, really listen to it, that there's something, there is some kind of underlying structure anyway. It's just harder to see. That's number one thing. Sometimes we say there doesn't seem to be any structure at all, but anything that any particular part of the human race considers meaningful, any kind of sound that's meaningful usually has some kind of structure to it. That's, you know, I'd have to, we'd have to go into case by case and talk about it. But I do think that's true. So, I'm agreeing with Monty here. Though, here's the subjectivity part, though. There are definitely, my wife, for example, is not much of a jazz fan. And I think she would probably consider a lot of jazz that I enjoy noisy. In other words, what I would consider musical, she would consider noisy. On the other hand, she can listen to waves forever. Waves on the water. Waves on the shore. Now, is that noise? She would kind of consider it pretty musical. I think that means that there is a certain amount of objectivity, but there is such a thing as noise, which is chaotic. As we've already referred to, the Bible in the beginning says that there was chaos that God brought order out of. So, there has to be something that is noise, something that is chaotic. There has to be something that is order. But, to a certain degree, there is some subjectivity to it. There are certain things that I consider noisy, and that means I can't, they don't help me. They distract me. They make it difficult for me to think. They make it difficult for me to feel. It's just a little bit difficult for me to think. It's just a little bit difficult for me to think. I consider noisy, and that means I can't, they don't help me, they distract me, they make it difficult for me to think, they make it difficult for me to feel. And there's other things like music that bring me joy or bring me coherence or speak to me. And my wife actually has the same set of those things, but they're, in weird ways, they're different. Different kinds of sounds seem noisy to her and different kinds of sounds seem musical to me. But I'm going to just suggest that God making us in his image made us all able to make that distinction. It just could be a distinction between noise and music is different for different people. I'll grant that, but I won't grant there's no difference, and that every human being knows the difference because we're in the image of God. So that's sort of my take on it. It's a great question, however. Good. We'll stay for 20 minutes if they're all like that. Who else has a question? One down front. Yes, right down here in front. I'd like to just address this to either John or Monty to get your take on performers or those of us who would be participating in a worship service and who would be contemplating a particular selection. I appreciate it so much. Let all four questions sound so much. And we would have no problem playing that in the church service because we're familiar with the words of God who knows it in a Christian context. I've been playing around with the idea of playing John Colfrey's After the Raid, even Around Midnight. I was going to smoke Around Midnight. Both of these are – I think they have so much feeling and stuff. And they lift me and they have a lot to do with what I feel like even worshiping in a Christian service. We could also play something like that using those as a selection. Okay, the question in a nutshell is about the use of jazz in Christian services and jazz that seemingly has no association with hymnody or a Christian theme. Well, God made all of us, including Thelonious Monk and John Coltrane. So whatever their motives were when they made those songs, I can hear the gift in them and their beautiful pieces of music. So if it came to me that these pieces are useful in a worship service, there's no reason why I shouldn't use them. I hope I wouldn't offend anyone who had a perspective on those men as being out of the realm, you might say. But I don't see that. And I think God would take issue with us if we tried to judge the creativity or the creation of one of those men and saying, well, because maybe we didn't know them or we somehow thought that they were outside the faith or something like that. I think God would take issue with us, actually, if we made that judgment. So I think those songs are appropriate. To me, with worship music, if the person is really trying to create a worshipful atmosphere and delivering a message that way and leading the people towards worship of the Lord, then it's really, to me, not respective of style as much as that is argued about in churches. And I'm in a church right now that is affiliated with Redeemer. And we all have all kinds of different music each Sunday, classical music, jazz, folk, everything. And I think it can be all very effective in leading people towards worship. If the people who are playing the music again and their hearts are right and they're really trying to not make it a performance but make it worship, then I think it's effective. Thanks for other questions. There's another one right here in front. Yeah, this is for any of you. How do you find the balance between the performance side of your playing music and the actual worship? I mean, is it a perfect balance because I find that in the performance development that you give a piece of your soul that you kind of share and express an idea, whereas the worship is fun and you give that to what? Ideally, to me, there should be no difference. If we're performing, ideally, you know, we don't know, us musicians, we're not always thinking a certain way. But the ideal thing is whether we're playing in a bar or a church, it doesn't matter. Because if that's what your circumstances were, that you took a job to work in a place where there was whatever going on, you could be worshiping while you're playing every note. In fact, I think that the ideal expression is to be thankful and worshipful with every note that you're playing. Other questions? I can't see in the back very well. Are there people in the back with questions? Yes. I have a question for Monty. Being in the jazz world for a while, have you had a lot of opportunities to share your faith? And what has been the reaction? How have you found that? Well, that has come in different periods where I was, let's say, on fire. Earlier days, on fire, going around, eyes wide open, telling people the good news. And I simmered down somewhat and just let it hopefully by example. But I'm not special or anything. It's just that I know something that some other folks don't. And I'm grateful for that. But I don't really, if somebody wanted to talk, then I would talk. But I'm not one to just intervene in people with their chosen lifestyles. So it's, I don't know what will happen tomorrow, but right now I'm, if someone was to ask me something, but I wouldn't go up to them and just volunteer. It's just me. Okay. This one right over here. Yeah, my question is for Dr. Keller. Can you expound a little bit on that idea of God becoming a man as an improvisation? Oh, yeah. What, the idea is that God, he didn't give you a chance to. I'll take a seat on this one. No. It's simply, God does not make you come to us. He comes to, he adapts to us. In other words, he doesn't say, you come to me. You do, there's a kind of faith that says God stays in a sense in heaven and he lays out the rules and you just follow them perfectly and you just come to me. Then there's an understanding of the faith that says God actually adapts to us. He does not make us come to him. He comes to us. He becomes like one of us. He enters in. He flexes. He changes. Now, I know this is pushing it a bit, but my friend Carl Ellis says, well, what kind of music is that more like? In classical music, you sit there and you follow the notes perfectly and if you follow the notes perfectly, you are the perfect musician. You've done it. In jazz, it's much more flexy than that. You can't just follow the notes. In fact, one of the things I hated about jazz was sometimes I would sit down and you get to a certain spot, there's no notes. Make it up. I said, oh my gosh, what am I going to do? But you don't just make it up. You have to listen to what everybody else is doing. You have to flex and you have to adapt to them. And it's much more of a communal experience. And you actually don't, in a way, it's harder to gauge your performance too just by saying I've followed all the rules because the rules are you guys go at it. So the idea is that the incarnation is improvisation, absolutely. It's God saying I'm going to flex. I'm going to come to you. I'm going to move out of where I was and come over to you. That's all. And I think it's perfectly fair to say that. Even though I don't know that you can press it too far and say jazz is more gospel music. At least gospel music is jazz. I don't think you can press it too far. But I do see that. I see that connection. And I think that it's a fair connection to make. That what happened in the manger was God improvising instead of just saying, come to me. Okay? I'm just going to take one more question. But that doesn't mean that your questions are being ignored. If you have them, again, feel free to come down front and John and Monty and Tim have all agreed to hang out for a little while afterwards. But for those of you who would like to go, I want to give you the opportunity. So one more question. No one wants to ask the last question. Here's one. Go ahead. Obviously, your love of music has had a great role in achieving a certain level now. There's an addition to this question. Do you ever have anything? Do you ever struggle with fear of any expectations? Just gain that for everyone. Of course, that's a great one. John, the question is, what kind of bass strings do you use and why? Why? I think every musician who's honest with themselves has fear, a certain amount of fear every time, especially when you're improvising. I tend to be kind of reckless a lot of times, so I have fear. I have fear, certainly, but I try to just sort of like shush that part of me and just jump out there. Because the way I see it is, unless you really are reckless and you really try to find something and explore, way more. . . you play it safe or even after a while you'll get stale and you'll start getting worse so you have to deal with that fear i think some guys have actually really radical stage fright and everything i mean but but for me i think i get i'm fearful sometimes because i'm stepping out on a limb every time i play i'm pushing myself and i might not make it sometimes but i'd rather try and risk that and maybe find something new so that's the way i deal with it anyway thank you very much for coming tonight let's uh give one more round of applause to all of our thank you so much
