TITLE: What is a Missional Church?
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: 
SERIES: What is a Missional Church? (Leader Talk)
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/what-is-a-missional-church/

============================================================

Okay, hello. Thank you for being here. In your handout, I want to talk to you about, first of all, a concept that we hear thrown around a lot, a whole lot, but at Redeemer, because we talk a lot about being missional. We talk about the fact that one of the reasons why we're doing the collegiate model is we're seeking to move from being one church in multiple worship sites to being one church that contains multiple congregations. We call them generative congregations. We call them missional congregations. Missional is kind of a buzzword nowadays, and I could actually give you an entire talk just on where the word came from and how it's used today, but I'm not going to. I'm going to talk to you about how we use it here, and then try to show you what that has to do with everything we're doing right now, like Catalyst, the launch of the various congregations, and so on. Okay? So, in your handout, I won't certainly be going line by line, though a couple places I will probably go paragraph by paragraph. You ought to turn to page five, okay? And hold on to your hats for a little bit as we go through this. What's a missional church? Just one thing you could know would be the word missional is a word that sort of came up in the last 15, 20 years, and it has to do with a new reality in Western society that means, you know, North America and Europe. These were formerly societies in which basically Christianity was very influential, it was very dominant, and people showed up in church because they thought they should. Or if you invited them to church, they came because they felt they should. But those days are over, and as I put it down here, missional means the new outwardly focused kind of church that is necessary in Western culture now that our society has become more and more post-Christian. A new outwardly focused kind of focus kind of church. So, what is missional? Before I go through the nine or ten principles, let me start by pulling something out. It's in here. I probably should have, you know, called it out and put it into a paragraph. A missional church is a church in which the long-time non-Christian residents of your community feel welcome. That's pretty…that's kind of putting it down in a nutshell, in which the long-term non-Christian residents of your community feel welcome. What I mean, feel welcome means this, that when they come in, they see a lot of other people culturally like themselves. When they come in, they see a lot…the language and the way in which things happen is not too culturally foreign. On the other hand, when they come in, they find that both the message and the quality of relationships is utterly different and counterintuitive and yet compelling. Utterly different than anything they've seen anywhere else, counterintuitive and yet compelling. There's a dissonance. In other words, on the one hand, it needs to be utterly culturally like the surroundings, and yet at the core of its message and the quality of its relationships, especially around sex, money, and power, it is utterly different. Let me break that down. And by the way, in New York, here's the other thing. When I say long-time residents, you might say, why privilege them? In a place like New York City, depends on the part of the city, but probably no more than about 30 percent or 25, 30 percent of the folks who live right around here are here for 10, 20, 30 years, that kind of thing. But the point is, they tend to set the culture of a place, and therefore, if they feel welcome, that all the newer people will feel welcome as well. You can question me about that if you want. Nevertheless, how can you become a church like that? A gospel-oriented church, which is missional in that the long-time residents feel welcome in those churches. Here we go. Number one, you have to love the city and show that love, real love for the city, energized by the city, love the community around the church. I point out here that conservative churches who despise the immoral society around us and ethnic or immigrant or expatriate churches tend to be churches that kind of ignore and don't love the city. They sort of love themselves. They're tribal. And I said, long-time residents of the community feel unwelcome in those churches. So a missional church loves and enjoys the city, prays for it, cares for it, very, very positive toward the city, number one. Number two, discourse in the vernacular. Now, what does that mean? Well, take a look at the bullet points. If you want to make sure that your church is…and by the way… website for like 10 years, okay? So none of this is new, but I realize that when we talk about missional, I don't know that many people today, you know, have as good a grasp while I'm trying to bring it back. But you can find, not all of it, but you can find most of it on an older document on the website. This is actually something of a redo, which I did for you tonight. Look at these bullet points. Oh, I point out here, you know, when America was more influenced by Christianity, there was very little difference between the language inside and outside the church. So if you go to the congressional record of the first, say, 50 years, it's amazing what you see in there. In other words, there's biblical verses all the time. It's just, you know, so kind of weird. It's all different. So the missional church avoids tribal language, stylized prayer language, pious jargon, you know, talking, or it avoids we-they language, disdainful jokes that mock non-Christians or people of different politics and beliefs. It avoids sentimental, pompous, and sanctimonious talk, as well as hype. See, it's very typical evangelical churches to say everything's a blessing or revival sweeping the country, to talk in incredibly sanctimonious, sweeping, sentimental ways, which grate tremendously on anybody from the outside. It's almost like another language, even though you're speaking English, sort of. Avoids ever talking as if non-believing people were present. Avoids ever talking as if non-believing people were not present. Excuse me. In other words, you should never have a small group. You should never have a meeting. You should never do anything in which you don't assume that, say, 20 percent of the people out there aren't, are non-Christian. You should assume that 20 percent are non-Christians. Now, you say, but that's not true. Well, if you act and speak as if they're there, eventually they may come. They may be brought. But if you act and speak as if they're not there, nobody's ever going to bring them in. And they're never going to come in. Or if one comes in or strays, they'll never come back. And unless all the above flows out of a truly humble, bold, gospel-changed heart, if you try to do bullet point one, two, three, and four because you think this is the way to reach non-Christians, if you do it just because, oh, I got to watch myself, then it's a kind of marketing. See, all of these things come out of what I consider a gospel-changed heart, a humble heart. Because sanctimonious talk and we-they language and tribal talk is all anti-gospel, anti-grace. So, how we talk in here has to be missional. Number three, entering and retelling the culture stories. I'm not going to talk to you this much about this because to a great degree, this one has more to do with preachers and preaching. But here's the point. What we try to do here is listen. In Redeemer, we try to listen to what the people outside are saying are their concerns, their narratives, their difficulties, their aspirations, their hopes, their fears, their nightmares. In other words, what you're doing is you're trying to discern the baseline cultural narratives of their lives. See, a narrative is antagonist, protagonist, you know, plot tension, resolution. And everybody has got an idea of what our problems are and what my problem is and how I can get there. And very briefly, gospel communication should always show how Jesus Christ is the only way that the narrative of your life can have a happy ending. We should not be presenting the gospel in such ways that it solves the problems and meets the aspirations of people of 30 years ago, nor should we be trying to do it to meet the aspirations and solve the problems of yourself. You have to know what the aspirations are. You have to know what the problems are of the people out here around New York, and that when you preach and when you talk, you show how it's Jesus that actually is the ultimate solution for the problem. Jesus is actually the ultimate aspiration for the ultimate fulfillment of the aspiration and so forth. That's all I'm going to say on that one. Number four, be a church that is a contrast society. All right. You can read this. I'm looking at the clock. I can't go any further. When the society around us was more Christian, not Christian in the sense of more born-again people, but just was more influenced by Christian ideas, the difference between how people lived inside the church and outside the church wasn't very great. So, all right, let me read you this. page, it's on the bottom of page six. It's a Leslie Newbigin quote. Can I read this to you? For centuries, the church in the West could assume that its people lived in a society in which the very folk culture was semi-Christian. The church could, without immediate and obvious disaster, confine themselves to specifically religious concerns. Do you hear what he's saying? Like to the provision of opportunities for worship, religious teaching, and fellowship. Thus, churches tended to become loosely compacted fellowships within a wider semi-Christian culture, providing for only a small part of the total concerns of their new members. Membership in a church often involves slight and relatively superficial contact with other members. But now, however, the situation in the West is more like the situation of a church in the midst of an ancient non-Christian culture like Hinduism. Leslie Newbigin was a missionary to India for many years. He says, becoming a Christian in such a situation involved a radical break with the whole of non-Christian culture. The church now is compelled to demonstrate that Christianity is not only a new pattern of personal behavior, but a new pattern of corporate activity extending beyond the strictly religious sphere all of life lived. So, what I put down here above this block quote is, for example, the way sex is regarded, the way money is regarded, the way power is used out in the culture is utterly different than the way in which the Bible says Christians should use it. And therefore, the church increasingly has to become not a thin community where you come just for kind of fellowship and religious activities, but a thick community in which you're really showing the world a whole different way of being a human society. And some of you may have heard me say, we have to really get, we have to say, for example, everybody knows in Manhattan that women tend to choose their marriage partners on the basis of money, and men tend to choose the marriage partners on the basis of looks. That's a very worldly way to do it. There's certain attitudes towards sex, money, and power embedded in that particular practice. So, we come into the Christian churches of New York, and it should be totally different. Is it? Of course not. It's not totally different. And that's because our community is too thin. And because our community is thin and not thick, we're not missional. Next, number six, a missional church is to be a church that is a servant society. Ah. Now, what this means is that we should be famous for our care for the poor. And that means what our diaconate does. That means what Hope for New York does. You know, we can be proud of that, and we can look at the statistics, and we can say, how great, but I don't know that Redeemer is famous yet for our concern for the needs of people. I put down here, in general, a church must be more deeply and practically committed to the deeds of compassion and social justice than traditional liberal churches, and more deeply and practically committed, I'll get to this in a minute, to evangelism and conversion than traditional fundamentalist churches. This kind of church is profoundly counterintuitive to American observers. It means we don't fit into categories. It breaks the ability to categorize us and dismiss us as if we're liberal or conservative, and only this kind of church has any chance in the non-Christian West. Okay, number seven. Told you, hold on to your hats. And this is the one I'm going to come back to in about two minutes and spend about ten minutes on it. In fact, the rest of my time, pretty much. A missional church has to be a church in which the lay people do lay ministry and witness. Now, this is just common sense. Now, we've been talking about this. I talked about it on Sunday. When Christianity was influential in society, there was a great deal of social pressure on people to go to church. So, at least three things. Number one, many people just showed up in church because I go to church, and then you could preach the gospel to them and they get saved. Many other people show up at church during milestones. Like, they stop going to church, but when they get married and they have their first child, then they want to come to church. Or at a wedding, they go to church. Or at a funeral, they go to church. That kind of thing. So, when the society was more influenced by Christianity, even though many people didn't go to church, many of them show up at church at critical times. Lastly, when society was more influenced by Christianity, at least when you invited somebody to church, they had this vague idea that they should probably go to church and so they might come. But all that's over, especially in a place like New York City. And therefore, we're more like the early church because in the early church, people did not come to faith in Christ by coming to hear the preacher because that didn't happen that way. You know, in persecution, in the early church, you couldn't bring non-Christians to church. You didn't know whether that person might not be a spy and then would report you to the did people hear the gospel? Lay people were equipped, were motivated, were courageous enough, were knowledgeable enough in order to talk to their friends, their neighbors, and their colleagues about Christ in winsome ways. We'll get back to that. That is utterly crucial, and that is something that happened a lot at Redeemer in the first five to ten years, and it does not happen much anymore. And therefore, it's a huge part of being missional. Number eight, practice Christian unity rather than turf consciousness as much as possible. I've already talked about this. Missional churches are seen as non-tribal. A tribal church doesn't care about the poor. A tribal church doesn't care about the neighborhood. There's a lot of things I mean by tribal, but here's the most important one. A tribal church goes after people and says, you're mine and not theirs. I remember when I first got here, I realized that the Christians who were here, they had three or four options. And there were not many evangelical churches then, and there were about four, let's just say, at least up in this part of the world. And I remember that some of the Christians I know who attended Redeemer said that when I go to the other churches, people say, you need to come to our church. And if you go to our church, you can't go to their church. They were much more territorial and turf conscious. Most people said in the early days, Redeemer was the least turf conscious of any of these churches. Never put pressure on people. You've got to come to our church. We're the right church. We're a good church. You've got to be part of this. Never. Much more willing to loan people. Much more willing to send people out. Much more willing to give people away. And ironically, I remember one person said, you know, the less you make me feel guilty about going to some other church, the more I want to come to yours. Missional. Cooperative. Lack of turf consciousness. Willing to release people all the time. You know, sending people out to start new ministries and new churches. Very important. And lastly, just to show you, just to give you a certain example of this, look where it says a case example. That's on page nine, excuse me. So being a missional church is not a matter of programs. It's not a matter of running particular programs. It's a state of mind. And I'll give you an example. Let's not even talk about a missional church. Let's talk about a missional fellowship group. If you have a missional fellowship group, then you have these things happening. One, you love and talk positively about the city and neighborhood. Two, you speak in language that is not filled with pious tribal or technical terms and phrases, not disdainful and embattled. Three, in their Bible study, when you study the Bible, you're applying the gospel to the core concerns and stories of the people of the culture. Then, they're obviously interested and engaged with the literature and art and thought of the surrounding culture, can discuss it appreciatively and yet critically. Then, exhibits deep concern for the poor, generosity with their money, purity and respect toward the opposite sex, humility toward people of other races and cultures. That should be seen. And you don't bash other Christians in churches. And in a small group like that, you will find eventually non-Christians being invited. And not only will they be invited, they'll come back. That's a missional small group. That's a missional church. Now, let me take the time I got remaining to talk a little bit about lay witness. And to do that, I actually do want you to come over, and I will actually kind of read, go over to where it says the importance of lay. Yeah, go over to page 11. See where it says, describing the lay ministry community. And before we start reading there, look up here, just for a second. When I talk…the question, and I put this in here in an earlier chapter, but I just…earlier page, but I want to just say it here. People…and I…if you're on the east side yesterday, I said this a couple times. What does it mean to launch a congregation? When we say we're launching the east side, we're launching the west side, launching downtown, what does it mean? What does it mean to stop being just a worship site and start being a congregation? Well, my answer is right here, and that is the difference is that each congregation actually gets not just a preacher, which you have now, but a pastor, which you actually don't have right now. Most people say, I love everything about Redeemer, but the fact is, I don't have a pastor. Now, we've got to be really careful. I'm willing to say this. I wouldn't say this in the big congregation because I don't know if I have time to make this qualification. and the leading minister is your pastor, that does not mean quite what it means in a small church. In a small church, you know that that pastor is going to find out if you've got an ingrown toenail and call you up and ask, how are you doing? I was a pastor like that for almost 10 years in a church in Hopewell, Virginia. We grew from 70 people to 250 people, and I did that. In other words, I made sure I saw pretty much everybody every three or four months. I went to see them. If I heard anything, I called them up. If there was a problem, I went to see them. You know, they didn't have to ask me. In a big city, that's not what a pastor means, but what a pastor means is this. If you see what the Bible says about being a minister, not just a lay leader, but a lay minister, a person who actually has had his or her life, if you've had your life changed enough by the gospel, and you've developed enough knowledge of the Bible and the gospel, and enough confidence and enough of a motivation to want to start to talk to both Christians and non-Christians, to pray with them, to share the Word with them, to talk about the gospel with them, if you want to be a minister, you're willing to put in the time and the effort to do it, then the pastor of each congregation is going to give you the support and the equipping you need. You hear that? You can ask me more questions about that. I'm not saying when I say you've got… I want the lead pastors to be pastors in a way that I haven't been able to be, not since the church got to a certain size. At this point, it doesn't mean, as I said, that the lead pastors are going to be in a position to talk to absolutely everybody, anybody who, you know, everybody you'll know by name. No, not with 1,000 people, 1,500 people or more. No. But in every single congregation, there is going to be developed what I call a lay ministry community, a community of people who are supported by the pastors, who are equipped, who are trained, who give themselves and make themselves available. So this is not just being in a small group, and this is not just going to worship services. If you make yourself available, and I know that in every congregation there will be, I hope, a significant number of people who do that, you'll get the equipping and you'll get the support. And the catalyst is the beginning of it. But after that, it has to keep on going. So when I talk about lay ministers, let me just point this out. Now go to your spot. It says, more fully described, each congregation offers a life-changing, ministry-empowering relationship through community with the pastoral staff, the pastors of the congregation, for those willing to give this relationship the time and effort. Each congregation will have a pastoral team led by the lead pastor that disciples, trains, and supports Christians for ministry to others within the church and in their neighborhoods and communities. I call that a lay ministry community. It consists of the lay people who are most connected to and trained formally and by the pastoral team. They take regular initiative in doing lay word ministry. Now I put down here number, and by that I mean counseling, encouraging, instructing, discipling, witnessing with both Christians and non-Christian individuals. Right above, on page, all of page 10 and 11, I give you a whole bunch of examples of it. Don't go looking at it now. Look at it later, please. I'm asking you to do that later. Right now, number one, the dynamic, this will rejuvenate the church's ability to edify and evangelize. It creates a lay ministry dynamic. Lay people involve themselves in the lives of others who either grow in grace or come to faith, and a certain percentage of these people ministered to by lay ministers come into the lay ministry community as well. By the way, this lay ministry community is a relatively informal group. You don't get a little card. Number two, lay ministers are not the same thing as lay leaders. The lay ministry community is ultimately an informal group without a clear boundary. Most people find their way in simply because they're willing to put in the extra time and effort it takes. But they are the pool out of which most of the formal lay leaders come, and lay leaders are those who are volunteering, leading groups, and programs. See, lay leaders are people who fulfill functions generally inside the church. Lay ministry is happening out in your relationships with your friends, with your neighbors, with your colleagues. And by the way, there are many folks who will be lay ministers who don't have the ability or time to do much in the way of lay leadership. There's tons of people who have jobs in which you can be incredibly good as lay ministers, but you simply don't have the time because your job doesn't allow the time for you to serve in some kind of lay leadership position. Now, let me just give you a quick example of it. If you go to page, and then I'm done, actually. I think I'm going to stop at that point and say something about the launches. Look at the very bottom of the end, page 16. Here we are, we have to do your endeavors. So, on a couple of the goals, we have to do your job with a state of the city. So, once you go to theffenheim team, you can get the deportation, with a state of the If you go to page, and then I'm done, actually. I think I'm going to stop at that point and say something about the launches. Look at the very bottom, and page 16. Somebody here is saying, oh, my goodness, oh, my goodness, oh, my goodness. I don't know how to do such a thing. What are you talking about? You mean sharing my faith with everybody around me? Yeah, but no. Yeah, but no. Here's what I mean. Look at these 11 behaviors. And these are only evangelistic behaviors. I mean, if you find somebody at church who's a struggling person, and you start to have Bible studies with them, and you meet with them, and you talk with them, and you give them books to read, that's lay ministry, and that's edification. That's not evangelism. But just to show you, to point that being missional especially means lay people doing evangelistic behaviors, take a look at these 11. I'd like you to see that most of them are really simple. Number one, let others know of your Christian faith in natural ways, just re-mentioning that you go to church or your Christian beliefs casually. Number two, ask questions about other people's beliefs and experiences with faith and church, and just listen appreciatively and sympathetically and say nothing. Can you do that? Can you do number one? Can you do number two? Number three, listen sympathetically and well to somebody's challenges, and then mention that you'll pray for them. That's all. Number four, share some difficult personal issue and simply mention that your faith helped you get strength and grant, you know, to do whatever. Number five, share your spiritual narrative, your testimony, your Christian experience. You see, the first, each one of these is a little bit more, but the first one, two, three, four are really simple. Number six, offer books or audio resources about Christian issues and then say let's talk about them. Number seven, initiate a discussion about a friend's biggest problems or objections to Christianity, listen respectively, and then give them things to read and talk. Number eight, regularly read a part of the Bible together, probably one of the Gospels. Number eight, no, that's number eight. Number nine, invite, did I miss one? Oh, well. Number nine, invite friends to situations or activities where they meet believers, but there's no direct Christian event or communication at all. Just invite them to a party where they'll meet a lot of Christians, but not necessarily, it's not a Christian event in any way. Number ten, invite friends to venues where they hear the Gospel communicated, like an open forum or a fellowship group or a worship service. Number eleven, share your faith. Now, when most people hear, I need to do evangelism as a layperson, they go right to eleven, or maybe to ten. But the fact is, the first nine are things, look, if twenty percent of the people in any congregation were regularly doing just the first eight or nine, the difference would be astounding. It's not happening. And the reasons for it are in the handout, but we don't have time for them. Now, what I'm trying to say is, what makes you able to do those kinds of behaviors? The answer is, you need, over a period of time, you need to have more confidence, because you feel like, I'm learning as a Christian. I'm learning about the Bible. I'm learning about Christian faith. I'm learning about enough things, so I have the confidence to open my mouth. That happens, only happens in things beyond what you do, regular going to services. It also means motivation. It also means a sense of confidence that the pastors and other Christian leaders are behind me and they'll help me in this. So, if you're part of, you might say, a lay ministry community doing these kinds of behaviors, then we are actually getting back into a kind of missional mindset that has, to some degree, been lost, I must say, but which is the way, you know, our church began. Now, let me just say a couple quick things about the three launches. We have just launched the Eastside Congregation. What's coming up, of course, next is in January, we're going to launch the Westside Congregation. That's a pretty big deal because it's a new building, and, of course, it's going to mean more changes. Just keep in mind that the neighborhood's going to be watching, that we need to find ways of making sure that we are really good neighbors. But the great thing about having the building there is there's going to be all sorts of opportunities for all sorts of ministries, and it's pretty exciting. Then we're going to hopefully form a downtown congregation. I hope I'm right in saying, you know, the Lord willing next fall, basically. And so that's our approach. When it comes to Catalyst, as I already said, it's the first step. It's a pretty big step, and it's a pretty formal step in the direction of creating, recreating the lay ministry communities in every congregation. But beyond Catalyst, it's going to take a lot of creativity and ingenuity. contentful relationships, but relationships. Catalyst is very content-filled, but please realize if you're involved, and I hope that most of you are, we've been amazed at the response. You know, it's like 50 percent beyond what we expected. We're hoping for 1,000, we're getting close to 1,500 or something like that. Nevertheless, it's the relationships that you build that are almost as important, I know, because I help write the content, so I'm not denigrating the content, but the relationships are every bit as important as imbibing the content for you to be changed into the kind of person that can really be a minister in the city. There you go. So, I think we have some time for questions. I just ran through a lot of stuff, and I'm hoping that I stimulated some discussion. So, have you, anybody want to just stand up? I don't think we're doing mic or anything like that. If you stand up, I'll just try to hear you. Q, A. Okay. Yes. Q, A. But spiritually unlike themselves, right. Q, A. Yeah. Q, A. Yeah. Q, A. Yeah. Q, A. Yeah. Q, A. Okay. Two things. Number one, if people outside, you're walking on the street, you see racial diversity. If you come into the church and you don't see racial diversity, then you're not making long-time New Yorkers feel welcome. Okay? In other words, if they're going to feel welcome, they do need to see racial diversity because they're used to racial diversity in the rest of their culture. That's right. So, I certainly didn't mean to say that you choose one culture and that's it. I mean, as much as possible, you try to be as diverse as you can be. Secondly, I did say that if this church is not known for its compassion for the least of these, then it's not a missional church. That was one of the main points. Somebody else? Yeah. Q, A. Oh, is there a plan to offer Catalyst again? Q, A. I don't know. I mean, you, yeah, maybe, but I shouldn't even say that. I don't know. Now, there's not specific plans to offer it again, or are there? Am I wrong? No, we're not sure about that, are we, Bruce? Yeah, he'll explain that in a second. Good. Q, A. Yes, sir. Q, A. Non-Christians. In the Catalyst groups? Well, I would say it's interesting. That's very interesting. Since the Catalyst groups are basically to try to train people to be lay ministers. Okay. So, the first couple of weeks is what is the gospel and idolatry? You know, the first couple of weeks talk about the gospel and the heart. That's your place to, if you perceive that a person in your group is not a believer, that's exciting. And you've got two or three weeks in which the material is going to be like a, it's going to be sort of like a, you know, it's going to hit them right between the eyes. So, all I could say is it would be a great time to talk about where are we all spiritually. I mean, one of the things you could do in your group is to say, so, let's go around the room and say, do we, where are we when it comes to the gospel? Do you accept it, or do you struggle with parts of it, or, you know, what parts do you struggle with? So, if you're aware there's non-Christians there, the first couple of weeks, you really ought to, since the material will essentially be evangelizing them, you just need to let them respond to the material. should expect that you'll have non-Christians everywhere. That's a good thing. Do you see what I'm saying? In other words, the first… When you go on a little later in the material, it might be… It won't be as direct, it won't be as direct, usually. But who knows? Because whenever you think you know what's going to evangelize somebody… You know, I can't tell you how many times I preach a sermon that I thought was an evangelistic sermon. If there's anybody who's non-Christian there, yeah, yeah, they got it. And then I'll preach some sermon over here on how wives should submit to their husbands and somebody becomes a Christian. You never know. So don't worry about it. Okay. Yes. Yes. I'm just curious. What do you think, like, long? You need to start out being very emotional. Well, it's complex. And actually, there's some ideas… Jason, there's some ideas in there. One is, I have some question about… I would say that there was a spot at which I thought that even though I couldn't really… I thought that through the existing programs, we could still maintain a certain kind of lay ministry dynamic through the programs. And it hasn't happened. So to some degree, I just…I've learned as I've moved along, as the church has gotten bigger and bigger, and I went past a certain spot at which I allowed programs to do what used to be done a little bit more organically and relationally, and I have not seen the same kind of result. So some of it is, I've learned that some of the things that I stopped doing, I shouldn't have stopped doing. Okay? So now that's my mea culpa. But then past that, there were only 9,000 Christians going to Manhattan congregations 20 years ago, and today there's 35,000 or 36,000. And so what that does mean is you now can move to New York and spend a big part of your life in a Christian world. And that wasn't possible years ago. When Redeemer started, if you were a believer here, most of your friends couldn't possibly be Christians. There just weren't enough. And now they can. Third thing is, I must tell you, I actually do think that social media has meant that in general, people are less aware of their geographic and physical surroundings than they used to be. That you don't, I mean, it used to be, if you were a young lawyer, if you were a young policeman, if you were a young model, if you were young anything, you worked all day, and then you went out to the lawyer bar with all the other young lawyers, or the model bar with all the other models. In other words, you really lived in your vocational network. And if you became a Christian, you had all these great friends, and you would bring them to church and all that. It's not that simple anymore. People actually pick and choose, you know, where they go. They maintain relationships with people who don't live in the city in a way that… Even in 1989, you had to get on the phone to talk to anybody and have a horrible long-distance bill. You're forced to live in your city in a way that people are not forced to anymore. So there's a whole lot of reasons, and there's no one culpa, really, okay? A whole lot of reasons. That's a great question. Yeah, right here. What kind of church? You might always ask. That's a great question. You might always say, what kinds are there that are you thinking of? That's always the first thing. So what kinds of churches are you that you're thinking of? And if they mean liberal or conservative. I do remember I was buying tea. For many years, I bought tea at a place called… Oh, I've forgotten the name of it. It was a really good tea store down on East 20th Street or something like that. And I went in so often to buy there that after a while, the woman who owned the little establishment says, Hey, you come in a lot. What do you do? And I said, I'm a minister. I said, oh, you have a church in New York? He said, yeah, I have a church in New York. She said, oh, gay or straight? That's the first… And that was like 1993. She right away… That's the two kinds of churches. So you better find out… I just said straight, but there's a whole lot of gay people that come to my church, which is exactly right. But anyway, if they… You know, the first thing to say, Presbyterian, and one of the good things about Redeemer being a Presbyterian church and not an independent church or not a church that's just got a name is most New Yorkers, long-time New Yorkers, consider all these churches that don't have any denomination cults or right-wing fronts. And so just to say we're Redeemer Presbyterian church, very often say, oh, Presbyterian, okay. they probably don't. But it deflects. Yeah, Greg. Yeah. Greg's asking, how do you move from thin to thicker? That is a very tough… I would love to sit down, brainstorm with my staff and pastors, and come back and do a whole talk on that. It is not easy. We are… I wasn't kidding when I said social media weakens community, whether it's Christian or not. There's a lot of talk about that. That sociologists talk about the fact that you've got… What social media does is it creates a large number of people that you really aren't accountable to. See, when you're living physically with somebody, they can see whether you're losing weight. They can see if you've got bags under your eyes. They can see, you know, all sorts of things about you. And there's an automatic accountability, a thickness to physical relationships that is not there online. And so, what's happened is more and more, you've got thin relationships anyway, so people expect thin relationships. I don't know. You certainly can't undo. Though, you know, I'm not on Facebook, and I can't wait. I'm hoping that I will not be dead when I hear people say, Hey, you remember Facebook? You know, like they do now about other things. Because I have seen how people move, and they don't really…they don't land. Younger people move, and they don't land for years, it seems like. No, I think this…probably the first step in making it more thick is that you have to do something besides Sunday. And you also have to be more accountable. There's a danger of…you come to a fellowship group, but you don't really share your life with people. And I guess a thick community is one of which more facets of your life are against the other facets of the other person's life. Colleagues at work only know each other at work, and they don't see the rest of their lives. People at church tend to be like that too, but you really are supposed to be eating together and playing together and learning together and having a variety of relationships with each other. It's a long story. I mean, you get the prize for the question that stumped me. I mean, I don't even know where to start. It's such a big question and a difficult thing. Okay, somebody else or two. Yes, go ahead. Yeah. Given what you just said about social media, how is Redeemer and Christian Church in general to have a change? How do you think it can adapt? All right. I just said that Greg's question was the hardest one. You guys are on a roll right now. You know what? Listen. Do you know that? Do you know that? I didn't actually get into it. Actually, I think I may. Oh, you know what? I skipped it, didn't I? Oh, my goodness. One of the missional principles is equipping laypeople for being a Christian at work. I'm sorry. That's a whole center of faith work thing. I don't know what happened. I must have missed. I'm sorry. I turned two pages. One of the things I point out there, because Leslie Newbigin points it out, and what he points out is when you equip somebody, if a minister wants to equip somebody to be a Christian in the art world or in business, it's actually a very egalitarian process. And here's what I mean by that. If you want to learn about theology, you want to learn biblical theology, come to me. I went to seminary. I studied the Bible. You haven't. And I will dump my information in you, and you will take notes, and that's it. Okay. But if I'm going to be helping you be a Christian in the arts, I know a lot of things that you don't know anything about at all, but you know all kinds of things about the arts that I don't know anything about at all either. And we actually have to come together, ask each other questions, and kind of resource each other cumulatively. You may have questions, and I say, well, I think the Bible has to do with that. Oh, I didn't know that part of the Bible. Meanwhile, I don't even know the questions and the things that an artist is dealing with. There's a kind of egalitarianism about theologians and pastors sitting down with practitioners and coming up with something. I actually think to answer your questions, these last two questions, would have to be the same thing. If you expect, I don't know your world as well. I don't know the world as well. There's some ways in which, because I'm older and I'm an outsider and I'm a theologian, I can critique the world as it is. On the other hand, I'm a little detached. utterly, I'm not a digital native. I'm not utterly immersed in it. And to answer those questions would take a certain, neither I should be pontificating on how to answer the question, nor should anybody else either. We really need to bring it together and ask those questions. And we're not probably doing that right now. Last chance. Okay, yeah. I called on you because I can hear people up front. No. No. Mm-hmm. Right. Okay, now wait, wait a minute. I'm almost there. This is a great question, I think, but I have to make sure I understand. So you're saying that how do you balance strengthening the church on the inside? Well, lay ministry, if you read, and since obviously I skipped parts of this, you better read the whole handout, please. I stress the evangelistic side of lay ministry by going through those behaviors. And it's partly because I feel the lack of them happening pretty acutely. That sentence got away from me, but you basically understand it. On the other hand, lay ministry isn't just evangelism. It's also edification. It's also inside the church. It's building up people inside the church. It's discipling one another. It's counseling one another. It's encouraging one another. And I make that clear. So the lay ministry dynamic works both ways. It's not just outward-faced. Nevertheless, a lay ministry dynamic gives a church a dynamism and a churn that means creativity and growth, and it's still, it's missional. But, yeah, I gave you a bad impression. Lay ministry is both inside and outside. It fills up both the, you might say, the needs of the Christians for being built up as well as the need for non-Christians to hear the Word. Good question, and thanks because I didn't say that properly. Okay, it's 8 o'clock, and I thought somebody was going to make announcements.
