TITLE: What Is True Freedom? (Open Forum)
SCRIPTURE: 
TOPICS: Doctrine
SERIES: Redeemer Open Forums
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/what-is-true-freedom-an-open-forum/

============================================================

I just remember what really I don't like about these open forums. You know what it is? I have to come on after all that stuff. And I don't like to feel like a... My solo. One of the things about jazz that's important to know, and I hope this doesn't hurt anybody's feelings, but jazz is high culture because jazz is not simple entertainment. It's like other kinds of high culture in classical music. It makes demands on the audience. It makes demands. It doesn't go down easy. It's not simple entertainment. You really have to think. It makes demands on you. Well, I'm going to do the same thing. I hope that you're willing to do some thinking with me. I hope you're willing to follow along and follow an argument that has a number of different points. I'd like to talk to you about what freedom is. As I already mentioned, and I'll get back to it in a second, jazz itself seems to embody freedom. But there's an underlying structure to jazz. There's more to the freedom than meets the eye. Let me... Here's an interesting quote. Just this last week, the Pope was in town, and he came to the United Nations and he said, We're on the threshold of a new millennium. We're witnessing the extraordinary global acceleration of that quest for freedom, which is one of the great dynamics of human history. This phenomenon is not limited to one part of the world, nor is it the expression of any single culture. Men and women throughout the world, even when threatened with violence, have taken the risk of freedom, asking to be given a place in social, economic, and political life, which is commensurate with their dignity as free human beings. Interesting point. What he's saying is that the dynamic, the thing that drives human history, is the quest for freedom. He says it's not just in one culture, it transcends that. It's a global, it's a universal thing. And he's right. He says, look at the 20th century. In the middle of the century, we're fighting for freedom. That's what World War II was about. After World War II, there was the decolonization of the world and all of the various movements seeking to get freedom, the former colonies getting freedom from their colonial masters, the civil rights movement, the fall of Euro-communism. So many of the controversies that are going on in this country right now, which are often called culture wars, are really issues of freedom. And he says, therefore, freedom is the thing that we're about. This is the thing that is the dynamic of human history. This is the global, the universal longing of the human heart. Pretty interesting. But, you know, it's interesting to hear a pope saying that, because a lot of people believe that the pope represents the greatest barrier to freedom. There was a guy named Diderot who had such an interesting way of turning a phrase. He put it this way. There will be no freedom until the last king is strangled with the entrails of the last priest. You know, it's just such a way of putting it, you know. I couldn't help but think about what he said when I was listening to the pope getting up there in front of the assembled peoples of the world and telling them about freedom. And here's Diderot saying, we're not going to have freedom until that guy's gone. We're not going to have freedom until the last king is strangled on the entrails of the last priest. And there were nicer ways of saying that in the op-ed pages of the New York Times when he was here. Just slightly nicer. One of the op-ed pieces said, he said, you know, here's the trouble with the pope. He's not American. And he's not American. He doesn't understand democracy. Because you can't have a democracy and tell people what they ought to do. In a democracy, we know that there's no outside constraints on us, went the op-ed piece, that everybody has to decide what is right or wrong for him or herself. Now, what you have here in that statement and in what Diderot says is a modern view of freedom that I would say everybody has and that most of us have and that is the working model. And I'm going to give it a name in a minute, but first I want to describe it for a second. You notice what Diderot is saying and actually what the op-ed page person was saying. Now, I didn't really jot down the name of the person, but what they're really saying is absence is the freedom from. The absence of externals, that's what freedom is. Freedom is freedom from. Freedom is the absence of external constraints. Now, with simple objects, that's exactly the way it works. Here's a helium balloon and it has an inclination to go up and it's free if there's no obstruction to it. And here's a rock and it has an inclination to go down and it's free if there's nothing impeding it. In other words, if its inclination is not impeded, if there's no obstructions or externals, then we're said to be free. Now, that has been... free, and this is the way it's understood now, if we're free from the outside to do what's inside. Freedom is defined that way. We're only free if we're free from the outside to do what's inside. If there's no obstructions to those inner desires, this is who I am. This is what I want to do. I should be free from the outside. There shouldn't be any obstructions so that I can do what's on the inside. That's what makes a balloon free. That's what makes a rock free. That's what makes a human being free. Now, I'm going to call this negative freedom. It's only defined in terms of what we're free from. We're only free if we're free from people telling us what to do. If we're free from political coercion. If we're free from. And I'm going to call that absolute negative freedom. The absolute negative freedom model. Or A and F for short. But I will never call it that. The absolute negative freedom model says I'm only free if I am free from the outside influences to do what's on the inside. And the reason Diderot said what he said is because if that's it, if that's the absolute freedom model, if that's what freedom is, God is the biggest problem we've got. Why is God the biggest problem we've got? Not every concept of God is. If you conceive of God as a kind of general life force that you kind of get to, you get in contact with in mystical ways and you have to find him, you find yourself in him and so on, that's not a problem. But the traditional Western understanding of God, the traditional view of God that says he was a personal creator, he's a personal being, and he's a judge, that's a problem. Nietzsche saw that. Let me read you two, let me just read you three quickies. These are all famous people. Friedrich Nietzsche, Jean-Paul Sartre, Aldous Huxley. Here's what they said. Nietzsche said, if there were gods, how could I bear it not to be a god? Therefore, there are no gods. Now, Sartre said, I mean, he's being poetic and that may sound silly, but listen. Sartre says, if God does not exist, then human beings exist before they are defined. So we can define ourselves and make ourselves what we will be. Since there's no God to conceive us, we are what we will ourselves to be. What's Sartre saying? What's Nietzsche saying? If there's a God, then you have a definition. And you've got to honor that definition. But if there's no God, then essentially, you have no definition. You can define yourself. If there's a God, you're not free. If you're going to be free, there can't be a God. Aldous Huxley, though, put it perfectly. And very frankly, he says, when I was a philosophy student, he says, the philosopher who finds no meaning in the world is not concerned exclusively with the problem of pure metaphysics. He's also concerned to prove that there is no valid reason why he personally should not do as he wants to do. For me, the philosophy of meaninglessness was essentially an instrument of liberation, sexual and political. Now, Huxley is not saying anything different than Sartre, not saying anything different than Nietzsche, and he's not saying anything different from Diderot. Here's what he's saying. He's saying, if there's a God, I'm not free. So if I'm going to be free, I decided there was no God. But if there's no God, then nothing has been created. There's no design. Nothing has an author, and everything is meaningless. Now, listen here. He is saying, I'm junk. You're junk. It's all an accident. It means nothing. That's the price of absolute freedom. If you're absolutely free to decide what you want to do and who you want to be, then you are junk. That's the price. See? He says, the philosophy of meaninglessness was essentially an instrument of liberation, sexual and political. On the other hand, if you want meaning in life, you're not free. Because then you've got to submit to what the creator has said, your definition. Now, I defy anybody here to refute that. As long as you're working on this idea of freedom being no constraints, doing what I really want to do, deciding for myself, see, freedom from the outside for that which is inside. If that's the model, that's the choice. Freedom and meaninglessness, okay, have to come together. Now, somebody says, okay, you know, some of you are swallowing a little hard maybe, and you're saying, well, all right. You put it like that. It's kind of stark. It's pretty, it makes me uncomfortable. I don't know what I think about it. But you haven't disproved it. Just because you're making me squirm, just because you're sort of showing me the implications of this view, doesn't mean you've disproved it. No, let me try that now. Thank you. Thank you. does not work. Let me show you that it doesn't work. I can do that pretty briefly, but then let me show you why. Here's, it doesn't work. Let's take the pure version, the one I just gave you. Most of you do not have it, and I'll show you what you do, but it doesn't help you. The pure version, the Huxley, the Nietzsche, the Sartre, the Diderot, you see, the smart people, they're the ones that say, I cannot be free if there's a God. Therefore, there is no God, and I buy the consequences. And that means that there's, when we die, we rot. That means that everything is just matter. Everything is material. Everything is just matter in motion. Everything is just atoms. But you see, when people start thinking about what that means, does that make you free? You know, Stephen Jay Gould, he teaches at Harvard, he said, you know why you're here? You're here because a comet hit the earth and wiped out the dinosaurs and gave mammals a chance. He says, you're here because some obscure little form of mammalia happened to have certain vestigial organs that worked out well to become legs so you were able to adapt to land. In other words, he says, you know, you're an accident. But he says, that's liberating. And he does a very Nietzschean thing when he talks about it. He says, it's very liberating because that means that you can be whoever you want to be. You're free. B.F. Skinner said, wait a minute. Here's a couple of quick quotes. B.F. Skinner says, man is a machine in the sense that he's a complex system behaving in lawful ways. It's just that the complexity is extraordinary. See, what he's saying is, he says, the reason we don't look like machines is because we're unbelievably complex machines. But we are machines. Why? If you're nothing but matter, everything that you feel, everything that you think, whether it's love, whether it's hope, whether it's fear, it's just what your brain's telling you. And some people can argue, well, it's the genes making you feel that way. And others would say, no, it's the environment. And here's this incredible, big, if you've gone to college, you know about this incredible intellectual struggle for years. Is it our heredity that makes us the way we are and programs us? Or is it the environment and the way we've been trained? And back and forth they go, but who cares? Because either way, you're programmed. Either way, there's no freedom. Bertrand Russell says, all our hopes and fears, loves and beliefs, are but the results of accidental collocations of atoms. And here's not somebody you've ever heard of. A young graduate French student living in France back in the early 80s. And he wrote a letter to a Christian woman who was married to a minister, and she published it in a book. And he wrote this. He says, you know, I don't know why Francois and I can't just have sex. I don't know why we seem to need a commitment. I've always believed that human beings are products of chance. We're like the machines, doing what we're programmed to do by our genes or by our environment. So I can't make choices. My program is just running me. I can't really love. Relationships are an illusion. Pause. My, how my beliefs have completely drained life of its joy. Now here's the point. If there, if you want to be free, there can't be a God. But if there's no God, you're not free. Your freedom's been eaten up. You are utterly determined. You're utterly programmed. Who cares if it's by genetics? Who cares if it's by the environment? You're programmed. You've got no freedom. Your freedom's an illusion. Now, as I just said, most people simply will not do what Diderot and Huxley and what those guys, they won't do it. They won't do it. What most people do, and I know this from talking to people and just from what the research tells you, the average person in this country says, I believe there's a God. But, but, here's what they do. They say, you say, but who knows? Who knows what he thinks? Who knows what is right and wrong? We have to decide that for ourselves. Now, this is very canny. Because on the one hand, you can say, oh, I believe there's something there. There's something there. And I don't believe that I'm just nothing but a matter in motion. But, here's what's so great, seemingly. Since nobody knows what God thinks, since nobody can possibly know what God says about who you are, what you should do, and so forth, we're just, you know, it's all mysterious. It's all complex. Therefore, we're essentially free. We have to decide for ourselves. A great example of this, even though I haven't seen the movie, I have read every, review tells you what the last line of the new Scarlet Letter movie is. novel to the screen, very freely. And at the very end, you have Hester, who had committed adultery with this 17th century New England minister, you know, Reverend Dimmesdale. And at the very end, I'm told in all the reviews, Hester at Stemmy Moore looks at Dimmesdale. Who is that? I forget. Oldman, yes. Okay. Thank you. See? See, I'm open. Anyway, and she looks at him and she says, did we sin? Did we sin? And Dimmesdale says, who's to say what a sin is in God's eyes? Now, apart from putting such words in the mouth of a 17th century New England minister, can you imagine? Who's to say? But anyway, let's overlook that. But that's what we do. Here's what he's got. He says, well, I believe in a God. But who's to say? Adultery. Who's to say it's a sin? It's very complex, you know. It's very mysterious. Nobody knows what God says about this and that. There's just no way to know. Well, I mean, for goodness sakes, how in the world could we possibly be sure of anything? So everybody has to decide that for him or herself. Voila. It seems like you've got your freedom back. You're able to say, well, nobody knows. But you don't have your freedom back. Here's why. When you say, nobody knows. There's a God, but nobody knows what he says here or there. Freedom? Boy, I'll tell you something. People that have thrown off the shackles of traditional religion, they love to style themselves rebels. They love to say, we're in revolt against the oppression. G.K. Chesterton puts it like this. The new rebel is a skeptic and says he believes in no dogma and that everything is relative. But that makes it impossible for him to denounce anything. For denunciation always implies moral doctrine of some kind. Therefore, the modern rebel is useless for any revolt. By rebelling against everything, he has lost his right to rebel against anything. There's a kind of thought that stops thought. That is the only kind of thought that should be stopped. Now, what is he saying? If you say to Hester, well, who knows what God says about adultery? In other words, it's the dumbing down of religion, the dumbing down of God. So we can be free, nobody knows. But then, okay, say that. But don't you dare denounce racism. Don't you dare denounce violence. Don't dare denounce anything. Why? Because you say, that's wrong. Somebody can say, who's to say? Hey, Chesterton says, here you are trying to look like this rebel, rebelling against traditional religion, rebelling against the idea of God. I'm free now. I can decide what's right and wrong. You are useless for the purposes of revolution or rebellion. You have no right to denounce anything. A Christian can. Why? A Christian is most free. A Christian has submitted, yes, and in a sense lost some freedom by saying some things are right and some things are wrong always. But now, look at the freedom. Who cares what kings and queens say? Who cares what the Poles say? Who cares what your friends say? Who cares about the experts? As St. Paul says, let God be true and every man a liar. I can stand, if I'm the only person in the world who believes what God says is true, I can revolt. See, I can rebel. Why? I've got the right to. If there's no God, your freedom is an illusion. And if you can't know what God says, if you think that you are free to decide for yourself what is right and wrong, your freedom is useless. You're not free. You're no rebel. Now, do you see it doesn't work? This freedom doesn't work. It eats itself up. It's self-defeating intellectually. It's self-defeating practically. Why? I've just shown you why it doesn't work. I mean, I've shown you that it doesn't work, but I haven't really shown you why, and here's why. It just breaks down. This model, this idea that real freedom is just having no restraints, no restrictions, free to do what's inside. Let me give you, let me run down the reasons why not. Number one, this view, by the way, this view, unlike the Christian view of freedom, this view is too simple. I would pause it, and this would be another whole talk some other time, all objections, all alternatives to Christianity are too simple. Christianity is more complex. They're too nuanced. They're too pat. They're too reduced. This view of freedom is naive about the complexity of the human heart. When you say, when a person says, I've got to be free to do what I really want, have you not looked at your heart lately? You've got an awful lot of wants, and they contradict each other. I want to have good health. What's freedom? To do whatever I want? These wants are, you know, they're playing chicken in your heart. They're at each other. There's a head-on collision. You have to decide, do you not, which of those wants is the liberating one? And which one will bring you into the bondage? You have to figure out which one of those is going to give you a long life and therefore is liberating and which one is going to destroy your body. And right away you've already started to alter your model, have you not? You're starting to realize freedom can't just be a lack of restrictions, it's finding the right restrictions. Let me keep on going. Secondly, the reason this doesn't work, it's not just naive about the complexity of the human heart, it's naive about the complexity of motivation. Yeah, motivation. Now what do I mean by that? What drives you? What moves you? There's hundreds of choices you have to make every day and they're usually between good options. Why do you choose the ones that you do? Every person has got what Stephen Covey in his very famous book, Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, he says everybody has got an ultimate value. Everybody has got one thing that they most want and therefore you've got a hierarchy and you like this one and you like this one a little bit more but there's one that's above all or the way Stephen Covey calls it, it's your personal center. It's the one non-negotiable. You've got to have a non-negotiable. It's how you decide if there's two things that are competing, which one is better. Now he makes a whole bunch of, he makes a lot of them. He says you can be spouse-centered, you can be family-centered, you can be money-centered, you can be work-centered, possession-centered, pleasure-centered, friend-centered, enemy-centered. You know, what's the main thing in your life? Religion-centered, cause-centered. But you know what happens? You think you're free but whatever is your center is your master. So, for example, you know, Bob Dylan told you about it. He said you've got to serve somebody. And you didn't listen. You never listened. Even Euripides said, no one is wholly free. You're either a slave to wealth or to the law or to the people you're seeking to please. But really, the classic, Becky Pippert in her book, Out of the Salt Shaker, she puts it like this. Listen carefully. Whatever does it mean to allow Jesus to be Lord of our lives, just this. Whatever controls you as your Lord. The person who seeks power, above all, will be controlled by power. The person who seeks acceptance is controlled by the people he or she wants to please. We do not control ourselves. We are controlled by the Lord of our lives. Now, listen. Do you see what she's saying? Everybody in this room has got something that's a bottom line. Whatever that bottom line is, you've got to have it. If you've got to have it, then when it's threatened, you're frightened. You're driven by it. Now, somebody out there may say, let me just show you why this is absolutely inevitable. I know people who say, not me. No way. I am free. I base my happiness on not a spouse, not a family, not money, not career. I simply base my happiness on me pleasing myself. I remember some years ago, I saw something I don't see much anymore since I came to work here. But when I was in Philadelphia, I remember, I was a teacher, so I sometimes saw daytime TV. And I saw a talk show in which they were talking about older women and young men. And at one point, somebody said to one of these older women who was about 50 years old, and she had this 20-year-old boyfriend, aren't you afraid he's going to leave you for another woman? And here's what she said. She says, my dear, he ought to be afraid I'll leave him. She says, you cannot base your happiness on anybody else. He better not count on me, and I don't count on him. I count on nobody. I'm free. I'm independent. But you see what she's saying? Independence is her center. And therefore, she's controlled by it. What do you mean she's controlled by it? She can't enter into a commitment. She can't become vulnerable. Because if she was vulnerable, she would lose the Lord of her life. That's the one thing. When Rocky says, I just want to go the distance, and then I'll know I'm not a bum. Every one of us has got one thing that we've got to have to know we're not a bum. And if we lose it, we lose everything. You're driven. You're controlled. You've got a motivation, whatever it is. your king is success, if it's any of the things that Stephen Covey mentioned, and he makes 15 men, I'm sure there's others. If it's anything, it won't forgive you. If you fail the success king, it'll say, you're a bum. If you fail the love king, if you fail the independence king, you will say, you're a bum. You know, the complexity of motivation, freedom. I'm free. You're not free. Nobody's free. Look at these so-called free philosophers, the atheists, the ones who said, I'm absolutely free. Have you read about Hannah Arendt and her obsession with Martin Heidegger, even though she was Jewish and even though he became a Nazi? And she was so blinded by love. And she was a brilliant woman. You remember, she's the one that wrote the banality of evil about Nazis. And she was blind. Why? Everybody has got a bottom line, and that bottom line is your lord and master. But most of all, this view is naive, not just about the complexity of the heart, not just about the complexity of motivation. It's naive about the fabric of reality. What's the fabric of reality? The fabric of reality is everything has an underlying structure. Look at the jazz people. They look like that. Somebody says, well, they weren't following the music. They were making it up. But they were relying on an underlying structure. Before, they decided, we're all going to go 32 bars. There's a rhythmic structure. We're all going to use the same chords. There's a harmonic structure. In some cases, they even used a melodic structure, a melodic motif that they kept repeating or going back to or something like that. And so, the reason they were free was based on a structure. In the right environment, in the right restrictions, freedom is finding the right restrictions. The classic illustration is a fish. A fish has two things that make it perfect in water. Gills can absorb oxygen from the water, not the air. And fins move you through water, but not on land. And if you put a fish on land, it dies. Well, that's a restriction, isn't it? Yeah. If you restrict the fish to water, it soars. It runs like lightning. It's alive. It realizes its potential. If it's in the wrong environment, you see, if it's in the wrong environment, if it's not willing to honor its inner structure, it never becomes really who it is. Now, here's the great irony. What is a human being made for? Let me give you a clue and the answer, and then we're done. The clue is, look at how human love works. One thing that really frightened me, I read this some years ago. The woman named Francoise Sagan, who is a French novelist, she's not real well known here. But on her 50th birthday, she was interviewed by Le Monde magazine. And she was asked this question. She said, have you been satisfied in your life? And she said, yes, I have been satisfied with my life. I have no regrets. And then the interviewer said, well, you've had the freedom you wanted them. Sagan, yes, well, I was obviously less free when I was in love. But one's not in love all the time. Apart from that, I've been free. Uh-oh. Now, the day you get up, the morning after you get married, you will realize something. You're not free. I don't just mean that you no longer can decide what city to live in by yourself and what job, you know, to take by yourself. And not only can't you make those decisions unilaterally, you can't even decide what to do with your day by yourself. You can't just decide, well, I'm going to go here, I'm going to go there. You got to clear it with headquarters. And headquarters is anybody you're deeply in love with, anybody that you're committed to. Now, here's what's so weird. Francois Sagan realized that. She says, I realized that the only way to have a deeply committed love relationship is to lose my freedom. And see, she was defining freedom, freedom from restrictions. And of course, there's all these restrictions in the world. But here's what's so weird. What is the environment in which the fish experiences freedom? Only when it's got the right restrictions, it's restricted to water. It's in water that this fish becomes itself. What is water to a human being? It's love. When you feel like a fish, when you feel alive, going like lightning, soaring, when you feel like a fish that's just been plucked off the beach, where it's gas water, is when you have a friend, a lover, a spouse, parents, child, somebody who loves you. And she realized, oh my gosh, in love you lose your freedom to find it. If you're selfish and you're not married, that's hard. If you're selfish and you're married, it's a disaster. Why? John Stott put it this way, true freedom is to be one's true self, but my true self is made for loving, and loving is self-giving. So in order to be myself, I have to deny myself and give myself. In order then to be free, I have to give up my freedom. In order then to live, I have to die to my self-centeredness. In order to find myself, I've got to lose it. Now, dear friends, somebody's going to say, didn't Jesus say something like that? This is the clue. You don't even have to go to Jesus, but I'm about to. You don't have to go to the Bible, but there it is. C.S. Lewis put it this way, love anything and your heart will be wrung and possibly broken. If you want to make sure of keeping it intact, you must give your heart to no one, not even to an animal. Wrap it carefully around with hobbies and little luxuries. Avoid all entanglements. Lock it up safe in a casket or coffin of your selfishness. But in that casket, safe, dark, motionless, airless, it will change. Your heart will not be broken. It will become unbreakable, impenetrable, irredeemable. The only alternative to tragedy, or at least the risk of tragedy, is damnation. See, the only way to be free is to be junk and have no love. The only place outside of heaven where you can be free from the risks of love is hell. It's Jesus who gives you the real freedom. What does Jesus say? Real freedom is finding the right restrictions. Real freedom is not being without a master. You've got a master. Real freedom is not doing what you most want to do. Real freedom is knowing which of the things you most want to do is really you. It's siding with what you were designed for. It's going to the one who built you. Real freedom is finding the right restrictions, and that's why Jesus says, if you hold fast to my teaching and follow me, you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free. Whosoever would find his life will lose it. Whosoever loses his life for my sake will find it. Come to me, he says, all weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in heart, and you will find rest for your souls, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. You see, the real restriction, the real master, the real you. Have you ever noticed something very weird? Very weird. Very weird. Our legends are filled with talks about kings. Great kings. And when they ruled, it was a golden age, and when they go away, everything falls into decay. The Robin Hood myth. The modern, the Lord of the Rings, the Tolkien myths, you know, the modern myth. But, you know, remember Arthur? King Arthur, they say on his tombstone is, Hic Iacet Arthurus Rex Quondum Rex Futurus. Impressed? What does that mean? Here lies Arthur, the once and future king. And here's what's so weird. You know, C.G. Jung and his followers understood something weird about myths, deep myths, myths that keep coming up. A king. A perfect king. That when he's ruling with justice and wisdom and compassion and grace and power, everything's in harmony. Everything's right. Everything's perfect. Deep legends. They found out that myths were not just things that some minstrel a long time ago spun out, but they realized that we dream in these things. These come from deep places in the human heart, and where did they come from? Because the actual history of human kings is abysmal. We've gotten rid of them all. And yet, we love those myths. And not only that, in countries that still have some kind of king, they idolize them. They're obsessed with them. And in countries like America, where there are no kings, we create them. There's Elvis. And here's why. We know that the need to adore, the need to bow down, the need to give something authority, which so puzzles us, is a memory trace. There was a king. There was a king. And his beauty? love, and his compassion, and his power, and his wisdom were like the sun shining in full strength. And if we can't have him, we're going to get something else. It's not a question of being free. It's what will you be a slave to? Every other king that you choose will never forgive you. The success king won't forgive you for lack of success. The love king won't forgive you. The beauty king won't forgive you. This is the only king that can forgive. You know why? He's the only real king. And if you don't get him, you're going to find one because our spiritual natures, like our physical natures, will be served. Deny it, food, and it will gobble poison. Democracy, Christians are for democracy. Human beings make lousy kings, lousy kings. But democracy is medicine for someone who's sick. We were not built for just presidents. We were built for a king. He's the one that you seek. The once and future king. His service is perfect freedom. Let me close this in prayer. Our Father, I ask that what I said, if it's right, and if it's true, that it'll sink in and make a difference in how we look at ourselves, how we look at life, and especially how we approach you. I ask that in Jesus' name. Amen. Here's what I want you to do. Those of you who are guests, this is a time for you to reflect. Those of you who come here regularly for worship services, and we have worship services usually on Sunday night, we're taking up an offering because this is your way of supporting the basic program. And when that's done, I'll tell you how the open forum will work.
