TITLE: When the World Hates You
SCRIPTURE: John 15:16-16:1
TOPICS: Sharing Your Faith Christian Living and Obedience
SERIES: Gospel of John, Part 2
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/when-the-world-hates-you/

============================================================

Travels through the gospel to the 15th chapter. I'm going to read from verses 16 through 27. You did not choose me, but I chose you and appointed you to go and bear fruit, fruit that will last. Then the Father will give you whatever you ask in my name. This is my command, love each other. If the world hates you, keep in mind that it hated me first. If you belonged to the world, it would love you as its own. As it is, you do not belong to the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, and that is why the world hates you. Remember the words I spoke to you. No servant is greater than his master. If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they obeyed my teaching, they would obey yours also. They will treat you this way because of my name, for they do not know the one who sent me. If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not be guilty of sin. Now, however, they have no excuse for their sin. He who hates me hates my Father as well. If I had not done among them what no one else did, they would not be guilty of sin. But now they have seen these miracles, and yet they've hated both me and my Father. But this is to fulfill what's written in their law. They hated me without reason. When the counselor comes, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth who goes out with the Father, he will testify about me, and you also must testify, for you have been with me from the beginning. All this I have told you, so that you will not go astray. This is God's word. You know, in one of my favorite books, as many of you know, in J.R.R. Tolkien's trilogy, Lord of the Rings, something very odd happens at the end. The heroes are very carefully marked out as very, very pedestrian, ordinary, normal kinds of persons. But the essence of the story of the book is that these two heroes go off with, and they ally themselves with a high, noble, angelic-like race of beings. And they, with the help of those beings, they fight and get glory and honor in many battles and ordeals and adventures. And in triumph, they return back to their homeland, which they love, and for whose freedom they fought, for whose protection they fought. But they discover that they have been changed. Something has changed. They find that they still love their land, and they fought to win their land, they fought to protect their land, but they realize now that they don't belong. You see, these high, angelic beings that they made alliances with had come from a high, immortal, paradise kind of land far beyond the western seas. And now our heroes return to their homeland, which they love so much, and they find that the life force of that high, immortal land beyond the western seas has entered into them. And when they come back, here's the paradox of it. When they come back, they realize that the new greatness of heart they have that enables them now to be leaders amongst their countrymen has also changed them so they don't feel that they belong there. They realize now that their hearts are over the sea. They realize that they're restless now in their homeland. The paradox is that there's a new greatness that's come into their lives from that land. They laugh louder than other people. They laugh louder than their peers. They cry more deeply. They see further into the future, and they remember the wisdom of the past better because in a sense they've been taken out of their land, and they have a perspective that is greater than the time and place of the people who have lived all their lives in that country. And so they're recognized by their peers as having a certain greatness of spirit, and they're made into their leaders. And yet at the same time, their peers and their friends can no longer understand them because now they're very strange. They're always walking off to the ocean, standing on the ocean, and the sound of the wave sinks deep into their hearts. And they sit there for hours, and everybody says, what's wrong with them? Why do they get comfort? Why do they get strength from doing something like that? In other words, they love their homeland, but now their relationship to their homeland has become complex. The citizenship of their hearts, the rootedness of their soul no longer is there. It's over the sea. And so they live great lives in their homeland, and they become great leaders in a sense. Their relationship with the other people that they love who have not had the same experience has been, has been, has been. and they can help them better than before, but they aren't understood. Because they're always going off to the shore and they're singing the song that goes like this, we remember we who dwell in this far land beneath the trees, the starlight on the western seas, and at the end of their lives they go over the sea and leave their land forever. Jesus Christ, in this passage, is telling us that the same thing happens to Christians. What he's saying here is something very radical. He's saying, my dear friends, you do not understand the radical nature of the change that has happened to you through your encounter with me. Something has happened to you. The very life of heaven has entered into you and your relationship to the world and anyone else that has not had an experience, an encounter with me, has made you very, very different. You see, the life of heaven has entered into you. I am the vine, you are the branches. My life has interpenetrated you. And now I'm taking you on all sorts of adventures, all sorts of battles and ordeals, but in the process, your very perspective on things is going to change. There's going to be a greatness that's going to enter into you, but your approach to life and to death, to security and to duty, to identity, to your name, to everything is going to be so changed that you're going to find the people around you who you love and want to serve are going to find it more and more difficult to figure you out. And your relationship with the world, your old country, your old homeland, which is no longer your homeland, because you'll sense that the citizenship of your heart has shifted over the sea. Your relationship to your old homeland will be very complex, because in some ways you'll have things that you can give them. In some ways you can serve and love them, and you will serve and love them, but they will never understand you. And in some cases, that lack of understanding will become hostility. In some cases, they will kill you. Jesus says, do not make this mistake. Don't miss the radical nature of what's happening to you. Do not realize the cleavage, the antagonism that inevitably happens between the citizens of your old homeland and yourselves, because you're here and yet you're not here, because you love it here, on the other hand, you know you don't belong here. The sound of the waves of the Western Sea have sunk deep into your heart. Now, why is it that we have to look at this? Jesus is saying there is a profound difference between Christians who are citizens now of heaven, who have the life force of heaven in their lives, and the people around them who have not had that experience of Christ, who have not received Christ as their Savior. He says, the difference is so fundamental that we have to lay it out. Why does everybody in this room need to hear it? Why does everybody in this room need to understand it? Because if you are considering Christianity and trying to figure out what you think about it, you must see the radical nature of its claims. You must see the radical nature of the thing, or you won't understand it. This is not just a lifestyle. This is a change of nature. This is a change of citizenship. This is a change of dimension. You are translated into another world, another country. And your relationship with this world and this country is always very complex. And Christians, he says, I'm telling you this, that you may not go astray. If you don't understand the difference between yourself and the world, you're going to continually be shocked, surprised, confused, and in the end, defeated. That's why we need to look at this. Now, in here, he's trying to talk to us about this radical cleavage between the church and the world. He's talking about the fundamental differences that go down to the bottom of things. And the way we think of things, the way we do things, the way we look at things, the way we feel about ourselves goes all the way down to the bottom. And the distinction between the world and Christians is fundamental. It's eternal. It's powerful. Now, what we're going to see here is that Jesus, first of all, tells us about three, I'm going to call them three RCs. We're not talking about the cola either. Three RCs. First of all, he talks about a radical conflict between Christians and the world. That radical conflict is based on a radical change that's happened in the hearts of Christians. And that radical change makes possible a radical challenge for Christians to enter into the world and testify to Christ there. So there's a radical, listen, there's a radical conflict which is caused by radical change. And that radical change makes possible a radical challenge for us to enter into the world and to testify to what Jesus has done for us. Those are the three things. And those three things will tell you, will in a sense define the difference between Christians and the world. A distinction that you have to understand. if you're not sure where you are. First, let's talk about the radical conflict. He says, in fairly blunt and difficult-to-mistake terms, verse 18, keep in mind the world hates you. Keep in mind the world hates you. It means hostility and persecution is inevitable, 2 Timothy 3.12. Paul says, all who live godly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted. 2 Timothy 3.12 says, if you live a Christian life flat out, if you live a Christian life with any kind of consistency, it's inevitable that you will arouse in the people around you who have not had the same experience, whose hearts are not rooted in the same homeland, you will arouse at least confusion, and in many cases out and out hostility. The world will hate you. Why? Let me just show you, if you look carefully here, Jesus gives us at least three reasons, there may be more, of why the world doesn't understand Christians and why the world in many cases has persecuted Christians and will persecute Christians. First of all, for example, it says, if you look down in verse, say, 19, it has to do with Jesus' teaching. See, in verse 20, it says, if they receive my teaching, then they would have received your teaching. Jesus' teaching was authoritative. You know, in the synagogues, when a man would get up to speak, at the end of, when he would sit down at the end of his speech, the elders would decide whether or not what he had said was true, and they would say what? Amen, amen, which means it is true. But when Jesus would begin his speeches, very often in the Gospels, he would start by saying, amen, amen, which was an absolutely astonishing claim. He was saying, as I take away, you're right to judge whether what I say is right. He says, I am God himself. I am the Son of God, and therefore what I have to say is truth from outside the world, is from above the world. It's from outside of time and space, and therefore it judges the world, and it judges how you feel about things. You must listen to it. You must submit to it. You must not question it. Now, that's one of the, that's the first reason why the world has a lot of trouble with Christianity. Why? Because the world is committed that there is no such thing as truth from outside or above the world. Recently, Pat Buchanan says to the Dartmouth students, I don't believe any individual can know the mind of God, my friend, and the Dartmouth students applauded. Now, there was a little self-contradiction there. If nobody can know the mind of God, then how can you know that the mind of God is unknowable? You know, in other words, there's no way he got out from underneath making faith assertions. Nobody can get out from under religion. Nobody. But the point is, the reason the Dartmouth students applauded was because we are culturally committed to the idea that there's no such thing as a truth that can come from outside the world and judge my experience. The world today says, if I feel that this is right for me, and you come along and say, no, God's word says that's wrong, then you're a bigot. And because Christianity has always said there is a truth that we've got, Christ teaching, which is revelation from outside the world and above the world that can judge the world, we will always find ourselves in the position of being persecuted. That's the reason why, think of it, listen, that's the reason why, for example, in socialist communist countries, the church is always seen as reactionary. Why? Because it has a truth that can judge the state and therefore is a threat to the autonomy of the state. But in monarchies, cruel monarchies and right-wing places, where the elites cry in the face of the poor, the church is persecuted not as being reactionary, but as being what? Subversive. Why? Because, you see, the church has got a truth, a standard of truth from outside the world that judges the ruling classes and brings into question the autonomy of the ruling classes. But then if you come to not a right-wing or a left-wing dictatorship, you come to a place like New York, where individual personal freedom, the autonomy of the individual is the divine principle, not of the state and not of the ruling classes, but of the individual, the church will still be persecuted. Because the church has the audacity to say there's a truth from outside that judges us, and we are not allowed to operate on the basis of our personal needs, or what we think will bring us authentic existence. We're not even supposed to live for the general benefit of mankind and humanity. We're supposed to live to serve God, and so we'll be persecuted here, no matter where you are. The church says there's a teaching from outside the world, and the world can't stand it. And that leads to the second thing. the top it said, I am not, pardon me, at the top verse 18 it says if the world hates you keep in mind that it hated me first. If you belong to the world it would love you as its own, but it can't own you. I've been reading the biography of C. Everett Coop, an evangelical Christian who became Surgeon General for eight years. If any of you know anything about his career you'll know what was interesting is because he was an evangelical Christian he just wanted to do what the Bible said. In the beginning the right wing put him forth in the Reagan administration as their champion because he was anti-abortion. And because he was anti-abortion everybody on the left side did everything they could to block his nomination for a year. And the New York Times had an editorial calling him Doctor Unqualified. It was an affront to put this man up. He was so unqualified even though he was the leading pediatric surgeon in the country. But halfway through the administration, though not changing his anti-abortion stand, he decided that AIDS was something that the administration was just covering up and we needed to do something about it. We needed to educate people. We needed to put money into research. Well he came out with his AIDS report. Suddenly everybody on the right got extremely upset with him and wanted to throttle him. And everybody on the left said now there's somebody with integrity. But it wasn't integrity. Because at the end of his term he was very interested in being maybe getting a cabinet appointment. And somebody came to him, got him alongside and says, you can forget about any more political appointments. You're too independent. You see the point is the world doesn't like us because we will never put the firm first. So you may have a lot of trouble being promoted. You won't put your company first. You won't put your race first. You won't put your political party first. You can't. Because you see there's a Lord, there's a judgment, there's a truth from outside of the world that brings all of these things into judgment. And therefore people will say, I can't trust you. Because the firm doesn't own you. The race doesn't own you. The party doesn't own you. We don't want anything to do with you. One of the men who was a student who had led the Tiananmen Square democracy movement, a young student who escaped and who is now at Princeton University as a visiting teacher and scholar, recently became a Christian, was converted to Christianity. And in his testimony he says, what's amazing is, he says, I finally know why I believe in democracy. But almost, he says, so many of my colleagues say, you've deserted us. How could you become a Christian? Because suddenly they realized, we don't own this guy anymore. If the world felt that it owned you, if it could call you one of its own, then it could do something. Then it could trust you. But you see, it can't trust you. What Jesus Christ comes and says, you don't know how radically I've changed you. You don't realize that your citizenship has moved away from your homeland. I am the vine. I have cut your roots to your race. So it no longer is the main thing that defines you. I do. I've cut your roots to your political party. It's no longer the thing that defines you. I do. I've cut your roots to your social class. These things used to define you and give your identity. They don't. These things used to be the things that you had to listen to, but no longer. I am the vine. I am your life. Your citizenship has been moved over the sea. And that's the reason why the world can't understand us. And why, in many cases, the world won't trust us. And why it's very, very difficult to say I'm a Christian. Because you see, I want to help AIDS patients. Because of what God says. I want to work for justice, racial justice. Because of what God says. And very often you'll find that people who should be your allies will say, I don't trust you. Because I can tell that you're not doing it for the same reasons. That's true. You see? He says, the reason the world will hate you is, first of all, because of my teaching. You hate the idea of authoritative teaching. Secondly, because it can't own you. They hate the idea that you've got a higher authority. But thirdly, one more thing. Verse 26 and 27, it says, you have to go out and testify that I am the way, the truth, and the life. And you see, the third reason why the world will continually get upset with Christians, not understand Christians, and very often hate Christians, is because Christians say, I know what ultimately the medicine is that will cure your deepest ills. You need Jesus. Now, the only way to come tell somebody that they need Jesus is to say, you're weak. You need to humble yourself. You need to see that you need him. Who wants that? See, the Bible says that Christians are salts. you're weak. You need to be answers. So, you need to find him in the same way. The important thing is, is that he was afraid of the truth or one of the things like that. We Jesus is to say, you're weak. You need to humble yourself. You need to see that you need Him. Who wants that? See, the Bible says that Christians are salt. Salt's a preservative. Salt's a healing agent. Christians are salt in the world. But when you put salt on a wound, it stings as it heals. And see, the gospel stings as it heals always. There was a pastor on his way to church one day, and he saw a poor little animal running around in panic because it was this little animal had stuck its head into a cocoa can to try to get a few grains of sweet things at the bottom and now couldn't get its head out. And it was running around. And the pastor says, what an interesting sermon illustration. Isn't that just like the world, you know, trying to get a few goodies and you get your head stuck in a can. Now you're in a panic and you can't see where you're going. And so he was trying to turn this into a sermon illustration. It wasn't me, by the way. And so he decided, well, but oh, look at this poor little thing. I've got to do something. And he reached over and he saw that the little animal was a skunk. And he suddenly realized he had a very difficult decision to make. It's probable that that skunk would not think it's being liberated as it is being liberated. So what do you do? What is Jesus saying here? He says, I will send you out to testify to people who will hate you. In other words, what do you do in that situation? Don't be a fool. Get down, win, but don't be a coward. Reach down and pull. What Jesus is saying is, he's saying this. He says, look, listen, when I was in my hour of greatest need, you deserted me. See, when I stooped down in love, I got nailed. And when I stooped down in love, I got nailed and there was nobody with me. But if you decide to love people by telling them about me, you'll get nailed too. But the difference is when I got nailed, you weren't there. But when you get nailed, I'll be there. My spirit of glory will rest on you. I will stand by you. My spirit will go with you. Testify of me. And that's one of the things that a lot of people will really hate. That's the conflict. There's a hatred there. There's a hostility there. There's an antagonism. Sometimes it's overt. Sometimes it's covert. Okay, second, that's the radical conflict. But what does it come from? It comes because of a radical change. Now, hear this. Why is it that Christians are so inexplicable to the world? And why is it that Christians act so weird? I'm going to give you two reasons fairly quickly, but very important. First of all, look up at verse 16. He says, and this is very important. He says, you did not choose me, but I chose you. Love one another as I've loved you. And then, in verse 19, it says, you do not belong to the world because I have chosen you out of the world. Now, hear this. First, the first reason that the world cannot understand Christians, Christians, the first reason that you, some of you may not understand Christians at all, or some of you Christians may find it very difficult to understand why people, in many cases, are alienated from you, for your Christianity. The first reason is love. Jesus says, the love between us, between you and me, is going to create all kinds of alienation with the world, with anybody who has not experienced my love. Here's the closest illustration we've got. Imagine, maybe this has happened to you, that your best friend is someone of the same gender, and that best friend falls in love with somebody who you can't see at all. Just think about that. You can't see what your best friend sees in this person. You can't figure it out. You have no respect for that person. And what does that create on your part? Well, your respect for your friend plummets. You feel left out. You feel betrayed. You feel confused. In many cases, you may feel very, very rejected. You may even get bitter. And that's what Jesus says. That's exactly what he says happens here. Jesus says, listen, our love for each other is so strong. A love like ours, with the universal claims that our love makes, will always seem repulsive from the outside. Absolutely. For example, one of the things that people from the outside of Christianity can understand is the exclusive claims of Christ. He says, I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father but by me. Now, see, from the inside, it makes perfect sense, even though we can't figure out all the details. From the inside, when you've experienced the uniqueness of his love, you say, of course, there couldn't be anybody else. There couldn't be any other channel. There couldn't be any other experience of love like this. And because I trust him so much, I leave it up to him, the details of what he does with people that never heard about Christ. I know whatever he does with them because I know him personally. I know that he will treat them with a perfect balance of justice and mercy. But from the outside, it looks incredibly repulsive to claim that Jesus is the one. literature and history is full of people who, for the sake of love, gave up things that nobody else could understand. Remember the Duke of Windsor, who gave up the crown of England, the throne, so he could marry an American commoner. And people came and said, you're crazy, what are you doing? And what did he say? He said this, you don't know her like I know her. You see, I've got her. What do I need this for? What do I need that for? What do I need that for? I can't expect you to understand, because you're not on the inside. If you knew her as I knew her, if you loved her as I loved her, you'd have no inability to understand why I'm giving these things up. So you see, that's why the world can't understand Christians. Christ comes to Christians. And he says, you've got me. Therefore, money, comfort, acclaim, and status, none of that stuff is important. You've got me. And when you have him, you know he's right. And so you see, as soon as somebody who has not experienced this same love finds out that you're giving 10% of your money away to the poor and to the church, they'll say, you're crazy. As soon as somebody who's not experienced Christ sees that you're forgiving people and you're doing good to people who have mistreated you, they'll say, you're crazy. You're going to be walked all over. In this world, you've got to be tough. In this world, you've got to make people wait for you. In this world, if you're too friendly and nice, they'll think you don't have power and they will take advantage of you. And you look at them and they say, just like the Duke of Windsor said, hey, you don't know him like I know him. From the inside, from the perspective of love, it makes perfect sense. From the outside, it will be absolutely inexplicable and probably repulsive. Do you see, that's one of the reasons that there's this huge difference between people who've known Christ and who haven't known him. It's a little bit like, it's a little bit like the cliffs in the Grand Canyon. There's places where the cliffs look like, the two cliffs look like they're very close together. Just a few feet away, too far to jump, too far to reach, just a few feet away. But if you look down, you'll see that the cliffs go down thousands and thousands of feet. And nowhere do they join. And at the very bottom, they're divided by a rushing river. And the river, dear friends, divides Christians from anyone else, is the love of Christ. Unless you plunge through that river, you cannot possibly understand on the outside what it's like on the inside. I mean, the logic of it makes no sense. But not only that, look, one more. Jesus says, the reason that you are so different, the reason you don't belong to the world anymore, the reason that your citizenship of your heart's been sent over the sea, is that I chose you. Christians know that they've been chosen. Christians know that they can't make themselves Christians. You did not choose me, he says, up in verse 16. I chose you. The Bible says no one seeks for God. Every other religion says, you want to be a Buddhist? Here's how to do it. Make yourself a Buddhist. You want to be a Muslim? Here's how to do it. Make yourself a Muslim. Christianity says, you want to be a Christian? You can't do it. Can't do it. Why? Romans 3 says, no one seeks for God. Our natural hearts are enmity toward God. And therefore, if you are seeking God, it's because God has come to you, and God has opened your heart, and God has softened your heart, and God has empowered your heart. If you want to understand the gospel, go look at the prodigal son, where you see the father. Remember? With the prodigal son. And the father doesn't sit on the porch. Oh, no. He doesn't wait for the son. Waiting. When will he come and repent? The father runs to the son. The father pounces on the son. The father, with his aggressive love, kisses him and hugs him and weeps for him and enables him to repent and empowers him to humble himself. And therefore, a Christian is somebody who always says, if I'm a Christian, it's because pride is completely excluded. I'm a Christian today because he found me, because he opened my heart, because he softened my heart. It's completely a gift. When that happens, you become an absolutely unexplainable phenomenon to the world. You want to know one of the reasons why the world cannot understand the church? Because, you see, the world doesn't understand the gospel of grace. It doesn't understand that we're saved by sheer grace alone. The world thinks, if you believe you're right with God, you must think you're perfect. Don't you see how the world has to believe that Christians are arrogant? It has to. Because if the world understood that it's not the sufficient that are saved, but the ones who finally admit that they're insufficient, if it understood that, it would be a Christian. The difference between Christians and everybody else is Christians say, it's not what I've achieved, it's the fact that I've been achieved. That Christ has come and he's died for me. He's lived for me. He's done everything for me. My faith has provided. I did not choose him. He chose me. He came for me. He came for me. not understand that puts you outside. And therefore, Christians will always seem arrogant because Christians are saying, I know God loves me. I know I'm saved. I know I'm in the family. And therefore, a person from the outside who doesn't understand grace must say, you must be the most arrogant person possible. How could you know such a thing? The world has to think we're arrogant. It can't help it. Because, you see, if you're like that, if you believe that Christians who are sure of their eternal life must be tremendously arrogant, then it proves that you have no idea what a Christian is. You don't understand the first steps of the gospel. Christians are not people who have achieved, but they've been achieved. They haven't won. They've been won. Okay? Don't you see it? You know, in Luke 10, 20, look, here, we were preaching a couple weeks ago at the Bold Ministries at St. Bartholomew's. We looked at Luke 10, 20. There's a place where Jesus has sent His disciples out. And His disciples come back, and He'd given them power to heal people and to preach and to cast out demons. And they come back and they say, gee, Lord, even the demons are subject to us. And He grabs them practically. And He says, rejoice not that the demons are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven. Now, what is He saying? He's saying, oh, yeah. He's saying this to you. You say, wow, what a great week. I made a killing in the market, which isn't that hard. The woman of my dreams, I think, is interested in me. I got into the grad school, and now I'm set. And Jesus says, you know, it's like coming to Jesus and saying, even the demons are subject to us. And Jesus says, what a worldly thing. That's this week. What about next week? As long as your names are written here, as long as your citizenship is here, as long as you're resting in things like that, as long as you're rejoicing. See, the difference between the Christian and the world is not so much what you believe in, but what you rejoice in. If you're rejoicing in these things, then these things run your life. And you lack the freedom and perspective. I say to you, don't rejoice in those things at all, but rejoice that your name is written in heaven. Rejoice of this fact. As long as you're in the world, the only thing you can count on is death. And therefore, you'll be up and down, mood swings everywhere, because you're rejoicing in these things, in your status, in your accomplishments, in your performance. You're a Christian? You're saved by grace. You're saved not because of your faithfulness, my faithfulness, and therefore your names are written in heaven, in your true country, over the sea. There's your inheritance. There's your safety. I have engraved you on the palm of my hands. Your names are written in heaven. That's your security. That's your certainty. Nothing else. And you see, that's the reason why the world can't figure out why a Christian, in the best of times, why Christians can do the things that they did. There were two Moravian missionaries back in the early 1800s that had a great burden for this huge slave colony in the West Indies. How can we bring the gospel of Christ to the slave colony? And they realized the only way to do it was to sell themselves into slavery permanently, and they did it. Why would they do that? Because they knew who they were, because they stood on the shores, and they said, we remember we who dwell in this far land beneath the trees, the starlight on the western seas. We know that the real riches and the real freedom is already guaranteed to us. We have the real riches, the only riches that can't be taken away from us. We know who we are. Rejoice not in these things. Rejoice that your names are written in heaven. That's the reason they could look death in the eye and say, you don't matter anymore. That's the difference in the Christian and the world. And until that's happening in your life, Christians, you don't realize the power that is yours because you're no longer part of the world. And friends, if you're on the outside looking in and wondering why do Christians do what they do, this is why. They don't belong to the world anymore because they've been chosen, and they know they've been chosen. Lastly, final, final, the great challenge. Jesus Christ says, go out and testify because the Spirit has come into your life. Go out and tell people. You see, this is the great adventure. You come back to your homeland, Christians, and you don't, and you know there's a bigger world than your homeland. You know, the difference between Christians and the world is not that Christians think the world's bad, but Christians see the world as a small place in a bigger reality. Christians realize this isn't all there is, so they don't get upset about money, they don't worry as much. They don't get upset about losing their life to do something to please God because they realize this, what can happen if I die? All I can do is get better. See, Christians, they don't think the world's bad. The world no longer controls them, and that's the reason why you're inexplicable. And therefore, Christians don't lose hope with any. knows 1 Corinthians 1 that says God chose the foolish things of the world to shame the wise. God chose the weak things of the world to shame the strong. God chose the lowly and despised things of the world, even the things that are not, to bring to nothing the things that are. And a Christian knows that you're a miracle and that you were hopeless. Every Christian, whether you're a person with a terrible past in the world's eyes or a person who's always lived a respectful life, when you become a Christian, you know you were chosen, you know you were hopeless. And that means you never, ever, ever are cynical about anybody else. Christians explore, they probe, they plunge into the lives of people. You're salt in the world. That means you penetrate the world. And that means Christians always have hope for everybody and never are hopeless about anybody and see everybody as, everybody is an adventure. And you can't wait to get into that person's life and be involved in that person's life because you know, you know what transformations can happen to them. And Christians, therefore, are called to go out into the world and testify in that way. Be involved in people's lives. Draw them into the light. Lose hope for nobody, knowing what an adventure lies in front of anyone who will listen to the gospel of your Lord. Does that sound exciting to you? That's why Christians see life as an adventure, an adventure that they can't really lose. If there's anybody here who thinks that's great, just consider this. Unless you have the Spirit, you can't give the Spirit. That's what it says in verses 26 and 27. Is any of this inexplicable to you? To paraphrase the words of the Duke of Windsor, it must be then because you don't know him like we know him. We remember, we who dwell in this far land beneath the trees, the starlight on the western seas. Let's pray. Our Father, we ask now that the people who are in this room, who don't understand the radical nature of the claims and of the love and of the grace of Christ, that they might know it and they might cross that line and they might find their names, their citizenship now written in heaven, and that that would be their true land. Help them to see that when their true homeland is not here, they can finally, finally stop being pushed around by this homeland. They can finally begin to serve and conquer here. And Father, I pray for the Christians who are in this room who are living defeated lives because they're forgetting this tremendous distinction and this tremendous difference between themselves and everyone else. I pray that you would help us to see what it means to rejoice in our true country. Now, Father, we pray that you grant all these things, for we ask it in Jesus' name. Amen.
