TITLE: Witness
SCRIPTURE: Isaiah 55:1-7; 57:14-21
TOPICS: Sharing Your Faith
SERIES: The Vision of Redeemer
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/witness-2005/

============================================================

Today's reading is taken from Isaiah, chapter 55, verse 1 through 7, and 57, verses 14 through 21. Come, all you who are thirsty, come to the waters, and you who have no money, come, buy and eat. Come, buy wine and milk without money and without cost. Why spend money on what is not bread, and your labor on what does not satisfy? Listen, listen to me and eat what is good, and your soul will delight in the richest of fair. Give ear and come to me. Hear me that your soul may live. I will make an everlasting covenant with you, my faithful love promised to David. See, I have made him witness to the peoples and a leader and commander of the peoples. Surely you will summon nations you know not, and nations that you do not know will hasten to you, because of the Lord your God and the Holy One of Israel, for he has endowed you with splendor. Seek the Lord while he may be found. Call on him while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his way and the evil men his thoughts. Let him turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will freely pardon. And it will be said, Build up, build up, prepare the road, remove the obstacles out of the way of my people. For this is what the high and lofty one says, he who lives forever, whose name is holy. I live in a high and holy place, but also with him who is contrite and lowly in spirit, to revive the spirit of the lowly, and to revive the heart of the contrite. I will not accuse forever, nor will I always be angry. For then the spirit of man who grow faint before me, the breath of man that I have created. I was enraged by his sinful greed. I punished him and hid my face in anger, yet he kept on his willful ways. I have seen his ways, but I will heal them. I will guide him and restore comfort to him, creating praise on the lips of the mourners in Israel. Peace, peace to those far and near, says the Lord, and I will heal them. But the wicked are like the tossing sea which cannot rest, whose waves cast up mire and mud. There is no peace, says my God, for the wicked. This is God's word. Every week this fall, we're looking at another aspect of Redeemer's vision. And we said Redeemer's vision is to bring personal conversion, community formation, social justice, cultural renewal to New York City. And so let's look at that word, that phrase, personal conversion. And boy, a lot of people get the willies when they hear that. Okay, let me just come right out and say it. You know, not rhetoric. We convert people. Now, a lot of folks say, you shouldn't be in New York if you're trying to convert people. Because that's intolerant. It's intolerant. That's proselytizing. Believe what you want to believe, but don't try to convert other people to it. Don't insist that your way of believing is better than somebody else's. So yesterday in the New York Times, it was a fairly innocuous article about campus ministers. And it was yesterday, the name of it was called Peer Ministers, Lead Search for God in College Dormitories. And in it, there was this quote. Being a minister here isn't about tallying up baptisms or proselytizing the incoming freshmen, said Pedraic Bartlett at the University of Chicago. We don't believe, pardon me, we don't bellow, Cotton Mather style, about the perils of damnation. More commonly, Mr. Bartlett said, ministers lend an open ear to those who are discovering themselves spiritually. They're discovering themselves spiritually. Now, a lot of folks in New York say, see, that's okay. That's all right. See how simple it is? Don't try to convert people. Don't proselytize. Just help people discover themselves spiritually. No, it's not that simple. Can I just show you how complicated it is? If you've ever read Robert Bella's book, very important, influential book by a sociologist, a look at American culture. It was written 20 years ago now. But if you've read that book, you'll know this. If you think that that's the best way to do it, just let people discover themselves spiritually. If that's what you believe, you've been converted. You've been converted to the worldview called expressive individualism. And not only have you been converted to it, you're trying to convert everybody else to it, or you wouldn't have said, that's fine. That's how you should do it too. In other words, to be converted by a non-innate, comprehensive view of reality, and to seek to convert others to it, is unavoidable. And it's also at the heart of the heart of the heart of the heart. do as well, to bring a particular message that is a comprehensive view of reality that converts people. So there's really nothing particularly wrong about it if you really understand something about your own. If people in New York understood themselves a little better, they wouldn't think it was so awful. For Christians to go about converting people. And that's what I'd like to show you a little bit today. It's not as simple as people make it. You want to convert people, but I'm open-minded. It's not as simple as that. Let's see what this text tells us about mission. According to the Bible, God calls his people into mission. He gives them a message for that mission, and he gives them a motivation and power for it. He gives them a mission. He gives them a message for that mission. And then he gives them the motivation and power for it. First of all, the mission. And by that, I'm looking at the center of this first page of text, where verse 3 says, Give ear and come to me. Hear me that your soul may live. I will make an everlasting covenant with you. Now, we'll get back to that, but that's remarkable. God is saying, I will, in your insides, I will revive your insides, your soul may live, and I will call you into an eternal covenant, a special relationship with me. And then he says, I promised this to David, and I made him a witness to this. And now, I want you to summons nations also to this. That's what 3, 4, and 5 is saying. He says, there is this new relationship, this new covenant relationship with God that I promised to David, and I made David a witness to the nations, but I want you to be a witness to the nations too. I want you to summons them to this, this thing that I promised to David. Word witness is, that's our English word, translating a Hebrew word that means essentially the same thing. It's a legal word. The word witness can mean either to give evidence and testimony in court, or it can be to act as a kind of notary, to say I witnessed vows being made and authorize it in that way. And either way, the idea of a witness is, I'm calling people to live in a certain way or act in a certain way because of a truth that I have experienced myself, a truth that I have seen myself. And God is saying to his people, I want all of you to bear witness to the life-changing, world-changing relationship with me that changes you. I want you to bear witness to others about it and call them and summons them to it as well. Now, this, by the way, is not just a hiccup in the book of Isaiah. It runs all the way through the Bible, all the way through the Bible. So, for example, well, in fact, I'll say something that's striking. If you've actually encountered the biblical God, if you've ever been brought into an intimate encounter with the biblical God, you will be propelled out into the world in mission. So, when Abraham meets God, personally, God says, I will bless you. And then he says, get out. Get out of your country. Get out of your familiar comfort zone. Get out. The burning bush, God calls Moses in. He says, I want to have an encounter with you. And then almost immediately, he says, go to Pharaoh. So, Isaiah, Isaiah 6, we're going to look at that passage later this fall. He puts a coal from the altar. He forgives his sins. He gives Isaiah a new experience of intimacy with God. And then he says, go. God never calls you radically in without sending you radically out. Jesus says to his disciples, as the Father sent me, so I send you. And the Latin word for sent is missio, mission. Jesus says, as God made me a man in mission, I make you men and women in mission. Anybody who's actually encountered the real biblical God has really, not just believes in a cognitive, vague way, but has been brought into an intimate encounter with the real God is always propelled out. Out what? Out. With a new fullness in your heart to live sacrificially to other people. Out. With this message. Out. Doing justice in the world. I don't want to give you the impression, and we're going to be talking over this, the next couple of weeks about this, that the only part of Christian mission is the message calling people to believe. We also see that part of the mission is justice in God's name, and we'll get to that as well. Nevertheless, here, you have to understand that if you do not sense that you're propelled out, almost under a sort of inner compulsion, to bear witness to the life-changing, world-changing relationship with God that you've gotten, and you haven't got one. You never called in without being sent out. There's both a centripetal and a centrifugal dynamic to a relationship with God. And boy, isn't that different than what the culture tells us life is about. One of my favorites. One of my favorites. Heidegger, who believed what most of the elites in our Western culture tell us, and that is that biological life is an accident, your life is an accident, so we're just here by accident. Heidegger says that that means that modern life is characterized by geworfenheit. Isn't that a great word? You know, you don't know German, but isn't it great? Geworfenheit. And, of course, what it means is throneness, to be thrown. We sense that we've just been thrown out there into the world. So we're being propelled, you know, but kind of at random. We're thrown, but that's not what the Bible says really is the characteristic of human life, not if you know Jesus. Senteness, not throneness. Senteness. You're propelled all right, see, but it's strategic. It's purposeful. You sense a usefulness you've never, ever had before, ever. So all human beings who have encountered the living God are men and women in mission. And now, but we do have a little footnote, and I have to go back to what we've talked about in the intro just a little bit, just a little bit more. So a lot of folks will say, this is my problem with Christianity. I have a problem with Christianity. You say, you believe in Christ. Fine, but why do you have to make other people believe in Christ? Believe what you believe, but don't say that your belief is more right than somebody else's belief. Don't try to convert people. See, that's my problem with Christianity, people say. But I'd like to show you, with all due respect, that there's a problem with your problem. There's a very, very big problem with your problem. A person who puts it perfectly well, even though it was a kind of throwaway line, N.T. Wright, in his book on the resurrection, he's a world-class historian and scholar. He says this, and again, it's a great line, even though he almost says it in passing. He says, Jesus' resurrection is often seen as an immoral doctrine because it appears to legitimate Christianity over against all other religions. The doctrine of the resurrection appears, therefore, to be a triumphalistic doctrine. How very undemocratic of God, people think, without realizing that that idea itself is a local, almost tribal, Western Enlightenment view. Now, see, he's absolutely right, and you see what he's saying. The idea, well, Christianity's view of things, is a faith. It's a view of spiritual reality. It's a view of things. It's a view of reality based on faith. But the modern view that says all religions are subjectively valuable, but no one is objectively more true than any other, that was the idea of Immanuel Kant and of the many of the thinkers in the Enlightenment of the 18th century. And that is also not something you could prove. That's a view of spiritual reality. It's a view of things based on faith. Now, what do you see what N.T. Wright is trying to say? If it's narrow to say one religion is the right one, then it's just as narrow to say one view of religions, namely that they're all equal, is the right one. Just as narrow. To say you mustn't convert people because all religions are subjectively valuable, but objectively one is not truer than another, is a view that you are saying is the right one. And it's righter than the Christian one or righter than the Muslim one or righter than the Jewish one or righter than the other ones. And so when you say you mustn't try to convert people to a non-innate, comprehensive view of reality, you are trying to do the very thing you forbid. So, listen. Can people be intolerant when they're trying to convert others? Sure they can. You can be intolerant with your attitude. You can be arrogant and haughty. You can be coercive and manipulative in your tactics. But when you say anyone who tries to convert someone to their worldview is intolerant, you're being a hypocrite. You're being a hypocrite because you won't admit what you're doing. So, conversion to a comprehensive view of reality that changes your whole life and then seeking to convert other people is unavoidable. Okay. Secondly, not only are we given a mission by God, secondly, we're given a message. Our mission is to take a message out. If you look at verses 1 to 7, you'll see it says in verse 3, give ear and come to me. Hear me. Listen. Listen to me. Now, that is not simply a request to take in information. This means believe me. There's a message that if we believe it, it's going to change everything because look, it says, if you go down to the... That's a call to conversion, because the way is your behavior. And then it says, forsake your thoughts. That's even more of a conversion. That's not just change your behavior and your practices. It's change the way you think. But ultimately, your behavior and your thinking comes from a deeper root, and that is your soul. Verse 2 and 3 says, God says, I'm going to give your soul delight and satisfaction. I'm going to give your soul, verse 3, life. Now, what is this talking about? And the soul in Hebrew, the word soul is not so much the spirit as opposed to the body, but it's the heart. It's the essence of your life as opposed to the parts of your life. And what we need to understand here is God is saying, you're not converted unless you're converted from the heart. Conversion is not simply changing your practices, not just simply changing the externals, not simply changing behavior. You have to change from the heart. And what converts you, this biblical message is, what converts you is, I'm going to convert, God says, what your heart seeks and how your heart seeks it. Conversion is not complete unless you're converted in what your heart seeks and how your heart seeks it. Okay, first of all, what your heart seeks. Let's say what we always say in all these sermons about the heart. In English, the word heart means the seat of the emotions versus the thinking, right? But in the Bible, the word heart means the control center of the whole life. It's the seat of the mind, the will, and the emotions. The heart is your most fundamental beliefs, commitments, and hopes. Now, let me be as, it's probably oversimplifying, but let me be as simple as I possibly can. Everybody in this room, there's many things that make you happy, like chocolate. Okay? And everybody in this room has religious beliefs. Some of you don't believe much religiously, and you're not really sure you believe in God. Some of you believe very strongly in particular religion. But apart from whether you're religious or non-religious, apart from religious beliefs, apart from every one of your hearts, at the most fundamental level, in your heart of hearts, there's something you think that if you have that, then you'll be happy. There's something that you say, ultimately, if I have that, I can, you know, I can do without chocolate, but if I have that, then I'll be happy. And if I don't have that, I never can be happy. Every single one of us has a belief about something like that, and has made a commitment to something like that. And you know, that is what, that is what controls everything else. That is the control center. That's why the heart is the control center for mind, will, emotions. Why is it that one person gets real upset about something, and another person doesn't? She's more emotional, he's more emotional? No. Different fundamental heart commitments as to what? They think they have to have to be happy. Why is one person able to change behavior, and another one can't? Or one person's able to do this, and another one can't? One person feels this. It all has to do with the heart. And unless that heart is changed, you're not converted. Because notice verse 1 and 2, what all this metaphor is about. Every heart is after bread and water. Now, what's bread and water? Milk is great, and wine is good, but especially the bread and water. Every heart, every soul is after a certain kind of bread and water. It's after something that will make it happy. And you've, it's feeding on something, it's seeking something, it's laboring for something. And God says, unless it's me, you're going to starve. In some cases, you're eating relatively good food that basically isn't going to nourish you enough, and you're going to starve. In other cases, you're actually gobbling poison. But unless it's me, you're going to starve. You're going to die. And everybody at a fundamental level, until they get converted by the Holy Spirit, is seeking something else out, regardless of what faith you were raised in. So let me give you an example of what I mean by how you have to be converted in the heart to really be converted. Many years ago, when I was in college, I was part of a Christian fellowship, and there was a young man who joined up. And it really kind of shocked us all and made us pretty happy. This young man was very, very, very famous on the campus for being incredibly sexually active. And he had the looks to do it. And he had the presentation. He was just handsome, and his presentation, he was charismatic in so many ways. And then, to our surprise, he comes into the fellowship, and he declares that he's a Christian now, and he forswears his sexual past. He forswears all that, and he's going to live a chaste, pure life now. And he throws himself into the Christian activities, and into Bible studies, and in all the activities we did. And everybody said, wow, this is a real change. It wasn't long before we came to realize that the young man. study, whether he was the leader or not, he had to be the leader. He always sought control. There was power struggle after power struggle after power struggle, and after a while, and I do mean it was sort of a while, it became clear, something became clear, that when he was sexually active, it really wasn't about sex. It was about power. He would go after some girl until she fell for him, literally and figuratively, and as soon as he knew that he literally had conquered her, he lost all interest. It wasn't about sex. It was about power. And then when he came into the Christian church, when he came into the Christian activities, now suddenly he adopts all the Christian beliefs, and he adopts the statements of faith, and he adopts Christian practices, now sexually he's doing the Christian thing, and monetarily he's living in a Christian way. But what his soul was after, the bread and water of his soul, was power. Power in relationships. Deep down inside, every one of our hearts is saying, if I have money, if I have approval, if I have power, if I have comfort, if I have control, if I have acclaim, if I have love, if I have romance, every one of your hearts is down there saying, that's the bread, that's the water. And for him, his justification, his salvation, as it were, was power. And instead of switching to God, he was just actually now serving his God, the God of power, through religious and Christian ways. He hadn't been converted. He sure looked like it. He wasn't sleeping around. He wasn't doing anything wrong. He wasn't, you know, breaking any of the rules, except everywhere he went, there was relational devastation. It hadn't changed. He hadn't been converted. Have you been converted? Or did you just get active in Christian things? Did you just start cleaning up your life? I'm sure his conscience didn't bother him as much. So, first of all, biblical conversion is you have to be converted in what your heart seeks, but then secondly, you have to be converted in how it seeks it. The other thing we see about this call is so interesting is the contrast. Notice in verse 1, 2, and 3, there's not just a contrast between what the heart seeks, but how it seeks it. Come all you who are thirsty. Come to the waters. You who have no money, come, eat, buy, and drink. Come, buy, and eat. Come, buy wine and milk without money, without cost, all right? Why are you spending money on what is not bread and your labor on what does not satisfy? Listen to me, eat what is good, and your soul will delight in the richest affair. Notice it's not just that God is saying, come feed your soul and your heart, rest your soul and your heart in me. He's also saying, he's also contrasting the way. He says, grace, define me, labor. Do you see the difference? Grace and labor. In other words, every religion on the face of the earth and the default mode of every single human heart, whether you're after blessing or nirvana or salvation or whatever you want to call it, whatever you think will make you happy, you're working for it. You're laboring for it. And you're being driven into the ground by it. If you've got it, if you just, if you're nobody, you know, remember what the old song says? You're nobody unless somebody loves you. And if you really, really believe that, you're nobody unless somebody of the other sex loves you, then you're being driven, perhaps, by the need to look in a certain way. And you're saying, why? If you really think that basically it has to do with power or approval or money, you may be coming through what look like external conversions, trying to get it that way, trying to get it that way, trying to get it that way. But you're laboring. You're laboring. You're working like crazy. But think about this. If you seek God, even God, even get involved in Christianity, and you say, I'm going to pray, and I'm going to give, and I'm going to do good things, and I'm going to live according to the Bible, and I'm going to surrender. If you seek God like that, you're not seeking God. You're still ultimately being your own Savior and your own Lord, which we've been talking about almost all fall. And therefore, God says, unless you not only begin to seek me, but you seek me through the way of grace, unless you start to find your deepest fulfillment in me versus things, and unless you seek to find me through my grace rather than through your moral performance and labor, you are not converted. And that's the message. Pretty radical. Pretty amazing. Now, that leaves us with questions, and that's just as well, because before we hit our third point, we always have some questions to answer. One is, well, what will convert the soul then? Is it enough just to say you need God instead of things, and you need to see that it's free? Is that all? Is that all? Is that all? be working. What will do that? What will do that? And then what will propel us? Because an awful lot of us say, you know, I think I know God, but I don't feel particularly propelled out into the world with a message. Well, the answer is, besides the mission and the message, God also gives us a motivation and a power for it. And where is it? Well, it's right here when, if you look at verse 3, it says, give ear and come to me, hear me that your soul may live. I will make an everlasting covenant with you, my faithful love promised to David. When Isaiah talks, see, Isaiah assumes his readers know the Bible, and we don't know the Bible as well, I guess, as his readers did, and therefore sometimes things he says don't immediately evoke what they're supposed to evoke. When he talks about the everlasting covenant that he promised to David, first, it's tapping in on one of the main themes of the Bible, and that is the idea of a covenant. A covenant is a binding, solid, intimate relationship with God, the universe of the universe, a relationship with God. And through the Bible, God makes covenants with Adam, and with Abraham, and with Moses, and with David, and he makes covenants with Israel. And it looks like covenants are possible. It looks like a relationship with God is possible. But that word everlasting really pushes on a kind of source place. Because if you really read the Bible well, you'll see that one of the big questions that comes up when you're reading the Bible is there are times in which God seems to be saying, yes, you can get into a covenant with me, but it's a conditional. There are many places where he says, you must do this, and then you will live. And if you don't... But there's other places where God seems to say that the covenant with him is unconditional. There are other places where God says things like, I will never leave you or forsake you. Never. And as you read through the Bible, it is a big question. In fact, there are some places where within a chapter it looks like, he's saying, I will never leave or forsake you. Ever. I will always be faithful to you. And because you're doing this, I'm dropping you. I'm rejecting you. And it's sometimes in the same chapter. And over the years, most people, actually, whether they know it or not, sometimes deliberately, but mostly, I think it's more unconscious. Most of us resolve that tension. Most of us either fall into what I'd have to call traditional moral people or more liberal, secular, relativistic people. Either you say, you know what, but when it comes down to it, yeah, God is loving, but at the end of the day, the commands trump the promises. Yeah, God promises a lot, but unless you do what he commands, he's dropping you. And so basically, when it comes right down to it, if you want a relationship with God, you better live up. And there are other people on the other side that take a look at the other things that the Bible says about unconditionally and say, well, look, of course God is just. And of course God wants you to live a good life. But at the end of the day, the promises trump the commands. In the end of the day, though he tells you to live in a certain way, in the end, he's going to accept you anyway. And you know what happens? If you try to resolve the conflict in the Bible, is it conditional or is it unconditional? You say, well, it's really basically conditional. Well, it's really basically unconditional. If you try to do that, you will find you're not being converted. You're not being changed. You're not being amazed. You're not being propelled. You're not being melted. It's unconditional. All he accepts is, you know, try your best, but yeah, it's conditional. You better be good. So if you get in, hey, you work pretty hard. But I had an old friend of mine who's now passed into God's presence, Ray Dillard, who used to teach Old Testament at Westminster Seminary, who told me this years ago and it really stayed with me. He says, you know, when you read the Old Testament, the Bible deliberately does not resolve that tension. In fact, do you realize it's that tension that propels the narrative? I said, thank you, Mr. Literary Scholar. What do you mean? And what he said was, well, that's the tension. That's the suspense. When you're reading the Bible, the question keeps coming up. Is God going to finally give up on his people? But then what about his love? Or will God just give in and let his people be, you know, the idiots they are? But then what about his holiness? Will he give up on his people? Will he give in to his people? What will he be? And he says, the Bible in the Old Testament never ever resolves it. I said, you mean it's just a paradox? He says, well, no, not really. It's a contradiction? No, not really. Well, where does it get resolved? On the cross. Because the last thing Buddha said when he died, according to his scriptures, are, strive without ceasing. Keep working, labor, labor, labor, you know, strive without ceasing. But the last thing that Jesus Christ said on the cross is, it is finished. And that word, tetelestai, is the word he uses. That's the Greek word. And it means Christ fulfilled the conditions so that we could have God's love unconditionally. So the real question is, is your relationship with God conditional or unconditional? And the answer is yes. Because we have to buy this without cost. Do you notice that the paradox is even maintained in the imagery here? He says, come buy without cost. Well, wait a minute. If it's without cost, you just take. What do you mean buy without cost? Because it's incredibly expensive, expensive to Jesus. But it's absolutely free to you. And if you know that, if you see him up there on the cross saying, it is finished. Saying, I have traversed every inch of the distance, the infinite distance between you and God, I have traversed it. There's nothing left for you to do but to admit, to admit that you need what I have done. Because see, that is what will convert the heart. Admit that you're that sinful, that you're that lost. And admit that you can be that loved. There's a lot of, our pride doesn't want to admit we're that loved. And our pride doesn't want to admit that the only way we're going to get loved is freely, that we can't earn it ourselves. But if you're willing to admit that, you see what it says? That great verse in Isaiah 57, verse 15, the second part. I am the high and lofty one who dwells in the high and holy place. I dwell in the heavens and also with anybody, anybody who's humbled. Anybody who finally says, listen, do you know what the gospel is? All you need is need. All you need is nothing. All you need is to admit you've got nothing, that you can't earn it. But you realize when you say all you need is need that most people don't have that? Think about it. All you need is nothing. Most people don't have that. And if you realize, if you realize that, if you see Jesus Christ fulfilling the condition so that we could receive it unconditionally, you know, to see the law by love fulfilled and hear his pardoning voice transforms a slave into a child and duty into choice, it's knowing that it was expensive yet free. Knowing that it was conditional yet unconditional. That therefore I am more wicked than I ever dared believe and I'm more loved than I ever dared hope. That will make you people in mission. That will give you people with a message and it won't offend anybody. You know why? Because if you realize that you're a sinner saved by grace, on the one hand, you're so flawed, God had to die for you, so how can you feel superior to anybody else you talk to about the Christianity? How dare you feel superior to them? You're not a Christian because you have better doctrine. You're not a Christian because you have a better life. You're not a Christian because you have a better anything. So how in the world could you look down on people? But on the other hand, how can you be scared of what they think? You've been so humbled by the gospel, you can't be superior to people you talk to, but you've been so affirmed by the gospel that you don't really, you're not afraid. And that will make you men and women in mission. You know, there's a place in Ephesians 2 where God says you are, where Paul says you are God's workmanship. You've been created for certain good deeds that God wants you to walk in. There are hands out there that only you can hold. There are people out there that only you can reach. There are hearts breaking that only you can heal. Your gender, your race, your ethnicity, your sorrows, your experience, your age, your everything, makes you like a fingerprint. And there are certain people out there that God wants to touch through you. And they're not going to be touched without you. So go, be a witness to the nations of this everlasting covenant. Now that your soul lives, let's pray. Thank you for giving us, oh Lord, a mission, a message, and a motivation and power to send it out. And we ask that you would help us to understand the implications of that. Lord, we're listening to this text as a church, in our small groups, in our vision groups. We're listening. And we ask that you would help us not just simply go away convicted, but to really think out in community what this means to be your messengers. Help us look at our attitudes. Help us look at our practices. Help us look at our relationships so that we truly can be sent the way you sent your son, Jesus Christ, in his name we pray. Amen.
