TITLE: Worry
SCRIPTURE: James 4:13-17
TOPICS: Anxiety
SERIES: James: A Faith that Comes Down to Earth
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/worry/

============================================================

We're going through the book of James, and we get to James chapter 4, verses 13 to 17. We're going through the book consecutively, piece by piece, and tonight we read this passage. Now listen, you who say, today or tomorrow, we will go to this or that city, spend a year there, carry on business and make money. Why, you do not even know what will happen tomorrow. What is your life? You are a mist that appears for a little while and then vanishes. Instead, you ought to say, if it's the Lord's will, we will live and do this or that. As it is, you boast and brag, all such boasting is evil. Anyone then who knows the good he ought to do and doesn't do it sins. All right, this is the passage. This is God's word for tonight. Now, what is it telling us about? It's…we're going through the book of James. James is a most practical letter, and today, tonight, we see him get to a subject which is so unbelievably mundane, so unbelievably practical that it sort of takes my breath away as I think about it. What is he doing? He's talking about not going and making money. I mean, later on and previously and later in the passage, in the chapter, in the book, James talks about what it means for a Christian to relate to possessions and wealth and business. But you see, he could have just as easily said, let…now listen, you who say, this year I'm going to school for three years, and after that I will go into such and such a career. Or those of you who say, in the next two years, we're going to start a family and we will have so many children. In other words, he's not so much talking about money and business. He is talking about one of the most normal things that we do. We try to exert some control over our circumstances. We plan. We plan. Tomorrow, I'm going to go do this and that. This year, I'm going to go to New York City and I'm going to accomplish this. It's just natural. It's just absolutely normal to try to get some control over the circumstances of your life by setting goals, setting up a schedule. Look, today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city place and spend a year there, a time, and carry on business and make money, a goal. So, setting goals, time periods, and so forth is something we do all the time, some of us very formally, some of us very elaborately for our job and our business, but everybody does it. Now, is James saying you shouldn't do that? Oh, if only it were that easy. If only he were saying, now listen, you who say today or tomorrow we will do this or that, and if he turned around and says, but I say to you as Christians, never say we will do this or that, that's not what he says. See, in verse 13, he says, now, many of you will say, we will do this, we will go. And down in 15, he says, instead you ought to say, and he does let us say, we will go and do. But he says there is a fundamental difference between the way we ordinarily do it and the way we should do it. And see, at this point, James tells us that the normal way in which we go about making our plans for a day or for a week or for a month or a year or for our life, the normal way we operate, the normal way we make plans, is fundamentally wicked, evil, arrogant, and boastful. That's what he says. You know, when you get to verse 17 where he says, anyone then who knows the good he ought to do and doesn't do it sins. And when you first look at that, it seems like, it doesn't seem connected to the rest of the paragraph. It seems like he's laying down some kind of principle. But notice the little word then in that sentence. See, it's very connected. What he is saying is there is a sin which is so huge that you can't see it. It's so huge and you can't see it and it's so pervasive because to commit it is not to exert any kind of energy at all. You commit it by simply going with the flow. You commit it by simply not doing anything, by not exerting yourself. If you don't exert yourself, if you go with the flow, if you do what comes naturally, you're sinning in this regard. I know there's a town, a small town in the south that I lived in for many years and some of the people in that little town get these tapes. I don't know whether they'll be insulted by this or not. You know, you can always tell a little smells. You know, a little smell is a smell small enough that it's contained in a room or an apartment and you never miss a smell like that. If there's a bad smell in one room, you smell it when you come into the room and then you leave the room and then you're not there. When you come back, you smell it again or if it's an apartment. But a big, big, big smell, I mean a smell so big that the whole town smells of it, every room smells of it, every apartment, every house, inside, outside. I mean, you can be in a town with a factory or a mill or something that creates... smell. Little smells you can smell, but not big, big, big smells, because after a while, you just adapt. You can't smell it anymore. I mean, that's true of anything that you just slop around in that's completely pervasive in the environment. One of my favorite quotes is, if you want to know something about water, just don't ask a fish, because if you ask a fish to describe water, the fish will say, what's that? What's water? I mean, fish won't know what water is because the fish is completely enveloped in water. And what James is saying here is, there is a sin that's so pervasive, it's so huge, it's so natural, that just to not exert yourself is to do it, that you probably don't even see it. What is that sin? It's simply to go about your life, make a plan, operate, you know, make a scale. It's simply to go about your life and forget God. That's what he's talking about. He says one of the worst sins, one of the most serious sins, one of the most fundamental sins is simply to forget God. Not to break this and that commandment, but just simply to go about your life forgetting God. It's one of the worst, it's one of the most ruinous, it's one of the most pathological, it's one of the most fundamental, it's one of the most guilty and terrible and dangerous sins of all, to simply do something. Conduct a relationship, conduct an appointment, make a decision, go about your life, set goals, work your schedule, and just without reference to God. No reference, not thinking about Him. In other words, here's the sin. The sin that he's talking about is living or planning or working or operating without continual and relentless reference to God intellectually and emotionally. The sin he is talking about is to fail in any regard to connect what you're doing, what you're thinking, and what you're feeling right now, connect vitally with who God is and what He's done for you. It's a pretty astonishing thing. It's one of the most, you know, as I started reading this and thought about it, it took me a little time to figure out what He was getting at, and then I realized what He's getting at. He says to simply say, tomorrow I'm going to do that, it's a very wicked thing. You have to say, God willing, I will do that. See, the difference between verse 13 and 15 is not that you, it's not like in verse 13 you say, tomorrow I will, and in verse 15 you don't. No. In verse 13 you say, tomorrow I will, and in verse 15 you say, tomorrow I will. Of course you make plans. You have to make plans. Of course you try to exert control over your circumstances. Of course you do. The difference is, and in the Latin, you know, the Latin edition of the Bible, it's a very famous phrase in here. He says, verse 15, instead you ought to say, Deo valente, we will live and do this or that. What does that mean? God willing. So he says, to ever say anything, to ever think anything, to ever do anything without saying God willing is a terrible thing. It's terrible to God, it's terrible to you. It's destructive in your relationship with God, it offends Him, it hurts Him, and it also destroys you. So let's ask ourselves, in what way, first of all, in what way is this so bad for God, and in what way is this so bad for us, and then how can we avoid it? How can we avoid this sin? How is it so bad for God, how is it so bad for us, and how can we avoid it? Well, here it goes. First of all, what's so bad about it? How do you like to be forgotten? There's almost nothing worse you can do. You know, I think I may have quoted this before, but I read somebody once, he was a writer, who said, he says, there's something far worse than having terribly bad reviews of your books. People attacking you. People saying, what a terrible book, what a terrible essay. This is awful. I don't agree with any of it. It's poorly reasoned. It's destructive. It's bad. He says, there's something much worse than hostile book reviews. It's no book reviews at all. Much worse. Much worse. There's something much worse than being criticized. It's to be ignored. Because when you're ignored, you're treated as a nobody, a nothing. You're treated as a vapor. You're treated as breath. You're treated as something transitory and temporary. There's nothing worse than being forgotten. To be forgotten from a list of people that is being invited to a party, especially to be forgotten by somebody that you love, somebody that you respect, somebody who you really have a, you know, a love for, somebody who owes you. There's nothing worse than being forgotten. It's the worst thing you can do. And therefore, in the Old Testament, you'll see many times that one of the great sins that God denounces is forgetting Him. Forgetting Him. Just obliviously going through life, forgetting Him. Only thinking about Him on Sundays. Only thinking about Him for 15 minutes in the morning. Forgetting Him. There's this wonderful place. and penetrating place in Psalm 9 where it says, the Lord is known by His justice, the wicked will be sent to the grave and all those who forget God. What does it mean to be wicked? To forget God. And then in the next verse it says, but those who are afflicted and who remember God will not be forgotten. And you see what's going on? Here's what God says, and it's perfectly fair. He says, if you forget me, I will forget you. Those who forget God will be forgotten. Those who remember God will be remembered. And what does it mean to be remembered? It means to be recognized. It means to be treated as someone of substance. It means to be focused on, you see? It means to be ascribed glory because, see, the word glory means wait. And the opposite of glory, to glorify, is to forget. God says, if you forget me, I will forget you. If you remember me, I will remember you. If you acknowledge me, if you focus on me, you see, I will acknowledge and focus on you. It's perfect justice. And there's this place, this wonderful and awful place in Jeremiah chapter 2 where God says this, does a maiden forget? Some of you remember, I preached a sermon on this in the morning service, oh, at least a year or so ago. Does a maiden forget her jewelry or a bride her wedding garments? Pardon me, her wedding ornaments. Start over. Does a maiden forget her jewelry or a bride her wedding ornaments? Yet my people have forgotten me. Days without number. What is he saying? I know what he's saying. I mean, I've done a lot of weddings and I've never, ever, ever seen a bride come down the aisle and suddenly say, I forgot to put my makeup on. It's never happened. Probably never has happened and probably never will. Why? Well, you know, you see, it's important. There's nothing more important on that day than to be presentable. Nothing more important than to be as beautiful as you can possibly be. Nothing. And God says, you see, you remember the things that are important to you, but I'm not important to you. You remember, but you haven't remembered me. My people have forgotten me. They've forgotten me. Days without count. Jeremiah chapter 2. To forget God, you see, is to be...how would you like it? You know what it's like. It's terrible to be ignored, to be treated as a vapor, you see. Hear God. Hear His cry. You've forgotten me. Now, but let me really tell you how it works. What's so interesting here is the structure of this forgetting. It's not just...it's not just that James says to forget God, to go about without reference to God is evil. Of course, it's evil. It hurts. It's terrible. It's inappropriate. It's trampling God, you see. Just to forget Him, to treat Him as unimportant when He's important. It's to be out of touch with reality. It's evil. But it's also...notice what else he says. It's not just evil. It's boastful. It's arrogant. It's proud. Now, here's what's so interesting. When you forget God, by definition, you assume God's place. That's what's so bad. Because he says, when you make a plan without reference to God, how do you know? See? You don't know. You aren't...you don't...what's he saying? Here's what he's saying. There's a place in Augustine's Confessions where he says, we were made in the image of God and God built us to reflect Him. That's what we're about. We must reflect God. We must resemble God. But Augustine says our sin has distorted us so that now, even in our sin, we seek to resemble God, but we seek to resemble Him in a sinful way. Here's how. Most theologians over the years have always divided the attributes of God into two categories, the incommunicable attributes and the communicable attributes. Now, we don't use those terms except with diseases, and that's fine because that helps you understand what the theologians mean. Communicable attributes are...attributes are characteristics of His character. Holiness, love, truth, grace, wisdom. See? Holiness, grace, love, mercy, wisdom. And those are attributes of His character, and we...those are communicable attributes. We can catch them. And when we come near Him through the Holy Spirit, we catch them. We become gracious. We become truthful. We become wise. We become righteous. We become holy. But the incommunicable attributes are attributes that belong not so much to His character but to His being, and they belong to Him by virtue of His being a creator. And they are incommunicable in that because we're creatures and we're definite and He's...you see, we're finite. We have finitude. He is infinite, and He is the creator, and therefore, He has these incommunicable attributes. So, what are those? Well, they tend to be the things that start with omni. Because...and they all are wrapped up. For example, you've heard of omniscience. God's omniscience means...omni-science means He's everything everything at once and he doesn't have to think about it well i think i know it somewhere he doesn't he knows everything at once he has to know everything at once because if he didn't know it it wouldn't exist and then there's omnipotence which means there's no limits into what he does and he wants to do something it's it happens and his on and then we have of course his omnipresence which means he's everywhere at once there's no limitations but it all is wrapped up in what's called not his omni but what the theologians called his aseity and his aseity means he's self-existent god is the only being that is undependent he needs nothing he has no beginning why does he have no beginning because what could have possibly brought him into into being he is absolutely self-existent he is absolutely self-sustaining he needs nothing he is unconditioned being no conditions no contingency no dependency utterly and absolutely sovereign and free and you know what augustine is saying augustine is saying sin even we have to resemble god but if you see what happened in the garden what the serpent did to us is under the influence of sin we reject we don't care about trying to resemble him in his communicable attributes but what we really desperately want more than anything else is to resemble him in his incommunicable attributes we don't care about righteousness but we care a great deal about omnipotence we don't care about holiness but how desperately we want that self-existence and when you forget god by definition you are assuming his incommunicable attributes you are stepping into place and acting as if you have the right to call the shots in your life and you have enough knowledge to know what's going on and you you see that you have omniscience and you have omnipotence and you have these things so by definition to forget god is to assume the place of god in your life in the world now what's so bad about that oh my goodness think about it for a second what's so bad about that for us what do you think worry is let me tell you what worry is worry is a frustrated aspiration to omniscience worry is saying exactly what james says we cannot say and that is here's what worry when you some of you are eating up with worry tonight about something you're eating up with worry and you know what you know why you were eating up with worry to the degree that you say i know i know what tomorrow i know what is good i know what is right i know what has to happen i know how history has to go i know what has to happen in my life i know what has to happen in their lives i know now if you say that you will be eaten up with worry because you're aspiring to omniscience i know and i'm sure god has to do this and if he doesn't do it it'll be a disaster i know and i'm afraid god won't get it right that's worry that's worry what is that that's forgetting god that's forgetting who he is and it's assuming incommunicable attributes do you know listen what if you said i would like to get into this school i would like to marry this woman i would like to marry this man i would like to have this career i would like these things i'm hoping for them i'm praying for them i've set a goal but i don't know i don't know i'm a i'm a i'm cosmic in terms of the cosmos i'm a child i'm a baby i don't know what's best for me i don't know what's right and wrong i don't know and you know if you say that you're remembering that's why he says you say today or tomorrow we will do this or that i know exactly how things let it go but you don't know if you forget god you've also forgotten who you are you don't know to the if you're able to say i don't know wait till you see you'll still be anxious of course you'll be anxious but it won't kill you it won't eat you up it won't destroy you i could go on but i can't why are you bitter about your life why are you why are you so why do you feel like such a failure you know why you feel like a failure you say look at all these other people they worked hard and they've gotten this place in life and i haven't you know why you're so down on yourself you know why you're kicking yourself it looks real humble but it's it is an aspiration to omnipotence it is a it is a mistaken belief it's forgetting god and assuming god's place it's a mistaken belief that those people who have made it better than you that they did it by their own skill that's ridiculous this is saying you do not make life life makes you you're not in control you are not in control what are you you don't know what is your life you're forgetting god and therefore you're forgetting who you are and that's the reason why you're bitter that's the reason why you're worried you ought to be saying i want you to be saying and we have to get to that you see if you forget god you'll be anxious and you'll be proud you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth you say i know you go back and forth I want you to be saying, and we have to get to that. You see, if you forget God, you'll be anxious, and you'll be proud. You go back and forth. You say, I know what's going on here. So you'll go back and forth between superiority complexes and inferiority complexes all of your life. Whiplash, back and forth. You have to. You see? When things are going well, you say, I know. And when you find out that you don't know, you'll feel like a vapor. You'll feel like a breath. It'll be traumatic because you'll be learning it the wrong way. You'll be learning about your finitude without grace. You'll be learning about it without the gospel. And you won't be able to handle it. It'll just destroy you. Now, how can we avoid this? Here's how we can avoid it. What I love about this, it took me quite a while to meditate on C. Notice, in verse 13, he says what you're not supposed to say. He says, today or tomorrow we will go to this or that city and spend a year there and carry on business and money. Then in verse 15, he says, but instead you ought to say, if it's the Lord's will, and he doesn't jump right into it, we will do this or that. He says, if it's the Lord's will, we will live. What he is trying to say is you must take any situation you're in, any plan, any condition, any emotional state, and you must, at that moment, remind yourself that the only reason you're even standing there breathing is by the grace of God. Jonathan Edwards, I think, used to get up in the morning and sometimes used to say to himself, I must remember this, that everything I enjoy today, which is better than hell, is strictly by the mercy and upholding gracious power of God. Do you realize how different your life would go, I mean, how different your attitude toward life would go if you actually believed that? Some of you don't believe it. I mean, that's what I like about New York. A lot of you think this is ridiculous, and I'm trying to get you to think about it. I'm trying to get you to think of what your alternatives are. What are your alternatives? But some of you believe it, but you don't use it, and that's what he's saying. When he says, by the way, when he says you must go around saying God willing, he is not saying we now have to sprinkle our language with pious jargon. He is not saying, what I want to hear people at Redeemer now doing is saying, well, I'll see you on Tuesday at 3 o'clock, Deo Valente. He doesn't want you to sprinkle...and let me tell you, by the way, I'll go this far. John Wesley, in his directions to his young preachers, goes out of his way to say, avoid pious jargon. There are people that feel that what James is saying is, we're supposed to be constantly saying, well, if the Lord wills, and the Lord is really leading me, and the Lord is really telling me this, and so it's sprinkled everything you say. Instead of just saying, this is what I think, you say, the Lord has shown me. Instead of saying, this is what we're going to do, and you say, well, I think the Lord will want us to do this, God willing, and so on. Let me tell you something. It's not just irritating to non-Christians to hear somebody talking like that. James is against arrogance. And when you talk like that, whether you know it or not, and I think you do at some level, you're putting yourself ten feet above contradiction. When somebody says, well, the Lord has, I've been praying about this so much, and the Lord has really worked on my heart, and I think that you ought to do this, what are you doing? You're making it impossible for somebody to say, I don't think that's a good idea. Well, who am I to question if the Lord, you know, you sprinkle the Lord over everything. It's the very opposite of what James is saying. James is saying, your whole problem is, you're putting yourself in the place of God. And if you make yourself hard to contradict, you say, the Lord has shown me this, what you're really doing, the Lord has given me this, you're refusing to take responsibility for your opinion. You are refusing to say, I'm not God. You're actually saying, well, I am. I mean, I'm telling you exactly what God said. No, no, no, no, no, no. James is not saying, sprinkle everything you say with these pious phrases. Oh, no. What he's saying is what Jonathan Edwards did. He says, look at your life and every part of your life and say, this is all of grace. The fact that I'm alive, the fact that my heart's beating, it's all of grace, all of the gracious love. If God gave me what I deserved, I'd be wiped out. It's only by God's grace that I'm living. If God wills, I will live. It's only by His will. It's only by His grace that I'm living. And here's what's so wonderful about that. It will transform everything. And I'll tell you, I have a little list in my quiet time notebook in which I take, depending on my emotional state, I use, this is all of grace on myself, and it changes it. When things are going bad and I'm starting to get worried, I have to say, it's all of grace. Your success was nothing but grace. God is in charge of this. You don't hold yourself up. What are you worried about? God, and it gets rid of the worry. When things are going very well, and people say, what a wonderful job you've done. What do you have to do? Don't you dare forget God at that moment either. side or go into the corner and say, this is nothing but grace. This happens strictly by the grace of God. You don't hold yourself up. Don't get a swelled head. So what if God helped you do that? Tomorrow he might not. It's all of grace. You know, settle down. You see, the pride, this is all of grace, pulls you down. The despair, this is all of grace, pulls you up. Complacency, complacency. You know, you're just sort of walking through life. You're not praying. You're not disobeying. You're not obeying. You're just sort of complacent and sort of spiritually bored. When you say to yourself, this is all of grace, that should scare you. It'll scare you out of your complacency. You don't hold yourself up. How dare you presume on God? To say this is all of grace takes the pride down, takes the despair up, takes the boredom, you see, into alacrity and out of indifference. Everything you do, if you're able to tell yourself this is nothing but God's grace doing this, it doesn't mean you won't ever be concerned. Of course, you'll weep over people and you'll weep over things and you'll have all sorts of goals, but it won't eat you up. There will no longer be superiority complexes or inferiority complexes. There will no longer be complacency, nor will there be a workaholic intensity. No, all of grace, all of grace. You don't hold yourself up. Don't you see? How can God do that? How can God be so good? Why does God hold us up? Doesn't it say in Psalm 9 that if we forget him, he'll forget us? But we have forgotten him. So how in the world is it possible for James to say, remind yourself, it's strictly God's grace? I'll tell you how. There's nothing worse than being forgotten. But you know, actually, I just heard this the other day. It struck me. I listened to my old Jesus Christ Superstar album, and I mean an old album. I mean a record. You remember records? And at the end, they have Jesus giving the seven words on the cross, you know, his last words. And if you listen carefully, you'll hear the way Tim Rice, Andrew Lloyd Webber, whoever wrote it, the words said, they have Jesus saying, my God, my God, why hast thou forgotten me? Because that's what happened to Jesus on the cross. He was forgotten. He was utterly, cosmically ignored by the only person in the universe who mattered to him. And it was hell. But don't you see, because Jesus was forgotten for us, he got the forgetting. He got the forgottenness that we should have had. That's the reason why God can say in the book of Isaiah, can a woman forget the baby that nurses at her breasts? Yea, she may forget, but I will not forget thee. See, I've engraved you on the palms of my hands. How could he not forget us? How could he be a God of grace? Because he forgot his son so he could remember us. And because he always remembers us, we can remember him constantly and live a life of triumph and sweet joy all day, moment by moment. Let's pray. Father, as we go to the table, we ask that you would meet us here and remind us as we see the bread broken, that this was the way in which Jesus Christ was forgotten so that we could be remembered. Help us to remember that's what the Lord's Supper is about, remembering, reconnecting every part of our life to what you are and what you've done. Help us to remember how you forgot your son, that you would never have to forget us. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
