TITLE: Worship
SCRIPTURE: Psalm 95:1-11
TOPICS: 
SERIES: Practicing The Christian Life
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/worship-2008/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading is from Psalm 95, verses 1 through 11. Come, let us sing for joy to the Lord. Let us shout aloud to the rock of our salvation. Let us come before him with thanksgiving and extol him with music and song. For the Lord is the great God, the great King above all gods. In his hand are the depths of the earth, and the mountain peaks belong to him. The sea is his, for he made it, and his hands formed the dry land. Come, let us bow down in worship. Let us kneel before the Lord, our maker. For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, the flock under his care. Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as you did at Meribah, as you did that day at Massa in the desert, where your fathers tested and tried me, though they had seen what I did. For 40 years, I was angry with that generation. I said, they are a people whose hearts go astray, and they have not known my ways. So I declared on oath in my anger, they shall never enter my rest. This is God's word. We're starting a new series on spiritual disciplines or Christian practices, like gathering for corporate worship, or private meditation and prayer, or disciplines of simplicity, generosity, reading the Bible in community, spiritual friendship. And you say, well, why is that so important? The best way to introduce the series is to plunge in to the first Christian practice, the first of the spiritual disciplines, and that is worship. And we're looking at Psalm 95, which is called the Venite. It's very famous because in Latin, Venite is the first word. It's O come. And it's probably, not only reputedly, but I also think in reality, the best single place in the Bible to go to understand what worship is all about. And when we ask the question, what do we learn about worship, of this psalm, we're going to learn three things. Worship. Why we should, what it is, and how it's done. Why we should, what it is, and how it's done. First, why we should. As I go around, not just as I go around, as a minister over the years, I get asked this question. Christians believe all these great things, but in reality, I'm told, Christians are every bit as selfish and as messed up as everybody else, if not more so. You're a Christian minister, why is that? That's the question I get. Here's these Christians, they believe all these things, but they don't live it out. They believe all these things, but they're just as messed up and as, you know, selfish as anybody else. Why is that? Now, on the one hand, as a minister, I've seen literally thousands of people change permanently, be healed permanently by faith in Christ. So I've seen a tremendous amount of changed lives. But the fact is that there is such an enormous number of people who profess the name of Christ, who are, in spite of their beliefs, just as selfish and as messed up as everybody else. There's so much of that that it requires an answer, and I'll give you two. The first answer is more theological, the second one is more practical. The first one is more theological, and here's how it goes. All human beings are made in the image of God, and therefore all human beings reflect God and have a certain amount of wisdom in their mind and in their heart and in their conscience. So whether you believe in God or not, you're in the image of God, and you reflect the wisdom of God. On the other hand, all Christians are filled with pride and selfishness and sin. Why? Because the Christian gospel is you're not saved by being a better person or by being a more moral person or being a more pulled-together person. In fact, you're not saved unless you admit you're not better, you're not more moral, you're not more pulled-together than anybody else, and that you need the grace of God. That's what it means to be a Christian. And therefore, Christians are filled with pride, selfishness, and sin. But now think about this. The non-believer in God, because he or she is in the image of God, lives a much better life than their erroneous beliefs should make them. But a Christian, because they're filled with sin, should make them. See that? Okay. In other words, the image of God makes unbelievers better than their erroneous beliefs should make them, and the sin in the Christian makes them worse than their right beliefs should make them. And when it actually comes out, in the wash, when you actually see believers and non-believers living lives, the differences aren't all that enormous. And that's explained what? By Christian theology. It explains that. The differences won't be huge, but that's not the only reason. I don't want Christians to get off the hook here. The second reason why there's so many people who profess faith and they have these beliefs, but it doesn't show up in their character, is practical. See, if you believe something, it's in your head. I believe it. I believe in Jesus. I believe he died for my sins. So here's your beliefs, and here's the character it ought to produce. And the Bible says, here's the character you should have. Love, joy, peace, patience, honesty, courage, humility, gentleness, self-control. Why is it so many people with these beliefs don't have this character? And the answer is, you need a bridge between beliefs and character. Because you're not just a brain in a vat. We're in the image of God. That means our minds are part of the image of God, but so are our emotions. So is our body as well as our soul. So is our mind as well as our emotions. And therefore, if you want beliefs to actually produce character, they have to be driven into your heart through practices, spiritual disciplines that engage the entire person, mind, will, and emotions. So, for example, here you are at worship. You have beliefs, perhaps, but you're singing those beliefs. We're going to actually talk about that next week. That actually engages the imagination. It engages the body. It engages the voice. It engages the mind. You're singing your beliefs. You're praying your beliefs. You're reciting your beliefs. We're studying the Bible together, you see. We're looking at the Word of God and coming to understand our beliefs together. So what's happening in corporate worship is it's a practice that engages the whole person and is driving your beliefs down into your life. And only, only through practices, like prayer and meditation, like Bible reading and community, like, and we're going to see about 30 or 40 practices over the next two years. We're going to look at all these practices. Unless you are engaged in skillful, regular, continuous Christian practices, that's the bridge that brings your belief into your life. Otherwise, there'll be a disconnect. If you say, well, I believe it, but you actually don't go to worship regularly. You don't have any kind of prayer life. You don't do any of these particular disciplines. You just believe it. Then you're going to be, at best, inconsistent and, at worst, a hypocrite. Your beliefs are not going to show up in your character. An illustration which my wife thinks is a little bit violent, but I think it's a good illustration. And that is, if you want to, if you're trying to move a rock so you can build a road through this huge rock, if you're trying to move a big boulder, you don't take the explosive and just put it against the front of the rock and detonate it. That's not going to move the rock. It might shear off part of the face. It might superficially harm the rock and create a lot of noise, but it won't actually move the rock. It won't really change things. Ah, but if you drill a little hole down deep into the rock, way, way down, and you put the explosive down into the center of the rock, then when it detonates, it'll move the rock. Then it'll change things. Then you'll be able to get the road through. And you see, if you just believe, say, oh, I believe in Christianity, right? And you don't have worship. You don't know prayer. You don't know Bible reading and community. You don't know the disciplines of, of, of, of fasting, of journaling. You don't know those kinds of disciplines. You don't know the disciplines of spiritual friendship and accountability and various sorts of community building disciplines. If you're not doing all those things, you're not taking your beliefs and putting them down deep into your heart. So when your beliefs actually, as it were, do their thing, it changes you. So listen, that's why you need to worship. And that's why you need to do quite a lot of things. That's why we should. Secondly, we not only learn here why we should, we learn what it is. What is worship? And now let me give you a definition. And in a way we already began to talk about it, but let me give you this definition. The definition is worship is ascribing ultimate value, ascribing an ultimate value to an object and engaging your mind, your heart, and your you do it. So using your entire person to ascribe ultimate value to some object, that is worship. Let's talk about that one aspect that we've already talked about just to finish it off. Worship isn't worship unless it engages the whole person. So, for example, look at verses 1 and 2. There you're told to worship joyfully with the emotions. Shout, sing, joyfully, it says. So you're commanded to worship joyfully with the emotions. But then you go down to verse 6 and 7, and there you're commanded to worship submissively with your will. You're supposed to bow. You're supposed to kneel. So that's not talking about the emotions of joy. It's talking about the submission of the will. You're supposed to change your life. You're supposed to give your life. You're supposed to make changes in the way in which you live. So where's 1 and 2 says you're supposed to worship joyfully with the emotions, and verses 6 and 7, she says you're supposed to worship submissively with the will. Then verses 7, 8, and following says you have to listen to his voice. You have to listen very carefully. You must not ignore it. And that's talking about the emphasis on the understanding, on the mind, on listening and taking in a message and not ignoring it and understanding it. So there's your mind, there's your will, and there's your emotions. Every single part of your person has to be engaged. And realize what this means. If, like in verse 8, you subscribe with a mind to Christian truth, but you never, ever, ever see the beauty of the Lord in your inner being in such a way that it just makes you weep and melt. So in other words, if you have belief, down in verse 8, but you never shout joyfully. So you have believing without feeling. Or if you have feeling, lots of feeling, lots of experiential emotions. You know, you come to worship, you come to church, and you're constantly happy, and you're singing, and you're weeping, and you're having these great emotions. However, there's no bowing and kneeling in your life. That's verse 6 and 7. If you're having great feelings, but it doesn't really change you. Week after week after week, you're just as grumpy, you're just as bitter, you're just as anxious, you're just as harsh, you're just as unself-controlled, you know, out of control as ever. So if there's feeling without real submitting and changing, or if there's believing without feeling, see, if they're all not all together, you're not worshiping, because worship takes your belief and drives it down into the heart. So it can really do some damage, so it can really change things. So first of all, it takes the entire person. But secondly, and here's the essence of it, worship is ascribing ultimate value. What does that mean? There's a little preposition in Psalm 95 that is really key, and it happens twice. In fact, it shows what triggers real worship. So for example, verses 1 and 2 says, Come, let us sing for joy. Let us shout aloud. Let us come before him with thanksgiving and extol him with music and song. For, there's the preposition, for. Why are we going to, what triggers all this joy? What triggers all this singing? For the Lord is the great God. Okay, then you down to verse 6 and 7. Come, let us bow down and worship. Let us kneel before the Lord, our maker. What's the trigger for all this submitting and this change? For he is the shepherd God. Now, here's what the psalmist is doing. The psalmist is thinking, is weighing, is calculating, is reckoning, is treasuring the excellencies of God. Thinking about God, his greatness, and or his, in other words, when he says, For God is our shepherd God, that's hearkening to all kinds of stories and accounts and statements and things in the Bible that have to do with God being a shepherd God. When he talks about being a great God, it's hearkening to other things. What the psalmist is doing is the psalmist is thinking, reckoning, weighing, calculating, counting, treasuring the excellencies of God until there's an explosion of emotion or there's an explosion of life change. Thinking about the excellencies of God until the whole life explodes with joy and your life changes permanently. That's worship. Ascribing ultimate value. The first two commandments, the ten commandments cover all of life. And the first two commandments, the most foundational commandments, are about worship. And the first two commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments, the ten commandments all of life. And the first two commandments, the most foundational commandments, are about worship. And the first commandment actually says, God says, you must worship me rather than something else. That's the first commandment. You must worship me rather than something else. Notice, God holds out no possibility that you're worshiping nothing. He says, you'll either be worshiping me or you'll be worshiping something else. Now, how can he say that? There's a lot of people in New York saying, no, I'm sorry, I never go to worship. I don't worship anything. Oh, no, it's not true. Everybody has to build, you have to, everyone builds their lives, gives their heart, sets their hope, or ascribes ultimate value to something. Why? Because you have to live for something. You have to find your meaning in something. And you have to look either at your career or this lover, this person, or your family or professional acclaim or your art. But you're looking to something and you're looking at it and you're saying, if I have that, if I achieve that, then my life is worth something. Then I'm worth something. Now, you know what you're doing? Do you know where the word worship comes from? The word worship comes from the old English word, well, it's a phrase, worth shape. To be shaped by the worth of something. That's what worship is. It's to look at something and saying, that is so valuable. That is so important. If I have that, then I'm worth something. You're being shaped by the worth of something. And everybody's doing that. And if you say, boy, if I could just achieve that, boy, then I'd have, I feel like my life was worth something. I was worth something. That's worship. You're looking at that thing. That thing is your God, basically. You're worshiping it. You're being shaped by the worth of it. And everybody's got something that you feel like is worth more than anything else. The pearl of great price in your life. Everybody's got that. Absolutely everyone. But what the psalmist is saying is if you really want to change your life, you've got to take your heart off of what you are worshiping. And everyone is worshiping some finite thing. Everyone's looking at something saying, if I have that, then my life is worth something. And you've got to do it to God. Now, to really get across this idea, let me give you a story, an illustration. Imagine a woman. And she has a, been, she's inherited from her mother, who's passed away now, a piece of jewelry. And she gets it. She looks at it. And it's kind of nice, but doesn't really, can't really tell, you know, really what it's worth. So she puts it on the top of her bureau and kind of forgets about it. As the years go by, there it is. It's her mom's thing. But she doesn't really, she hardly, she almost ignores it. Occasionally something gets put on top of it and she loses track of it. She says, where's that thing? Oh, there it is. You know, she doesn't really take much notice of it. But one day, for some reason, she decides to take it to the jeweler to see, you know, whether it's worth anything. So the jeweler gets it. And he, and he puts his little eye thingy in, whatever that is, a little eye thingy, you know, the jewelers have. And within about a minute, he's looking at it. And suddenly, his little eye thingy pops out. And he says, wait a minute. And then he goes in the back. And here's what, I don't know anything about jewelry, jewelry, or jewelers. He goes into the back, let's say, and he, and he puts on a bigger eye thingy. And then he, then he looks at, then he does a test. And then he goes online to sort of do some research. Next thing you know, his breathing is getting rather labored. His little beads of sweat are starting to break out on his forehead. And he's come to realize that this is a piece that was long lost. It's a historic piece that is literally priceless and is worth more than all the jewelry he's ever sold in his shop all the last 25 years put together. What's going on? His entire being is being engaged by the worth of the thing that he is assessing. He's looking at it. He's thinking about it. He's calculating it. He's, he's, he's adding it up. He's noticing its excellencies and it's beginning to just explode in his life. This thing means, and you know what's going to happen? The difference between him and her is he is being shaped by the worth of it and she's not. She doesn't understand anything. Well, here's what's going to happen. He's going to come out and evangelize her. He's going to come preach the good news to her. He's going to come out and he's going to say, you are more stupid than you ever dared believe, but you are more wealthy than who ever dared imagine or hope. And when she begins to be shaped by the worth of it, when it begins to dawn on her, it's going to change your life forever, right? Now, an awful lot of you, an awful lot of people in the world, they believe in God. Oh, I really believe in God. I have a firm belief in God, but you're no different. You're just as selfish. You're just as messed up as anybody else. And you know why? Because God is like that piece of jewelry on the bureau. It's in your life, but you have absolutely no sense of his value, his worth, his excellency, his beauty. It's never dawned on you. It's never changed. It's never been taken down into the center of your life. So your whole life explodes with joy and you begin to change. It just hasn't happened to you. Because you don't know the discipline of doing what the psalmist does. And that's what you must do. That's what you must learn to do. Or you'll be an inconsistent person at best and you will be a hypocrite at the worst. Everybody is shaped by the worth of something. And this is something very important. This is why worship is so critical. Remember I said the first two commandments are about worship? And all the other commandments then come after that and are based on that. Do you know what that means? See, what if you fail to love your neighbor? What if you fail to control yourself? What if you're failing in self-control? What if you're failing to love your neighbor? What if you're failing to be honest? In other words, if you're breaking the other commandments, you know why? It's always because you're worshiping the wrong thing. Oh, yeah. So, for example, if you're lying or cheating, do you know why? Because you're looking at something besides God and saying, I've got to have that or my life isn't worth anything. So, you've got to have your reputation or you've got to keep your job or you've got to make money. And so, you lie. And you're afraid of lying and you don't want to lie. But you have to. And then you say, why did I do that? I'll tell you why. It's not, you say, well, I'm a bad person. I'm a dishonest person. Well, yeah, you're a dishonest person because you were just dishonest. But the real problem was something besides God you're looking at in your heart of hearts and saying, if I have that, then I'm worth something. There's something more worthy than God in your life. There's something you're worshiping more than God. And that's why you're screwed up. Because if you really valued his love over the love of anyone else, if you really valued his approval over the approval of anyone else, then when someone criticizes you or you break up with somebody or you have a financial reversal, it would be hard, but it wouldn't devastate you. All of your problems come from where's your heart? What is your heart treasuring? Do you sit around and just daydream about, well, wouldn't it be good if I made this much money, then I could start to do that? You're worshiping. You're meditating. You're treasuring. And until you learn how to do that with God, you're not going to change. If you want to change your life, you've got to worship. Change what you worship. That's the secret. So that's why we should. And that's what it is. But now three things on how it's done. And to some degree, we'll get back to these things because worship is a foundation for so many of the other disciplines. But there's the three things that you need to know we must do. And that you must, if you're going to worship properly, you have to worship corporately, rhythmically, and restfully. Okay. First of all, corporately. You notice something about, one of the most obvious things about the whole psalm is it's all plural. Let us worship, not let me worship. Oh, come, let me worship. That's not what it says. Oh, come, let us worship. Let us do. Everything's us. It's all us. Why is that so important? Can't I just go home and pray about it? I don't like getting out. It's, you know, it's a lot of trouble, and I'm a pretty busy person, and I don't like half the people out there anyway. C.S. Lewis, in a very famous place, one of his books says this. In each of my friends, there is something that only some other friend can fully bring out. By myself, I am not large enough to call the whole person into activity. I need other lights than my own to show all of my friends' facets. Now that my friend Charles has died, I will never again see Ronald's reaction to a specifically Charlesian joke. Far from having more of Ronald, having him to myself now that Charles is gone, I have less of Ronald. We possess each friend not less but more as the number of those with whom we share him increases. And you know what he's saying? There were these three great friends, and one died. And what C.S. Lewis was saying, when I lost friend A, I figured, well, at least that means I have more of friend B. But he began to realize he lost the part of friend B that only friend A could bring out. And he began to realize, you can only know an individual human being in a fellowship. You really can't know a person one-on-one because you only see a person. you see people, a person with other friends, he's saying what's really weird is the more you share a friend with other friends, the more of the person you have. Now that's another subject, actually, if we want to get right into that, we will later. This year, we will get back to that. But here's the point. If a finite individual human being can't be known one-on-one, if even a finite human being needs to be known corporately, how much more God? You will never really know God unless you corporately praise, corporately pray, corporately study the word of God. You've got to do it with others. Or you will never know him at all. You'll get a distorted little view of him. Unless you are willing to read, to pray, to talk, to worship, to praise together all the time. That's the reason why this service, our corporate worship service, but in corporate Christian worship, is so crucial. It's the reason why, for example, putting this thing on is important. Not only for you to be here, but by the way, this week, this year, I mean this week, we have a ministry fair. The people who usher, the people who break things down, the people who run the book table afterward, the people who make worship happen. You know, that Sunday service ministries, that's very, very important. So, support it. But be here. Eighty percent of Americans say you can be a good Christian and not go to church. And I have no idea what in the world they mean by good Christian. Do they mean it can be saved and not go to church? Well, yeah. Because you're not saved by going to church. But if you, listen, it's no way true that you can be a changed life person and not go to church. It will never happen. The idea that you can be a changed life Christian and not go to church is bunk. So, you've got to do it corporately. Third, secondly, you have to do it rhythmically. Now, what's interesting about Psalm 95 is notice there's praise for the first five verses. There's submission and confession in the second, in the middle part. And then there's listening to God's word at the end. Praise, confession, and hearing God's word of grace, his word of rest. And guess what? That's how Christian liturgy works. You know, Psalm 95 has had an enormous impact on the liturgy of the church. Why do we do what we do when we come here? Have you noticed that this is exactly how we worship? There's praise to start with. There's confession in the middle. There's hearing the word at the end, Psalm 95. And there's a rhythm to it. See, if your worship is all praise and you never get down to looking at your life and thinking about where do I have to change? Or if your worship is all about you and you and your problems and thinking about yourself. Or even if your worship is all academic. It's sitting and taking notes and reading the Bible. It's not worship. We're not just talking about mind, will, and emotions here. We're talking about a certain rhythm. You see God's greatness. That leads you to think about your littleness and that leads you to need the word of grace. And then you end the service at the end of this sermon by, during the offering or during the Lord's Supper, ending by rethinking his praise and rethinking what you have to change. So it's thinking about the greatness of God, telling him how great he is, thinking about where you have to change, listening to God's word of grace. It's natural. The confession comes from the praise. And the need for the word of grace comes from the confession. And then you end by praising God a bit, confessing God some more, and going out into the world. And this is, by the way, why you're wrong to think that when the sermon's done and you have the offering, that somehow it's okay to check your BlackBerry and remember, where am I going to go next? Because the worship is over. Oh, no. Praise, confession, hearing God's word, and then end with praise and confession in your own life and in your own heart. That's what the offering is there for. And the final song. Every single part of this service is important. You can't just come rushing in, take notes to Tim Keller because I want to hear Tim, you know, and, you know, I can miss the first part. And then I have to run out because I've got to get someplace. Look, I am not a school type person, you know, and I know, by the way, it's very easy in New York to come to something late. And I know sometimes you've got to leave early, but it shouldn't be a habit. So I'm never going to look at you funny for coming late. I'm never going to look at you funny for leaving early. But it's only because there's too many of you to really keep track of. Because if you're always coming early, if you're always leaving late, you really don't understand worship. You don't really understand what you need. It's worship that changes you, not information from my sermon. So you have to do it corporately, you have to do it rhythmically, and last of all, rest. Now, here's what I'm going to say. Now, here's what I'm going to say. Now, here's what I'm going to say. Now, here's what I'm going to say. Now, here's what I'm going to say. It's worship that changes you, not information from my sermon. So you have to do it corporately, you have to do it rhythmically, and last of all, rest. Now, here's what rest is about. The last part of the sermon, pardon me, the last part of Psalm 95, is about an incident that happened in the history of Israel. They were wandering in the wilderness. And every day they had to get up and put everything in their life on their back. You know, can you think about that? They needed rest. They wanted to go to the promised land where they could settle down and have their own home and have their own farms and so on. But you see, when they were in the wilderness, they were burdened and weary because every morning they had to get up and put their entire life on their back and carry it. And because they didn't listen to God's word at a particular place, Meribah Massa, it's an incident you can read about in Exodus 17, their getting into that rest of the promised land was delayed. Now, in the book of Hebrews, Hebrews chapter 4, says that the problem that the Israelites had of not listening to God's word and therefore not getting that rest and having to stay burdened and carrying their whole life is actually symbolic of a greater burden and a greater rest. You can read about it in Hebrews 4. I don't have the time to read what Hebrews 4 says, but here's what it says. It basically says there is still a problem we have. We still are burdened. We're still carrying our lives on our back because we still think we're saved by our works. But we need to hear the gospel so we can enter into the ultimate rest, the rest of resting from your works. And you know what that means? Here's what it means. Every one of us looks at something, our career, you know, or if we're religious, how good we are and how we go to church and we listen and we obey the Bible. Everybody's looking at our performance, our work, to feel like our lives are worth something. We're always saying, my life is worth something because I'm a good person or I'm a conservative person or a liberal person or a moral person or a religious person or whatever. But you're burdened because when you try to get your sense of worth from your work, your performance, it's like carrying your whole life on your back. And you're never sure you've lived a good enough life. Here's the word of grace. Here's the word of rest. It's the gospel and here's the gospel. Jesus Christ came and died for you. He came to pay the penalty for our sins. He lost everything. He came and suffered and lost everything. It was an infinite cost. It was an incredible price. And yet Isaiah 53, describing the suffering servant, has a little line that says, the results of his suffering he will see and be satisfied. That's amazing. He's going to look at all that he gave, all that he experienced, and he's going to say, the results are so valuable that it was all worth it. The results of my suffering I see, and the results are so valuable it was worth it. He's looking at something and he's saying, look at the worth of that. It makes it all worth it. He's being shaped by the worth of something. Jesus Christ was moved by the worth of something to come here and to die. What was that? What was it that Jesus Christ had after he suffered that he didn't have before? He was Lord of the universe. Didn't he have everything? No. What was the one thing that he's looking at that makes it all worth it, the results? And you know what the results are? You know what he's looking at? You. You are his bride piece. You are that piece of jewelry. 1 Peter 2 says, you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's treasured possession. Jesus Christ looks at you and loves you and adores you and adds up your worth and calculates it and is so moved by love of you that he was willing to come and give everything and still think it was worth it. In other words, he's treasuring us and when you see him treasuring you at infinite cost to himself, that'll make him your treasure. See, when you realize that you're his treasure, you drive that into your heart. That'll make him yours and then you'll start to really worship and then the great burden will fall off your back as you know in Pilgrim's Progress when the Christian finally understands grace, his burden falls off his back and he experiences the rest of knowing that I'm accepted because of what God has done and I no longer look at my work to get my sense of worth. I look at what Jesus Christ has done for me and that's rest and that's the secret of worship and if you know the secret of worship, your life will change. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for helping us. Now we have to come to your table and as our whole being is engaged, as we... take the bread, as we sing, as we bow our heads, be real to us. Make all this real to our hearts so that we can really worship you in spirit and truth and change. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
