TITLE: You Will Disown Me
SCRIPTURE: Mark 14:22-31
TOPICS: Atonement Salvation Jesus' Death & Resurrection
SERIES: The “Amens” of Jesus: The Challenge of the Cross
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/you-will-disown-me/

============================================================

Mark 14, 22-31 While they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks, and broke it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take it, this is my body. Then he took the cup, gave thanks, and offered it to them, and they all drank from it. This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many, he said to them. I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day, when I drink it in you, in the kingdom of God. When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. You will all fall away, Jesus told them, for it is written, I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered. But after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee. Peter declared, Even if all fall away, I will not. I tell you the truth, Jesus answered, today, yes, tonight, before the rooster crows twice, you yourself will disown me three times. But Peter insisted emphatically, Even if I have to die with you, I will never disown you. And all the others said the same. The word of the Lord. The six weeks before Easter, it's been traditional for centuries for Christians to do some disciplined thinking about the death of Christ. Disciplined thinking. It's a period, you know, it begins with Ash Wednesday, a period called Lent. And what we're going to do over the next few weeks, with a couple exceptions, like next week, for example, we are going to take a look at some of Jesus' most solemn statements about the meaning of his death in the New Testament. When I say the most solemn statements, I mean this. In every one of the Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, when Jesus has a, when Jesus wants to say something of utmost importance, when he wants to say something that's extremely crucial and that he stakes everything upon, he has a marker. And it's the word, it's the Hebrew word, Amen. And if you read in the Greek, these statements, the most solemn statements begin with the word Amen. That's a hard word to translate, but in most, and every translation has to sort of choose, in English, how it's going to convey that. In the New International Version, which we're having here, the way that marker is conveyed is with the phrase, I tell you the truth, which isn't bad, because if you're listening to somebody speak and the person really wants to say something pretty solemn, they'll say, listen, I tell you the truth. Not bad, though, of course, as I'm going to show you a little later, that fails to get across all of what that word means. But some translations say, truly, truly. Some translations say, have Jesus saying, verily, verily. You remember that? The old King James Bible, verily, verily, I say unto you. It's the same marker. It's trying to get across the fact that there are places where Jesus says something very solemn. And each week, we're going to look at some of the most solemn things He says about the meaning of His death. Tonight, we're taking a look at a text that has two Amen statements in it. Did you notice them? And what's… I never noticed them both there. Jesus didn't say, make Amen statements everywhere. I mean, there are a lot of them, but they're not everywhere. And the fact that they're put together here clearly is for the purpose of getting us to compare and contrast them. So there are two solemn Amen statements in here. And if you want to know Him, if you want to know Christ personally, if you want to have the changes in your life that can come from knowing Him, you have to be absolutely certain and you have to understand these two solemn statements. We're going to look at both of these statements. We're going to look at His first Amen statement and what that teaches us, the second Amen statement and what that teaches us, and then when we put them together, what effects that actually has practically on our life. Okay? The first Amen statement, the second Amen statement, and if you understand and pull them together, the practical influence is on our life. Now, the first Amen statement is in verse 25, and this is where He says, Amen, or He says, Truly, or He says, I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God. Now, here's what that's telling us. In this statement, Jesus is saying, I am radically and utterly committed to those who trust in Me. I am radically and utterly committed to you. Let me show you how that phrase gets that across. First of all, when He says, I will not eat, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine. He's just, He's been drinking, you know, eating and drinking, and He says, I'm not going to do this until I drink it anew. you go back to Acts 23, there's a very interesting story, and unfortunately, a couple people earlier today said, how does that story turn out? And I'm not here to tell you about that. That's another sermon. You can go read Acts 23. But in Acts 23, a group of men get together and decide, Paul has to go. St. Paul, the apostle, he has to die. And they take a vow, and the vow is, they vow not to eat or drink until they've killed him. Now, when you say, I take a vow not to eat or drink until I get a goal accomplished, that is putting the most, that is putting the highest possible priority on that goal. What you are saying is, I won't even eat before I have this done. I will, there is nothing more important. I won't even stop to eat. And that means, this kind of language means, this is utterly the highest priority of my life. And Jesus says, essentially, I will not eat or drink until what? Now, Matthew gives it a slightly longer version. Mark was very brief. If, you know, if Mark was a preacher, a lot of you would really enjoy going to his church because he was very brief. He always is making things shorter. Matthew always gives you slightly longer versions. But here's what Matthew says. Matthew says, gives it to us this way. He says, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine until I sit down, drink it anew with you in the kingdom of God. He's talking about the Messianic banquet. He's talking about the Messianic feast at the end of time. He's talking about the final day, the last day in which he sits down. So, here's what he's saying. He's saying, I am utterly committed, radically committed. There is no higher priority in my life than to get you home with me to Father. Father, that is an amazing statement. But that's not all. We're not only told the size of this commitment, which is, look at the magnitude of it. We're also told the shape of it. We're not only told how much he's committed to it, but we're also told here what he is ready to do in order to get it done. And that's because this verse 25, when he says, I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until the day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God, period. It says, and when they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives. That's the end of the meal. And that would have, that would, the apostles, the disciples who were there, would have been thunderstruck by the fact that that was the end of the meal. You say, why? I'm glad you asked that question. I'm here to tell you. This was a Passover meal. And the Passover meal was the annual commemoration of the great deliverance by God of the children of Israel, bringing them out of bondage in Egypt. And God in Exodus chapter 12 had said, every year, I want you to commemorate this great deliverance in which I brought you out of Egypt. And I want you to do that through a meal. Every family will sit down and once a night, once a year have a meal, the Passover meal, the same meal you had the night before I brought you out. And there was always three elements in that meal, always three. First, it was the bread. And the bread was unleavened bread. And the reason it was unleavened bread, and it was always unleavened bread, was that reminded them of the fact that they had to rush out at the very last minute. It talks about the haste, the riskiness of the time. And it was unleavened bread because nobody could wait around for it to rise, okay? And so, the first element in the Passover meal was you passed around the bread. And what the presider would always say at the Passover meal is, this is the bread of our affliction. This is the bread of our, the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, in the wilderness and so on. That's the first element. Second element was the wine. And the cup went around four times. There were four, four actually cups of wine, well, the cup went around four times to represent the four promises that God made to the children of Israel before he took them out. In Exodus 6, he says to them, these four great promises, he says, I will bring you out, I will rid you of their bondage, I will pay your redemption price, and I will take you away to be my people. And every time the cup goes around, the wine, it was to commemorate those four promises. So, first of all, you have the bread of affliction, and then you had the cup, and the third element in the Passover meal was the lamb. And yeah, that figures. You know, bread is great, right? Wine is great. You got to have something to drink, you have to have bread, but you need a main course. It's not much of a meal. And the main course was the lamb. Why? Because on the night before Passover, here's what God said. God said to the children of Israel, I'm going to spring you from Egypt, and here's how I'm going to spring you. I'm going to... send my sword of judgment down into Egypt, and the sword of judgment will fall on people. Now, why? Here's something pretty interesting. Why didn't God actually say, he's only, and I'm going to send my angel of judgment against the bad people. You know, the pagans. The people without the right beliefs. The people who do all sorts of lascivious and sinful things. He will come, or my angel will come, and just slaughter them. But you're good people. You believe in me. See, you follow my laws, and therefore you have nothing to fear. Don't worry. Don't even worry. No. What does God say? God says, I want every family among you, he says to the Israelites, to kill a lamb and put blood on the doorpost to show that you have sacrificed a lamb. Why? You know what that means? It's fascinating. It fascinates me. God did not send his angel down just to smite the bad people. He wasn't smiting a particular race. He wasn't smiting a particular religion. What God was doing was he was saying, I'm going to send my sword of judgment down there, and the sword of judgment will fall on all people who are what? All people who deserve judgment. And everybody deserves judgment. This sword is going to come down on everybody unless provision is made. You'll see that. The good people and the bad people. See? The people with the right religion, the people with the quote-unquote wrong religion. Why? God is no respecter of persons. The God of the Hebrew Scriptures is not the vindictive person that he's often, you know, depicted as. He's not just saying, Oh, you know, I'm going to lift up the people of the race that I like and put down the people of the race that I don't like. Oh, no. God says, I can spring you because what I can do is I can actually send down the sword of judgment into a group of people, but that means that everybody in that land will be subject to judgment unless, unless some provision is made for your sins. So, kill a lamb, put the blood on the door, take shelter under the blood of the lamb, and the angel of death will pass over that place. And that's the reason why every night, every year in the Passover, you have the bread, you have the cup, and you have the lamb. So, here's Jesus, and he's doing the Passover. And that night, you know, you read these words, you know, Michelle just read them to you. He said, Here's the bread. This is my body. Here's the cup. This is the blood of the covenant. Now, let's go. You are so used to this, especially if you've come to church in the past. You're so used to those words that you do not realize how that would have, how the disciples would have been thunderstruck by them in two ways. First of all, Jesus changed the Passover. He changed it. He did not send it out saying, This is the bread of the affliction of our fathers. He passes it around saying, This is the bread of my affliction. This is my body. Then he sends around the cup. He doesn't say, This is the cup of God's redemption. This is the cup of my redemption. This is the cup of my blood. So, he changes it. Do you know what kind of claim that is? In Exodus 12, verse 14, The Lord God says to the children of Israel, Never change the Passover. This must be a perpetual memorial. Do not change this. Who has the right to change the commander-in-chief's order? You know, if you're in an army and down comes the order of the commander-in-chief, who has the right to change that? Who has the right to say, Let's do something different? Only the commander-in-chief, of course, right? Nobody but the commander-in-chief of the army can change an order from the commander-in-chief. And for Jesus Christ to change what is said at the Passover means he's claiming to be the one who gave the original order. It's stupendous. You say, It's outrageous. Well, that's another sermon. But, you know, how do we know he is who he says he is? That's another sermon. That's not what we're talking about tonight. But what we are trying to say is he claimed it. You know, a lot of people look through the Bible and they say, Well, where does Jesus say he's God? I just think he's a wonderful man. If you know how to read it, it's almost every page. So the first thing that would have just shocked if you shocked the disciples is the claim that he could change what is said. But he didn't just claim, he didn't just change what was said at the Lord's Supper. He changed what was served. Around comes the bread, right? Okay. Around comes the cup, right? Great. Now let's go. to the Mount of Olives. Excuse me. Wait a minute. Excuse me. I've been to many Passovers as a disciples, and you know, I mean, I'm, you know, I'm 34, 32. I've been to, you know, if you're a 32-year-old Israelite, you've been to 32 Passovers. I mean, you never miss Passovers. I mean, that's the way you do it every year. Where is the main course? And one of the most stunning things about the Lord's Supper was Jesus Christ says, oh, I'm changing that. He not only changed what was said, he changed what was served. Around comes the bread. Around comes the cup. Have you ever noticed this, by the way, when we do the Lord's Supper? Have you ever noticed that when you go home, it wasn't much of a meal? I mean, you know, maybe you have never wanted to say that, huh? You say, I've never really wanted to say, but you know, I usually do need to eat after the Lord's Supper anyway. And here's the answer to that. Jesus didn't send around the lamb. What does that mean? What was that? There was no lamb on the table because the lamb was at the table. What Jesus is saying by not sending the lamb around is almost as cataclysmic as what he said when he took it upon himself to change the Passover. What he's saying is, I'm the lamb. He says, don't you understand, this is the night that is different than every other night. He says, as great as the deliverance from Egypt was, I'm giving you a deliverance from sin and death and evil itself. As important as it was to get out from under the economic and social bondage of Egypt, how much more important would it be to get out from under the bondage of evil and death? Those lambs were necessary so that you could realize that we will only be saved and accepted by grace. You see, every family that put the blood up there was actually saying, we realize that we are not good people who are going to be saved because we're better than the Egyptians. We are sinners saved by grace alone. That's what it meant. It was very important for them to do that. But Jesus is saying, do you really think that the death of those lambs could have actually paid for the sin, could have made atonement? Jesus is saying, I am the lamb. Behold, the lamb of God who taketh away the sins of the world. Now here's what's so fascinating. Jesus is saying, Jesus is saying, I tell you the truth. And what is he saying? I am so radically committed to you. Most people, when they say, I will not eat or drink until I accomplish this goal, what they're saying is, I will die or accomplish my goal. But I'm saying tonight, I will die in order to accomplish my goal. I will die for you. I am the ultimate sacrifice. I will pay for your sins. Take shelter under my blood. And there'll be no condemnation for you. No condemnation at all. Now, we have to move on to the second amen statement, but here's what you have to see. Just for a second. He is saying, I am radically committed to you. Now, there's got to be somebody out there. I'm going to take a minute here on just on this, just a minute. Somebody's out there. There's got to be people out there saying, oh my, I can't believe you're talking about using this sacrificial language, blood sacrifice. There's plenty of people, and surely there's some in this room, who find that extremely disturbing. And maybe very disturbed that I'm talking about it as if the idea of Jesus' sacrifice, his blood sacrifice, being an image of the animal sacrifices of the Hebrew scriptures. Some people are very upset saying, why are you talking like that? Why are you accepting all that? And I've had many people say to me, you know, just, and I can understand this. They say, look, we've got to get beyond that. In ancient times, people had this idea of God or the gods as being these vindictive, peevish divinities who needed to be placated and needed to be, you know, sort of buttered up with all sorts of sacrifices and even human sacrifices. I mean, so you read, you know, there's Agamemnon. Remember the story of Agamemnon, the Greek king on the way to Troy, to the Trojan War? And the winds were against him. So what does he do? He sacrifices his daughter to please and appease the gods. Remember Iphigenia? And he sacrifices her. That's how the story goes. And then, of course, the gods are appeased. They see that he honors them, and he takes them that seriously, and then he gets good wins. And, you know, it's very typical for people to say, when I hear about the cross, when I hear about Jesus, the lamb that was slain, he says, that's just terrible. What you're saying is the God of the Bible is one of those bloodthirsty gods that needs to be appeased by blood sacrifice. Surely we have to get beyond that. We have to get beyond that to a God of love, people. When Jesus Christ said what he said here, he was utterly repudiating all those primitive religions. Absolutely. Don't you see all those religions have gods or God that says, bring your sacrifice, make it costly, make it a daughter or a son, bring your sacrifice, make it very costly, and if it's good enough, then I will have favor upon you. But Jesus Christ, when he changes what is said at the Passover, is claiming to be God himself, and when he changes what is served, is saying, I am God, but I don't come demanding a sacrifice, I come providing a sacrifice. I don't come demanding payment for sin, I come providing payment of sin. I come to substitute myself. That is utterly the opposite of all those primitive old faiths. Do you understand that? Utterly and completely the opposite. There is a God of grace, and I would go so far as to say this. When somebody says, I don't believe in this whole idea of sacrifice, and I don't believe God needed something like that. Well, then I would suggest, just for a second, that you don't have a God as loving as the God of the Bible. You say, well, the God of the Bible must be a kind of harsh person who needs the sacrifice. Don't you understand? Remember what I just said? When Jesus Christ comes and does what he does, he is not saying, I, God, will be happy to favor you if you provide sacrifice and payment. No, he is the God who comes and provides the sacrifice and provides the payment himself. And therefore, the God of the Bible says, I love you enough to die for you. If you don't have a God who says there must be payment for sin, then you have a God that spent nothing to love you. When Jesus Christ said, I tell you the truth, I will let nothing stop me from getting you home to Father, it meant he was willing to die. So if anybody says, well, I don't believe in a God who needs, you know, a sacrifice for sin and atonement for sin, then you have a God who didn't pay a thing to love you. I've had people over the years saying, well, I believe in a God of love. I just don't believe in all this stuff about Jesus and the cross. And I always say, what is it, what did it cost your God to love you? And they said, well, nothing. He just loves everyone. And I said, well, actually, I think the God of the Bible, even though you don't like that aspect of him, is a more loving God than the God you've got. With all due respect. So first thing we see is he says, I am radically committed to you. I am utterly committed to you. There's nothing more important to me, not even my own life. Nothing more important to me than to get you at that feast, to get you home. Now that's the first great amen statement. But that's not all he says. And this is what's so amazing. There's the second amen statement. And Mark must have meant, Jesus certainly must have meant, that we're supposed to put them together. And look at what they are. What's the first amen statement? I tell you the truth, I will not drink again of the fruit of the vine until the day when I drink it anew. In other words, I tell you the truth, I will never let you down. That's the first thing you've got to know if you want a relationship with Jesus Christ. But look at the second amen statement. The second thing he says you've got to know. Ah, verse 30, I tell you the truth, Jesus answered, you will disown me. Now why does he use the term, I will tell you the truth? Why does he use this solemn amen for something like that? And here's what I'm suggesting. It is just as important if you really want to have a relationship with Christ that changes your life, it's just as important for you to know that he will never let you down. But it's just as important for you to know that you will let him down and he knows it. See, he is saying you've got to know two things if you want to be a Christian. You've got to know that I am radically committed to you, but secondly, you've got to know that I'm counter-conditionally committed to you. Counter-conditionally. Yeah, what I'm trying to say is this is so strong that even the word unconditional is a little bit too weak. He is saying, I'm committed to you in spite of the fact that I know you're going to disown me. Look, in fact, look at it. I think it's almost humorous. Look at verse 27. He says, you will all fall away, he says to his disciples. And then verse 28, but after I have risen, I will go ahead of you into Galilee. What he's saying is, you will all fall away, but I'm on my way to Galilee and I'll pick you up on the way. He's saying, you will all fall away, but listen, we've got a job to do. I'm going to be rising from the dead. We're going to go to Galilee. We're going to do things. He says, the fact that you're going to disown me, the fact you're going to fall away, the fact that you're going to let me down, I'm not going to let that come between you and me. I'm not going to let that come between me and the fact that you're going to let that come on. I'm not going to let that come. I'm not going to let that go. You know, I've got the fact that when I go to Galilee, what I'm going to do, I'm going to let that The fact you're going to fall away, the fact that you're going to let me down, I'm not going to let that come between you and me. I'm not going to let that come between me and the goal I have for us to someday sit down together at the Messianic banquet. He says, I want you to know that in my scheme of salvation, I have taken it completely into consideration that you will let me down. Now, if you put the first amen, which is, I tell you the truth, I will never let you down. Now, in the second amen, I tell you the truth, you will let me down. You redeemed people will let me down. You, my disciples, will let me down. You, my closest buddies, will let me down. Then you have this. The gospel is, you're not saved by your commitment to him. You're saved because of his commitment to you. You understand that? In other words, my salvation is not based on my committing myself to him. My salvation is based on his faithfulness and his committing himself to me. And it's counter conditional. Now, somebody says, but wait a minute. Don't we have to have faith? Now we're finally in a position to, yeah, of course we do. Now we're in a position to understand what that faith is that connects you to Jesus. Jesus, there's this great story in Mark 9, where Jesus comes down off the mountain and there's a man who's got a little boy, or I don't know if he's little, but he's got a son, a boy, I think. And this boy is possessed. And this boy is being thrown into water and thrown into fire and is completely out of control. And the father has brought him to be healed. And Jesus says to him, what do you want? He says, I want my son healed. And Jesus says, all things are possible to those who believe. And the father says, oh, help my unbelief. Now, I like that. You know why? In other words, let me paraphrase. He says, I want my son healed. And Jesus says, all things are possible to those who believe. And what does the father say? Oh, no, he says. He says, oh, no. He says, I'm filled with doubts. I'm filled with uncertainties. I don't know. He says, I'm filled with unbelief. Help me. And what does Jesus do? Does he say, well, come back. Come back later. Work on this. You know, read the Bible till you believe. No, what does he say? He heals his son. Why? Because that is the faith. That's the faith that connects. In other words, it was a lack of faith in himself. And it's sort of a desperate need for Jesus was all you need. I mean, put it this way. Imagine you're falling off a cliff. I can't think of a better illustration than this. If I've given this to you in person or private, sorry, I can't think of a better one than this. I'll try, but until then, imagine you're falling off a cliff and you're going to be dashed on the rocks below and you see a branch sticking out and it's well-rooted into the cliff. How much faith do you need in the branch for it to save you? Do you need to say, I know that branch will save me. Aha, I see that branch. No problem. Look at those rocks below. No sweat. Yes, I'm teetering. Oh, I got it. I know that. No, no. Of course, all you need. How much faith do you need in it? Just enough to grab it. Because it's the branch that saves you, not your faith in the branch that saves you. The level of faith, the quality of faith is not what saves you. And see, there's an awful lot of people that would say because of the first amen, yes, I know Jesus is committed to me. I know he's died for me, but I've got to be committed to him. And Jesus is saying, I want you to know that my commitment to you is counter conditional. You will let me down. Everyone, all you need is need. All you need is nothing. But most people don't have it. All you need is to say, nothing in my hands I bring, simply to the cross I cling. All you need is to say, I don't believe enough. I will disown you. I will let you down. I won't be able to keep this up. And Jesus, but you've got to help me. And Jesus says, now we can start to work together. Now, if you believe these two things, you can be a Christian. You can live a Christian life. I know a lot of people that know the first one, or at least they say, I believe the first one. He's committed to me. But when you let him down, you go nuts. You say, oh, he'll never have me back. But Jesus says, I tell you the truth, you need to see both of these things. You know, there's a couple reasons why people give up. I've had many people say to me, I tried my very best to live a Christian life, tried my very best, and I gave up. It was just too hard. And if you do, if you have given up, I suggest you don't know these two amen statements together. One reason people give up is you think that his commitment to you is based on your commitment to him. And when you flub up, you feel like he's gone. Or why would he put up? based on yours your commitment what what it is will grow if it's based on you see that my your salvation is based on mine another reason people give up though is a lot of people say i'm going to live a christian life and when god doesn't seem to be answering their prayers they give up because they say oh i'm so disappointed i mean things aren't going very well but that again shows you think that you obey in order to get accepted and now that you're obeying god owes you but you're accepted and then you obey your commitment has to be based on his commitment to you not vice versa now where does this leave us right here two things if you understand these two things together then you have both an enormous amount of spiritual authority and a pattern for patient service first of all an enormous amount of spiritual authority once you realize he's done this for you then there's really no limit no limit to your obedience what's really unusual about jesus is he puts amen at the beginning of his statements you know how unusual that is in the in the hebrew scriptures i mean in judaism amen meant uh it was something you said at the when you were listening to someone teach when someone was teaching in a synagogue the elders would sit up front and they would listen and they would weigh what was said and if it made sense to them and it sounded like it was the truth at the end of this of the teaching the elders would say what amen and amen meant we have weighed what you said and it is true but jesus christ starts his statements with amen bill lane who's a a scholar of greek and hebrew says jesus use of amen to introduce and endorse his own words is without analogy in all of jewish literature and in the remainder of the new testament and here's why he's doing it jesus starts his statements amen because he's saying because i've bought you with a price because i've died for you now i take away your right to sit in judgment on what i'm saying i take away your right you can't amen me jesus is saying see years ago when i when my middle son michael my middle son michael was not an easy person to control and i would say michael do this and michael would always say dad i mean i can't tell you how many i can hear him now so dad i'd be happy to obey you if you would just give me a reason why and i said michael just do it and he said but just if you just gave me a reason why that made sense to me i could do it and i would say michael then it wouldn't be obedience so you don't in other words michael when you say i'll obey if it makes sense to me i'll obey if i can weigh it sit in judgment upon it and decide it makes sense and is profitable and and to me in other words michael you don't really want a father you don't want to obey you're taking applications you see you know you're saying if you want to be my parent for today i'll i will choose the person that i think you know looks like they have my best interest in mind and and is telling me things that fit in with what i already know to be true and right and profitable to my uh uh you know to to my goals and so on jesus christ by starting his statements with the amen is saying because i bought you with a price you must do what i say you can't weigh it i take i ask you not to decide whether or not to obey me you must obey me and if that sounds harsh it's personal see what jesus is really saying is i want you of course i want your time of course i want things from you but i want you i want you to give me yourself i want you to hold on to yourself i don't want you to keep hold of yourself i don't want you to say i'll be happy to obey you jesus if and when it makes sense to me you're holding on to yourself give me your whole self look what i've done for you how can you come to grips with somebody who's given himself utterly to you without giving yourself utterly to him that's the reason why paul says in romans 12 1 make your whole selves a living sacrifice which is your reasonable service you see to not how can you come to grips with somebody who's given himself utterly for you without you giving yourself utterly to him to not do so is as stupid as it is immoral it's not reasonable but then there's the second thing you not only have a new spiritual authority the second thing you get you can relax you don't have to succeed see what's interesting about jesus is he makes this announcement about what he's going to do and immediately he's let down he makes i tell you the truth i'm committed to you and immediately the people let him down and this is our pattern our job is to go out and serve that's what his pattern was it was a pattern of weakness it was a pattern of sacrifice was a pattern of service our job is to go out and serve our job is to go out and find it is not to choose where we live on the basis of what makes us happy safe recognized or successful but on the basis of is it doing good for people i don't choose my career on is it being, am I doing good for people? Service. See, Jesus Christ was the upside down king. He came not in strength, but in weakness. He came not to gain power, but to give away power. And we're called the same thing. To love people who are going to let us down. To love people who don't look in the long run like it's all that profitable for us. You know, I like, I keep, I downloaded the latest Lord of the Rings movie trailer. And there's an interesting place, you know, the hero of Lord of the Rings is a little hobbit named Frodo. He's played by Elijah Woods in the movie coming up. And he's a little guy, right? And there's one place in the trailer where the great elf queen, Galadriel, looks down at him, played by Cate Blanchett, by the way, and says something that's not in the Lord of the Rings book. Tolkien did not write it. He looks down and says, even the smallest person can change the course of the future. Now, that's very 1960s. That's very, you know what, it doesn't matter who you are, but if you try hard enough, you know, you may not have any, you know, you may not have any legs, you may not have any feet, you may not, you may, but you, you can run the New York marathon. If you really try hard enough, it's very 60s. Anybody can do anything they want. I'm sure Tolkien would never have said that. I don't think he would have said it. It doesn't mean I'm not going to look forward to the movie. I just don't think he would have said that. Here's what he would, here's what he would have her saying. Not even the smallest person can change the course of the future. Tolkien was a Christian. Tolkien was soaked in the gospel. And it actually comes out in the book. Because what she would have said is, only the smallest person can change the course of the future. Tolkien sets up his book so that the only person who can actually overcome the evil force that's threatening the whole world is not a great person, not a big person, not a powerful person, but a little person, a weak person, a person who's going to be overlooked. Because he understood the gospel, that the way up now is down. The way to gain power is to give away power. The way to rule is to serve. The way to change the world, the way to change civilization is the way Jesus did, which is give yourself completely to serve other people, even though you may get it in the neck. And see, now you can do it because you know what he feels about you. You know he's committed to getting you home. You don't have to worry. You don't have to keep records. You don't have to say, I'm giving a lot, but am I getting anything? Oh, compared to what you're going to get. See, he's committed to bringing you to the messianic banquet. So you get a new spiritual authority, and you get a pattern of humble service and a complete security, knowing that he is utterly committed to you. Though he knows you're going to let him down, he will never let you down. He will never, ever, ever, ever, ever forsake you. Let's pray. Our Father, we thank you for giving us the assurances of this text, the assurances of the death. What does the death of Christ mean? It means he is completely committed to us. It means nothing, not even death, will stop him from taking us home, from loving us, from saving us. Nothing will stop him. We thank you, Father, for these kinds of assurances. We would all admit to you that we really don't live much in the light of them. We would all admit to you that we don't have the humility or the confidence that comes from knowing this. We don't have the humility toward other people, and we don't have the confidence toward life that would come from knowing this. Let us know it. Help us to get whatever it takes for us to know it deep in our hearts. We pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
