TITLE: You Must Be Born Again
SCRIPTURE: John 19:38-42; 3:1-8
TOPICS: Identity Salvation
SERIES: St. John’s Passion
URL: https://gospelinlife.com/sermon/you-must-be-born-again/

============================================================

Tonight's scripture reading comes from the book of John, chapter 19, verses 38 through 42, and then we'll go back to chapter 3, verses 1 through 8. Later, Joseph of Arimathea asked Pilate for the body of Jesus. Now, Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but secretly, because he feared the Jews. With Pilate's permission, he came and took the body away. He was accompanied by Nicodemus, the man who earlier had visited Jesus at night. Nicodemus brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about 75 pounds. Taking Jesus' body, the two of them wrapped it, with spices, in strips of linen. This was in accordance with Jewish burial customs. At the place where Jesus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden, a new tomb in which no one had ever been laid. Because it was the Jewish day of preparation, and since the tomb was nearby, they laid Jesus there. Now, there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a member of the Jewish ruling council. He came to Jesus at night and said, Rabbi, we know you are a teacher who has come from God, for no one could perform the miraculous signs you are doing if God were not with him. In reply, Jesus declared, I tell you the truth, no one can see the kingdom of God unless he is born again. How can a man be born when he is old? Nicodemus asked. Surely he cannot enter a second time into his mother's womb to be born. Jesus answered, I tell you the truth, no one can enter the kingdom of God unless he is born of water and the Spirit. Flesh gives birth to flesh, but the Spirit gives birth to Spirit. You should not be surprised at my saying, you must be born again. The wind blows wherever it pleases. You hear its sound, but you cannot tell where it comes from or where it is going. So it is with everyone born of the Spirit. This is God's word. Every one of the four Gospels tells us that Jesus was buried in a garden tomb by Joseph of Arimathea, who was a member of the Sanhedrin, the ruling council of Israel under the Roman imperial government. But only the Gospel of John tells us that along with Joseph of Arimathea, another member of the Sanhedrin buried Jesus with Joseph of Arimathea, and his name was Nicodemus. Only John tells us about Nicodemus because John in chapter 3 earlier in the book has given us the record of a conversation between Jesus and Nicodemus. And in John chapter 19, we learn the result of the conversation in John 3. So you can't understand John 19 unless you understand John 3 and read them together, so we're going to do it. And when we read them together, we'll realize that the point of John, the point of Jesus is, you must be born again. That's the point. I hope you'll stay for the rest of the sermon, even though I've already told you the point up front. You must be born again. The new birth, born again. Christianity, new birth. What do we learn here about it? We learn four things about the new birth, okay? Who it's for, what it means, why it comes, how it looks. Okay? See? In other words, who it's for, what it means and is, why it comes to us, and how, once we receive it, how do we look? What does it look like? So first of all, let's look at who it's for. Verse 7, chapter 3, you, Nicodemus, must be born again. Now, to get into this, we're going to have to do a lot of work. You know, usually at sermons, I do all the work, and you guys come and listen. But tonight, we're all going to have to do some work because you're not going to be able to hear what Jesus originally meant by this term unless you spend some time bracketing out, working very hard to eliminate all of the modern political freight and baggage and nuances and connotation that this term born again has. You can't just say born again. Oh, I know what that means. No, you don't. You know what it has come to mean, but you don't know what Jesus originally meant by it. And if you're going to understand what he originally meant by it, you have to not only get down into the metaphor of it, but you have to take a look and see who he said it to if you want to understand what he means when he says, you must be born again. Most people today, I think, and I certainly have talked to a lot of people about this recently and all the 20 years ago, think of the born again experience or the born again person, they think of a type. When they hear, oh, this person's born again, they think of a type. They believe that there are some types of people who are emotional and maybe who are very, very broken people and they need a cathartic emotional experience. And there are others who feel like, well, born again folks are people who are disoriented and they need a lot of moral structure in their lives. So there's, you know, a lot of people say, yes, I have a friend or a relative who had a born again experience. Either the person was very broken, you know, was an alcoholic, had some kinds of problems in his or her life and had this born again experience. Well, that's because they're very broken people and they, I guess, need that. Or they know somebody who has had a born again experience. They say, these are people who seem to want moral authority. They need to join a church where there's lots of rules. They need structure. And that's that kind of person who needs that kind of moral structure. But when Jesus says to Nicodemus, you must be born again, he's smashing all of these ideas, all of these preconceptions. Why? Well, let's think about who Nicodemus was. He was a ruler of a Sanhedrin. He was a ruling, he was an older man. He was a religious leader. He was highly successful. So first of all, he was extremely educated. He'd be what we call a professor. Very cognitive, very educated, not at all emotional. Secondly, he was very successful, very pulled together, not in any way a broken man. But most interestingly of all, he would have been incredibly moral, exceedingly religious, you know. He would have been a person who, as a Pharisee, was living under hundreds of moral rules and therefore was as moral as a person could be. And you say, yes, yes, I know you've talked to me about the Pharisees. They were nasty, bigoted people. Not all of them, and not this one. Let me show you something interesting. Here is a Pharisee, and he's a religious leader, and he's a religious scholar. He's at the top of his profession. He's an insider. And he comes to this man, Jesus, who's very unpopular with his class. So he's showing a lot of personal, professional courage. Secondly, he calls him rabbi. That's unbelievably generous. Jesus is just a young carpenter who's never gone to school, never gone up through the ranks. And a member of the Sanhedrin has the courtesy and the generosity to call him rabbi. And he says, I want to hear more about this. You know, you've done some things that, I'm open to you. So here is an open-minded man. Here's a kind man. Here's a generous man. Incredibly moral, but extremely emotionally healthy, well-adjusted, kind, open-minded, admirable in every way. And yet Jesus has the audacity to say, you must be born again. You know what that means? You, Nicodemus, must be born again. When he chooses a highly religious person, highly religious and moral, and says, you must be born again, he's not calling a person into highly structured, moral. He's not calling that man into morality and traditional religion. The challenge to be born again is a challenge to traditional morality and religion. If you think, oh, it's getting really, really religious. No, he was already religious, yet he had to be born again. And when Jesus Christ chose a highly well-adjusted, kind, generous, pulled-together, successful man, a man who was perfectly happy, perfectly pulled together, not broken, everything about his life was fine, and says, you've got to be born again. You know what that means? That means we've all got to be born again. There's nobody that could be left out. See, it's not just for people who need to get religious. Religious and irreligious people need to be born again. It's not just for broken people who are messed up. No, extremely happy, very well adjusted, everything working in your life, and broken people, everything. You all must be born again. We all must be born again. By Jesus choosing Nicodemus and saying, you must be born again, the question, who is the new birth for? The answer is everybody. And that's the reason why, for example, 1 John, pardon me, not 1 John, but earlier in John, the gospel, chapter 1, verse 12 and 13, and we read this, to all who received him, that's Jesus, to all who received him, who believed in his name, he gave the right to become children of God, children born, not of natural descent or of human decision, but born of God. Did you hear that? As many as received him, as many as believed in Jesus Christ were born again, born of God. It's not like, well, here's the Christians, and then there's these born again types that are particularly broken or emotional or need a lot of moral. No. To believe in Christ is to be born again. You have to be born again to believe in Christ. 1, verse 12 and 13 says. It's not what the Bible says. You, me, we, doesn't matter. You need to be born again. That's the first point. Now, the second point. Okay, well, what does that mean? What does the new birth mean? And when we take a look at this term, born again, we see two things that it means. Born, that word actually means radical spiritual equality. Born again means radical death and resurrection. The new birth means two things. First of all, let's go to the first one. radical spiritual equality. Now, when Jesus Christ looks at Nicodemus and in verse 3 says, you've got to be born again. You've got to start all over if you're going to become a citizen of the kingdom of God. See verse 3 of chapter 3? Here he's saying to a man who's on his way to the kingdom of God, someone who's done a lot, someone who has performed well, someone who has lived a very good life, someone who has a tremendous track record. He's a virtuous man. He's got a man of character, probably a man of generosity, open-minded, and yet highly moral, knew the Bible, trying to obey God in every way. He's got a great record. You know what Jesus says? It counts for nothing. You've got to start all over. You've got to be born again. When I started doing, I used to, you know, do a monthly breakfast I would speak at at the Harvard Club, and we started that many, many years ago, and back when New York City was much rougher, I mean, when I should say Manhattan was a lot rougher place 18, 19 years ago, I remember sometimes I would come up out of the 42nd Street and 6th Avenue subway, and it's only about, you know, it's only like, you know, a short block this way and a half a long block this way to get from this subway station to the Harvard Club. Um, but what I would do is I'd be passing obvious street walkers, obvious prostitutes, drug dealers, people doing deals and drugs, homeless people, the people at the bottom, the losers of society, and then I'd walk in the door and, you know, wood paneling, high-backed real leather chairs, and roaring fires, all the trappings of privilege and power. It was like, I would get, you know, sort of like culture, I was getting the bends. You know, if you're down, down too low, if you come up too fast, you know, isn't it right? If you come up out of the water too fast, you get nitrogen bubbles in your bloodstream. And it was sort of like, oh my word. And yet, you know, here's what Jesus is saying. It would make sense, you might think, if Jesus looked at, uh, the street walkers and the prostitutes and the, and the, and the, and the people at the bottom morally and socially and said, well, now if you want to become citizens of the kingdom of God, you've got to start all over. Your record is terrible. Nothing you've done counts. You've got to, you need a fresh start. You need to be born again. But he's saying this to Nicodemus. Shouldn't he be saying to Nicodemus, well, Nicodemus, you're sort of a spiritual, moral adolescent. And if you want to get to maturity and full adulthood, you need to enhance, you need to supplement. You've done fairly well. You've come to this place, but you've got to go to this. No, he says, you've got to be born again too. Nothing you have done counts. Nothing. You've got to start all over. No matter who you are, if you want to get into the kingdom of God, you've got to be born again. This is a statement of radical spiritual equality. It's astounding. Now, how could he say that? Well, in this case, I let's, let's talk about what we often talk about here at Redeemer. What is sin? Sin, according to the Bible, is self-centeredness, self-absorption. Or put another way, sin is the thing that makes you want everything to orbit around you and your ego and around your needs and your happiness. So you might do charity to the poor as long as it makes you feel good about yourself and as long as you feel better and it doesn't cut in too much to your lifestyle. Well, you might have friends. You might get married. You might do many, many things as long as it fulfills you, as long as it's meeting your needs and making you happy. Because, you know, if that relationship is not, well then, you know, that's evil. That's self-centeredness. That's what makes the world a miserable place. That's what alienates you from God. Self-centeredness, self-absorption. But there's two ways for you to be your own savior, two ways for you to have everything in the universe center on you, two ways for you to be your own God, two ways to be self-centered. One is by being very bad, breaking all the rules, trampling on people, lying, cheating, killing, harming people. The other way to be very self-centered, make everything tone on you, is to be very, very good, very, very moral. Keep all the rules so that everyone you think, including God, has to honor you and bless you. Thank you. Thank you. kinds of self-centeredness make the world a terrible place because the self-centeredness that leads to bad living, where you're harming people, that makes the world a bad place, but self-centeredness that is the basis for good living, good living self-centeredness. I am going to like myself and I'm going to make everybody, including God, bless me because I'm a good person. I'm a decent person. Everybody needs to recognize that self-righteousness. You see, pride, looking down the nose at other people, condemning, judgmentalism, that makes the world a terrible place too. And that means both kinds of self-centeredness destroy the soul and alienate you from God and everybody's got to be born again. What we really need is to have the soul decentered. See, now here's what happens. If you say, here's what may happen. You may say, oh, okay, self-centeredness, sin is self-centeredness, good. I'm going to be unselfish. Then I'll feel good about myself. Then God will have to bless me. Don't you see? Something has to happen besides you just trying harder to be good, trying harder to be unselfish. You know, there's no way to, you're just making it worse. Stop it. Something has to come in from the outside to de-center the self so that your little ego doesn't revolve around, you don't get everything to revolve around your ego, but your ego begins to revolve around God and your neighbor. Something has to come in from the outside to just push you off of that self-centeredness. And it doesn't matter whether you're a good person or a bad person. You need to be born again. Radical spiritual equality. Everybody's the same before God. Everybody's the same before God. That's the first thing it means. The second thing it means is it means death and resurrection. Think of the implication of born again. To be born again means there needs, it's born again means a rebirth. Rebirth happens after death. Something has to die for it to be reborn. And therefore, Jesus' salvation is not moving from strength to strength. Jesus' salvation is not, well, I got this level of strength, but now I need vitamin supplements. I need to move on. I'm a spiritual adolescent. I need to move on to spiritual adulthood. No. Jesus' salvation only happens through death. And that death is death to the ego, death to self-sufficiency, death to pride, death to the thing, which is ruining everybody's life and ruining the world. Somebody who put this awfully well, Andrew Delbanco, who teaches at Columbia University, recently I got to meet him after all these years, written some really great books. And some years ago, he was writing a long essay on AA, Alcoholics Anonymous. And during his research, he visited some AA meetings. And he tells about an incident that happened at one of these meetings. He says, some years ago, I was at an AA meeting, which I attended in a New York church basement. And we were listening to a well-dressed young man at the AA meeting who was talking at length about how his mistakes were caused by others, how he was going to hold people who had wronged him to account, and how he was going to take control of his own life. And he wasn't going to let people do this to him anymore. And while he was speaking, the man sitting next to me, this is Andrew Delbanco talking, the man sitting next to me, a black man of about 40 in dreadlocks and shades, leaned over and whispered, I used to feel that way too before I achieved low self-esteem. And Delbanco immediately laughed. And then he suddenly said, wait a minute, this was more than a good line. As the speaker bombarded us with phrases about, I'm going to believe in myself, I'm going to tough it out, I'm going to take control of my life. The man beside me had taken refuge in the old Christian doctrine that pride is the enemy of hope. What he meant by his joke about self-esteem and about the other young man was that no one can save himself by dint of his own efforts. He thought the speaking man was still lost, lost in himself, but without knowing it. Divine grace waits for the barricade of pride to be lowered. As Richard Sibbes, the Puritan once wrote, a holy despair in ourselves is the ground of true hope. Now, that's very, very profound. And that's really what the new birth is about. Now, it feels like death. It doesn't feel like a death to say, I'm going to try harder. You know, I've done fairly well, but I've also failed and I just need to go, I need to move my spiritual and moral, my whole life up to a new level. That's not a death. That's, you know, that's a shot of adrenaline. That's a surge. That's a supplement. But Jesus says, no, the new birth is a death and a resurrection. Here's the death. have been trying to achieve self-esteem, they're really forms of addiction. All the ways that I have been trying to achieve self-esteem through my career, through finding Mr. Right or Miss Right or whoever's going to make everything right in my life, or through my art or whatever. All these ways of trying to achieve self-esteem have been a pit, a swamp, a trap. They're just driving me and driving me. And that's the reason why I have to make everything revolve around myself because I need people to approve of me and I need things to go well. And I need the death of giving up on self-sufficiency, giving up on trying to achieve self-esteem through my own achievement and my own performance. I need the explosive release of laying down my pride and laying down that whole approach to save myself and just ask for his mercy and grace and base my self-esteem on a whole other grounding. And it's when you realize that, not like, the new birth is not, I'm going to try harder to live a better life. Absolutely not. The new birth is I have a whole new grounding for my self-appreciation, a whole new identity. I realize my self-sufficiency has to be laid down and especially the idea of achieving self-esteem through my personal performance. That's the reason why, look, even though none of that language, that's sort of AA language, but it's okay. I mean, it's modern and it's one way of getting across what the Bible is talking about. Here's an older one, Martin Luther. And Martin Luther said, I was laboring diligently and anxiously to understand Paul's text, Romans 117, where Paul says, the righteousness of God is revealed in the gospel. I didn't understand it until I grasped that the righteousness of God that was being spoken of is that righteousness which through grace and sheer mercy God gives us through Christ by faith. Thereupon I felt myself to be born again and to have gone through open doors into paradise. For when I saw the difference that law is one thing and grace and the gospel is another, I broke through. That's Martin Luther. That's pretty theological language. That's, you know, he was an Augustinian monk. Okay, he doesn't, didn't, never went to an AA meeting. He achieved the joy of low self-esteem. He went through the death of saying I'm a failure and this way of even going about it is making it worse. And he says I have to do something to stop centering everything on me and everything on my achievement and everything on my performance and I need the grace of God. So what does it mean? It means radical spiritual equality of all people and radical death, spiritual death into a resurrection. Thirdly, why is this possible? Why can God give us this kind of grace? Why is the new birth available to us? Here's why. This is going to be a little hard for men here to understand, but I actually think it's actually kind of hard for women to understand too. I've seen three children born very up close, okay? And men, if you've seen the goriness of a birth, the utter messiness of a birth, you begin to understand a little bit about what this metaphor means. But, you know, women, listen, even you, in the age of epidurals and anesthetics and modern medicine, I don't think any of us really understand what Jesus was talking about. By the way, guys, if you don't know what an epidural is, ask somebody who's, ask a woman. Okay. I'm not sure any of us understand this, even though you get a sense of it if you've actually been through a birth or if you've even watched a birth, and that's this. Children are born only through the labor, through the pain, and through the blood of someone else. When my children were born, they weren't born by their own effort. They were born by someone else's effort. And even in modern times, it's kind of horrendous. And what Jesus Christ was saying is, when you must be born again, your salvation, your connection to God has to be a birth. What is he saying? He's saying it's not of your works, it's not of your efforts, but he's not just saying, oh, God just lets everybody in, he has no standards. It's by the blood, by the labor, and by the pain of someone else. You see, in those days, every time a woman gave birth, there was far more pain, there was far more suffering. was brought into this world, a woman's life teetered on the edge of leaving this world. It was always touch and go. And many, many, many times, far more than now, children got new life through the death of their mother. And you know what Jesus is saying? There is absolutely no way for you to get this kind of grace unless it's by the pain, the labor, the suffering, and the blood of another. Who would that be? We don't have to speculate, even though it's not hard to, because in chapter 16, Jesus makes this amazing statement. He says, in chapter 16, 19, he says, in a little while you will see me no more. He's talking the night before he dies. He says, in a little while you will see me no more. And now listen to what he says. A woman giving birth to a child has pain because her hour has come. But when her baby is born, she forgets the anguish because of her joy that a child is born into the world. Why does he say, I'm about to die, and then suddenly he says, a woman, okay, suddenly he's talking, I'm going to die. And then he says, a woman giving birth to a child has pain because her hour has come. No other place in the book of John does the term hour mean anything other than the death of Jesus Christ. Whenever Jesus talks about his death in the book of John, he calls it his hour. In John chapter 2, he says to his mother, my hour is not yet coming, talking about his death. In John chapter 12, he says, when my hour has come, I'll be lifted up and I will draw everyone to myself. And now he has the audacity to say, I'm about to die. And when a woman in her pain, in her hour of labor and anguish and pain, sees the child, she forgets all about it because of her joy of the child. You know what he's saying? He's saying, I'm your spiritual mother. It's not through the risk of my life, but through the cost of my life, you can be born into the world. Through my pain, through my labor, through my blood, and through my death, you are given birth. Because I'm taking your penalty for sins and I want you to know something. I'm paying for your sins on the cross, but here's what I want you to know. When a woman sees that child, she forgets all about her anguish. What does that mean? It doesn't mean she can't, just doesn't hurt. She means the joy overwhelms the anguish. This is an amazing statement. I've actually seen that two or three times. And for Jesus to say, in spite of the fact that I've gone through infinite labor, I'm going through infinite blood, I'm going through infinite suffering, I'm going through infinite cost in order to bring you into the world so you can have God's grace and you can be born again. When I see you turn to me, when I see you born again, when I see you turn to me with your face toward me in faith, all of my suffering's worth it. I'm like a mother laughing through the tears of my labor, seeing the child born and put on my tummy. It's an amazing, absolutely amazing image and metaphor. And if you think about what that means, about how Jesus Christ looks at you, if you turn to him, it's life-changing. It's transforming. There's one more thing to think about, and only one. What does this look like when it comes into your life? How do you know you're born again? Or if you are born again, what do you see? Now we can get to chapter 19, finally. And you know what chapter 19 shows us? Two old, prominent, top of the social chain, the end of the food chain men, Joseph and Nicodemus, they do two things. The first thing is they go right to Pilate, right to the Roman governor, right to a man who's just executed this person, Jesus Christ, for treason. The kind of governor who will be suspicious of any sympathizers and who might actually arrest his sympathizers on the spot and say, give us the body. Incredible boldness, incredible courage. They don't care. They know the danger. They don't care. It's probably the most manly thing they've ever done. But on the other hand, they personally anoint the body. They take the cadaver. It's smelly. It's old. It's bloody. And to anoint a body and to prepare it for a burial was one of the most smelly, one of the most awful, one of the most demeaning things. Who did that? In that society, the only people who ever did that were who? Women. Women because they were at the bottom rung of the ladder. And yet something has happened to Joseph and Nicodemus that they're not embarrassed to do this. It's not only the most masculine thing they've ever done, it's the most feminine thing they've ever done. They don't care anymore about their class, their station. They don't care about their macho pride. They love the one who did this for them. There's a boldness and a humility that they never had before. that they never had before. confident and far more tender and intimate than they've ever been before. Why? Because, you see, religion, or even irreligion, that bases your self-image on your performance, it can either give you a boldness if you're living up to your standards, but not a humility because you're proud, or it can give you humility if you're failing your standards, but not a confidence because you're discouraged. But the gospel is you are more loved than you ever dared believe. At the same time, you're more sinful than you ever dared believe. At the same time, and that, on the one hand, takes those streetwalkers, you know, on the way to the Harvard Club, and if they're born again, it lifts their head up so that they can be as proud as anyone because the Lord of the universe loves them, but it also takes the head of the people in the Harvard Club and brings them down and says, but you're a sinner who needs to be born again, and you know better than anybody else. The gospel gives you that unique combination of boldness and humility. And here's Joseph, and here's Nicodemus, and they're serving, and they're loving, and they're doing the most courageous and the most tender thing they've ever done in their lives. Why? The answer, they've been born again. That's why John 19 is there, to tell us what Jesus said in John 3 worked. They were born again. We must be born again. Let us pray. Thank you, Father, for showing us the simplicity and the profundity of this teaching. And we do ask, I certainly, but I would beg you, oh Lord, to clear away the rubbish around this word that is in our hearts right now. This word is such a turnoff to so many people, and it's also, it's so misrepresented. It's so twisted in most people's minds of what it means. We pray, Lord, that you would help us have a better grasp on what it is, and I pray that everybody in this room will enjoy being born again, appreciate being born again, experience being born again. I pray this in Jesus' name. Amen.
